BR ORE TE INDIAN CLAIMS CGEMBSION

CLYDE F. THcnPso1~z, et al. (Indians )
of California). D 3 ) Docket No. 31
’ )
BRET RISLING et al. (Indians )
of ceijromiei ) Docket No. 37
)
YOKIAH TRIBE OF I1ID:D'-ms, et al. J Docket No. 176
)
use TRIBE OF INDIARS ) Docket No. 215
' )
SHASTA TRIBE, et al. ) Docket No. 333
) .
Petitioners , )
V. )
)
UNITED snmzs on Am-'_TRICA, )
)
Defendant. ))
Decided: October 6, 1958

Appearances :

Ernest L. Wilkinson
Reginald E. Foster
Charles Kasch

I-Iilton Fenton

Laurence A. Schroeder, Jr.
Attorneys for Petitioners.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Horton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE CCIMISSION

0‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

On June 6, 1958, the Indians of California, Dockets Nos. 3l and 37,

the Yokiah Tribe, Docket No. 176, the Yana Tribe, Docket No. 2.15 and the

6 671:

6 675

Shasta Tribe, Docket No. 333, joined in a motion requesting "—:=- «=2 that the order of consolidation of Nov. 1953, wherein the aforesaid Dockets 176, 215 and 333 were ‘consolidated
for trial‘ with Dockets 31 and 37, be amended to provide that
the aforesaid Dockets 176, 215 and 333 be consolidated in their
entirety for all purposes, including judgment, with the aforesaid Dockets 3l and 37."

The defendant filed its response to such motion on June 18, 1958,
stating that on certain specified conditions it did not object to the
motion.

To fully understand the purpose and scope of the motion it is necessary to look at the explanation of it by the attorney representing all
the parties thereto. At the argument of the motion (pp. hl2l:-11126.) of
Transcript of June 23, 1958, Docket No. 31 et al.) the attorney said

about the motion:

Now, there is a second motion filed in order to establish
a fair and orderly method of procedure and that is the motion
filed by Dockets Numbers 31 and 37 and Dockets Numbers 176,
215 and 333, in which we seek alternative relief. 3

First, a granting of our motion of March 25, 1958 about which
I have just been talking, holding that that is the fair and
orderly way to dispose of this question. The alternative would
be, and only if the Commission should rule against us on the
first alternative, that these cases be consolidated for all purposes hereafter.

That would mean that we would have one case proceeding, we
would have consolidated five cases -- six cases -- and proceeding as one action, the different party plaintiffs and the procedure necessary and the substantive law applicable to the case
would be just as if we had five cases merged so that we had one
case with six different party plaintiffs and the applicable law
would then govern the proceedings.

4' *2 ‘I?

COM!-IISSIONFB O‘1-IARR: Before you get into that, Mr. Barker,
do these six groups that you have just referred to, you say on

your alternative plan that you would consider those cases consolidated for all purposes, including judgment. I an: merely
inquiring if we were to adopt your alternative plan, would
there be separate judgments for each one of these four groups
and the description of the lands involved?

MR. BARKER: No, your Honor. It is our View there would be
one judgment. I misstated myself and I should have said five
cases because Docket Number 80 was not joined in this motion.

Should they see fit to come in the scope of this motion, we
have indicated we would be willing to have them come in. Actually, there would be five.

CCMl*1ISSIONER O‘I*1'ARR: I understand that we are talking about
the groups inthe stipulated class.

MR. BA.RKER: The answer to your question would be we envisage
one judgment on behalf of all of the group and they would all
share in that judgnent as Indians of California.

The point being here that as your case proceeds, we have one
consolidated case as if it were one action with the claimants,
Clyde F. Thompson, et al, in Docket Number 31 and Ernest Risling,
et al, in Docket Number 37, the ‘Iokiah Tribe of Indians in 176,
the Trans Tribe in Docket Number 215, and the Shasta Tribe in
Docket Number 333, all with separate attorneys of record.

-5? -5- 4’:

ccmwlsslonsa 0'}i!.RR: would the lands be separately described,
the boundaries of the land of the four groups?

MIR. BARKER: It is our thought that the land would not be _
separately described in the four groups under this proceeding.

The above explanation makes it plain that it is proposed to have us consider the claims of the Yokiah, Yana, Shasta (roe lands in California),
and Indians of California as though they had joined in a single action
and a judgment entered on that basis. Such a judgment would no doubt

be a final determination of the rights of each of the parties joining in

the motion for lands in California.

We see no objection to the proposed arrangement and an order will

3°C Ordillgly be made.

6 676

Since the above plan removes the question of the rights of the
Yokiah, Yana and Shasta to assert their clahns separately from the claim
of the Indians of California (Dockets 31 and 37), which was the question
basic to the Commission's decision.of January 20, 1958, 6 Ind. Cls. Com.
93~97, there is no need for modifying that decision. Imoreover, it would
seem to follow that the approved consolidation constitutes an abandonr
ment of'the stipulations the three tribes made with the Indians of California, howevcr, the effect of the consolidation is perhaps not directly’
involved and need not be passed upon at this time.

Louis J. 0*Marr
Associate Commissioner

‘Ne concur:

Chief Commissioner

Associate Commissioner

6 677

