h 662

,BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS CONnIssION

THE OMAHA TRIBE OF NEBRASKA, ET AL.,)_
'0 Plaintiffs, ;
v. V i Docket No. 22SeA
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, %
I Oefendant. gg

iDecided: Jannany 18, 1957
appearances:
David Cobb and
I. S.'Weissbrodt,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs
Maurice H. Cooperman,
with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant
OPINION OE THE COMMISSION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commissiona

The plaintiffs herein, the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, are seeking
recovery for the difference between the amount they received for upwards of 5,200,000 acres of land located in the northeast corner of
the State of Nebraska, and the value thereof at the time they ceded the a
land to the United States by Treaty of March 16, 18st (IO State 1on3).

In.their amended complaint petitioners allege ownership of the
land and that the defendant in various ways recognized that they ex»
clusively owned, occupied and.used the said land and that they were

entitled.to own, occupy and use said land at the time of said treaty;

they also allege that the Court of Claims in the case of the Omaha Tribe
vs The United States, 53 C. Cls. Sh9, decided that they were the owners
of the land ceded by the 185k Treaty; and that the United States may not
now be heard to deny the Omaha ownership of the lands when ceded by the
185k Treaty. O

By Interlocutory Order of this Commission of October 19, 195k, this
Commission held that the Court of Claims in the case to which.reference
has been made decided that the Omaha Tribe at the time of the Treaty of
March 16, 1851; had Indian title to the land North of the Ayoway (Iowa). I
River line (referred to in the Treaty as due west line‘) in the amount of
783,365 acres; and that by the Judgment entered by the Court of Claims
in said case the parties to this cause are estopped to relitigate the
issue of title or boundaries of said land lying North of said river line
as of the time of said Treaty;
In the said former opinion and order of this Commission in this ’/
cause it was held by this Commission that the said former decision of
the Court of Claims also decided as to the lands South of said Ayoway

River line, that the plaintiff tribe intended by said Treaty of l85h

to cede, and did cede, to the defendant all lands claimed by them and

S that such.lands comprised h,SO0,000 acres, and were located.within the

boundaries therein stated, and that the parties to this action are
estopped from relitigating the said boundaries or said acreage; but
that said court did not determine that the petitioners had Indian title

to the said h%-million acres of land, South of said Ayoway River line.

The issue now before this Commission is confined to a determination

as to whether or not the plaintiffs herein at the time of the cession of
said.h,SO0,000 acres by them to the defendant by Treaty of March 16,

l85h had Indian title to said land. The plaintiffs contend that at the
time of this Treaty they had Indian title to said land not only by rea_

son of use and occupancy but also by reason of recognition thereof by

the United States. The defendant contends that the Omaha Tribe had no

title to any part of the area involved on March 16, l8Sh either by

reason of use and occupancy or by reason of recognition of title by

defendant.
The Omaha Tribe contends that it established its residence in the

area in issue about 1750. The defendant fixes first permanent settlement of Omaha in the territory involved as in 1795 or l796. The Omaha
Indians were found in this area in the 1700's when the white man first
arrived. From about 1750, or not later than I796, until the Treaty of
‘March 16, l85h the Omaha Tribe at all times had its village and its
farms within the area. From time to time the village and farms were
moved to different locations widely scattered over the length and breadth
of the area. Throughout all these years the Omaha Tribe exploited the
entire area as fully as they were able in the pursuit of game, roots,
berries, and other products of the land, in the course of their customary manner by the Omaha Tribe from the time the white man first arrived
until the Treaty of March 16, l8Sh.

During these years prior to March 16, l8Sh, no people other tnan

the Omaha Tribe used or occupied any part of this area for anything

other than.brief or temporary stays. From time to time Dakota war
parties raided in the area but there is no record that the Dakota
Indians, or any tribe except Omahas, ever intended or attempted to
establish any residence in, or permanent use of, any parts of the area.
White emigrants beginning about l8h§ passed in large numbers through
parts of the area, but the record is clear that no significant white
settlement was made in.this area until after the Treaty of March 16,
1851;.

within this area, and for a short time laid claim to a small part of

For a number of years after 1835 the Otoe Tribe made its village

this area. The Otoe village and Otoe claim were both short—lived. The

Otoe had no village in the area when the Treaty of March 16, 185k was

negotiated and did not at that time claim.land within the area. Aside

from these temporary incursions by other people, the Omaha Tribe was
at all times during this period the only tribe that was using and

occupying the area.

The United States made its earliest ratified Treaty with the Omaha
Tribe in 1815. Thereafter, the United States negotiated a series of
treaties with the tribe.r By an unratified Treaty of 1820 and the ratified Treaties of 1825, 1830, and 1836 the United States recognized that

the Omaha Tribe was claiming ownership to a large area of land West of

the Missouri River. None of these treaties, however, attempted to designate the boundaries of this Omaha land. However, a designation of

such claimed boundaries was made by agents of the United States in
183h. Thereafter, on a number of occasions, agents of the United States

defined the claimed boundaries of the Omaha land West of the Missouri.

On each occasion, the boundaries determined by the agents of the United
States included the area in issue. Prior to the Treaty of March 16,
185b, the Treaty Commissioner and other agents of the United States
explored the Omaha land for the purpose of determining the area held
by that tribe. Thereafter, the Indian Office reported to the Congress
of the United States that the Omaha Tribe was resident in and "indigenous" to the area in issue.

The Treaty of March 16, 185k compensated the Omaha Tribe for the
south area in issue by payment of $881,000. The area north of the
Ayoway River line, also ceded by the Treaty of March 16, 185k, as has
been held by this Commission, was decided by the Court of Claims to
have been owned by the plaintiff Indians by recognized Indian title.

The contents of the documents to which reference is made in support
of Findings 18 to 27, inclusive, and particularly those referred to as
supporting Findings 22, 2b, and 25 are hereby referred to as certainly
evidencing the belief on the part of the Government officials and others
who are dealing with said lands, that same were owned--that is by Indian
title-—by the petitioning tribe.

Attention is called to the fact that aside from the documentary
exhibits in evidence petitioners rely greatly on the expert testimony
of Dr. John L. Champs; and the defendant upon testimony of archaeologist
and historian, G. Hubert Smith. The record will show that under cross
examination Dr. Smith agreed almost in toto to the facts and conclusions

.-o- an-2-uunm-u-L-==-2.-rw----—-' -.=a-—vr‘ '0 ‘=

as testified to by Dr. Champe--Dr. Smith contending, however, that exm

elusive use and occupancy was established positively, beginning at no

h 666

earlier date than 1795 or 1796 and that such occupancy from that date
to ths date of the Treaty would not, in his opinion, result in the
Indians having Indian title to the land. 'While Dr. Champe was of the
opinion that the occupancy began as early as somewhere in the 1750's
he thought that Indian title would result even if the occupancy did
not begin prior to 1795 or 1796. This Commission thinks that it is
immaterial as to which date occupancy actually began. Except as to
beginning date of such occupancy the defendant agrees that "the evidence of both parties are in essential agreement upon the subject of
immemorial possession." (Defendant's Brief p. h8)

Based on the evidence referred to in this opinion, together with
that supporting the findings on the issue of title, and applying the
requirements as heretofore made by this Commission and Court of Claims
for establishing Indian title by use and occupancy, it is the opinion
of this Commission that Indian title in petitioners at the time of the
Treaty of the land involved has been established.

As title is found as having been established by use and occupancy,

it is unnecessary to pass on.whether or not the United States by its

I course of dealings with the Omaha Tribe and by the reports and actions

of its agents had as a matter of fact and law recognized that the Omaha
Tribe at the time.of the cession held Indian title to the area in issue.

However, the evidence relied on by petitioners as showing recognition

;s strongly supports the findings of exclusive use and occupancy by the

h 6:

3.1. 66.9

petitioning'tribe, and was considered by the Court of Claims sufficient

to estab1ish.reoognition of title in petitioners to lands to the northo

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

‘We concur:

LmdsJ.O%mT
Associate Commissioner

Mm, M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

