THE OMAHA TRIBE or NEBRASKA, et al.,

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

Plaintiffs,

V. Docket No. 225—A

THE UNITED STATES OF.KMERICA,

Defendant.

\...J\u.#"-—I'|Iu-l\-..I‘I—ul'N-.ul\-..J\../

Decided: January 18, 1957

FINDINGS _(_J__}f_’_ FA CT

Pre1iminary'Statement

The entire claim under consideration in this docket embraces an area
ceded.by the Treaty of March l6, 185k (10 Stat. IOH3) lying in the northeast corner of the State of Nebraska and consisting of 5,283,365 acres,
less 300,000 selected by the Omaha, as hereinafter stated in the findings.

By Article 1 of said Treaty, the ceded area was in two sections,
being 783,365 acres of land lying north of an east-west line referred to
herein as the Nayoway" (Iowa) river line fixed by said treaty, and
h,soo,ooo acres of land lying south of said line.

By Order of the Commission dated October 19, 195k, it determined
that the plaintiffs had Indian title to the lands lying north of said
line, describing them, and determined and fixed the boundaries of the

lands lying south of said line, which were ceded by said treaty, but made

no determination of the title thereto, leaving that question for later

determination. So the following findings relate primarily to the Indian

title of the plaintiffs to the ceded lands lying south of the Ayoway

river line but shall also make a specific finding as to the ownership

4.‘:

‘ of the lands lying north of said line as well as those southo

In the following findings the lands lying south of said line will
be generally referred to as the "area in issue."

The Commission.makes the following findings of fact:

Finding No. l

The plaintiff, the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, is a recognized Indian
tribe organized.under a constitution and by-laws ratified by the tribe
on February 1S, 1936, and approved by the Secretaty of the Interior
on March 30, 1936 pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act. The member»
ship of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska is prescribed (1) by the official
census roll of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska as of'April 1, 193b, with the
supplement thereto of January 1, 1935, and (2) by Article II of its Constitution and By Laws, and (3) by such ordinance as shall be hereafter
enacted by the Tribal Council, subject to review by the Secretary of
the Interior. As of the latest count, completed in July 19553 there were
2,223 enrolled.members of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska. Each of these
members is in part descended from one or more members of the aboriginal
Omaha.Tribe.

Finding No. 2

The plaintiffs, Amos Lamson, Charles J. Springer, John F. Turner,
and.Henry F. Freemont, are, each of them, Omaha Indians, enrolled.members
of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, and former:members of the Tribal Council
of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska. Each has brought the claims asserted in
the Petition as the representative of all the descendants of'members of
the aboriginal Omaha Tribe.

Some of these descendants of members of the

Omaha Tribe are not included among the 2,223 Omaha Indians presently

enrolled in the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska. How many are not so enrolled

is not known.
‘Finding No. 3
(a) The members of the aboriginal Omaha Tribe as of l8Sh had worked

and lived together long enough to consider themselves a unit as against
outsiders. These members of the Omaha Tribe spoke a language of their
own, which belonged to the Dhegiha group of the Siouan languages. This

Omaha language was not intelligible to any of the Indians who occupied

the country bounding the Omaha Tribe, except the Ponca. The Ponca
Indians, who lived to the northwest of the Omaha, spoke a closely related language in the same Dhegiha group.

(b) The Omaha Indians were hunters, farmers, and trappers. They

engaged in two large tribal hunts each year directed at the buffalo, the

one a summer hunt, the other a winter hunt. Their agriculture and hunting were probably equally important to them, and, after the advent of the
white traders, fur trapping also became extremely important to the maintenance of their way of life.

(c) Prior to the movement of the Omaha Tribe onto the Omaha reserOvation in 1855, the tribe always had a single village, where the Omaha
livetiapproximately five months out of each year, although individuals
may have scattered themselves out at convenient spots around the village.
The Omaha Tribe had a council of seven chiefs, which was the real governing body of the tribe, and two principal chiefs, those being the two

members of the council of seven having the greatest number of honors

important to the Omaha.

and greatly respected among the Omaha.

The authority of the Omaha chiefs was very great,

h 629

(d) Our documentation of the Omaha Tribe in historical records

extends back to about 1670 and there are Omaha traditions which carry
our knowledge of the Tribe back to an earlier time. As far back as
this knowledge extends, the Omaha Tribe is continuously'known'as the

3Maha" or Omaha Tribe, the words teing the same, simply spelled differently. Since about 1875, a number of studies have been.made and

published about the Omaha.Tribe so that today the Omaha aresaLtribe:of

sAmerican Indians about whom we are relatively well informed.

(e) The Omaha Indians numbered about 2800 during the last two
decades of the 18th century, were reduced by smallpox at the beginning

of the 19th century to approximately 1500, or somewhat less, were
reduced still further over the ensuing years until they numbered about
l000 in l8Sh. Since that time the Omaha population has increased to the
present tabulation slightly in excess of 2200 people.

(i) In this case, the Commission has heard the testimony of Dfo
John Champe, called by the plaintiffs, and Mr. Hubert Smith, called by’
the United States. Dr. Champe has done extensive archaeological work

in northeast Nebraska and, in particular, has either participated in

or directed the excavations of the Omaha sites in the area in issueo

IMr. Smith.prepared for this case an ethno-historical:report on the question

of Omaha use and occupancy of the area in issue.
Finding No. h
(a) The area in issue was ceded by the Omaha Tribe to the United
States in the Treaty of'harch 16, l8§h, and has been determined by the

Court of Claims to have been bounded as follows:

Commencing at a point in the center of the main channel of
the Missouri River due east of where the Ayoway River disembogues out of the bluffs and extending on a line drawn due
‘west from this point (herein referred to as the Ayoway river
line) to a point where the west line of range 5 w. intersects
said.Ayoway river line, thence south along said west range
line to where it crosses Shell Creek near the northern boundary
line of'T. 21 N., R. S West, thence down the meanders of the
stream to its junction with the Platte River in.T. 17 N.,

R. hE., 6th P. M., thence along the Platte River to its junction
with the Missouri River, thence northerly along the Missouri
River to the place of beginning at the eastern.point of the
Ayoway River line.

- hf”

This area has teen found.by the Court of Claims and this Commission to
comprise h,SO0,000 acres. It has been.marked off by a heavy black line

on.Plaintiffs' Exhibit 238. This is the area in issue to which the Omaha

h 633

Tribe is seeking to establish title, as of the treaty date, March 16, l8Sh.

(b) The land lying north of this area in issue, east of the west line
‘of range §‘W., and south of the Missouri river has been determined by the
Court of Claims and this Commission by its Order of October 19, 195k, to
be land to which the Omaha Tribe had Indian title at the time of the
Treaty of'March 16, l8Sh, and to comprise 783,365 acres. It will be
called hereinafter the "Omaha land north of the Ayoway river line.". These
two areas of land north and south of the Ayoway river line, less the reserved land hereafter described, constitutes the lands claimed by the
plaintiffs, and when spoken of together will be.called hereinafter the
"Omaha land.west of the Missouri river." This "Omaha land west of the
Missouri River" seems to conform to the area of land.mapped.by Fletcher

and LaFlesche in their ethnology of the Omaha Tribe as "the country

occupied.by the Omaha."

Finding No. 5

(a). The earliest historical reference to the Omaha Tribe is conu
tained on the Marquette Map which appeared in 1671 and places the Omaha
in the neighborhood of the Missouri River some distance from the Mississippi River to the west. The earliest journal reference to the Omaha is
in Beaurain‘s “Memoirs” wherein two Sioux Indians are reported to have
told the French trader Le Sueur in 1700 that the Iowas and Otoes "had
gone to establish themselves on the banks of the Missouri River, in the
neighborhood of the Mahas, a nation which lived in those quarterso"

In 1702 a map made by the French map maker Delisle, in part on infonnation provided to Delisle by the French trader Lesueur, shows an Omaha
village on a small river marked Rock Rivera This was the early French
designation for the Big Sioux River. .A later Delisle map made in 1718,
generally accredited to be the most reliable of the very early French
maps, again shows an Omaha village on the Rock, or Big Sioux River,

and shows further to the west up the Missouri river the notation "The
Maha, a wandering nation."

(b) These earliest historical records locating the Omaha Tribe are
consistent with and corroborate the traditions of the Omaha Indians in
respect to the migration of their tribe prior to its arrival in the Omaha
lands west of the Missouri River. The Omaha traditions were gathered and
recorded.by Dorsey, and Fletcher and LaFlesche, during the latter part of
the l9th century from Indians who were ignorant of historical documen~
tation. According to these traditions, the migration of the Omaha Tribe

commenced at a place near the present site of St. Louis, took the tribe

northward to the neighborhood of Red Pipestone Quarry in.Minnesota,

h 632

thence,down the Big Sioux River, where the Omaha, Ponca, and Iowa remained for a time "making earth lodges and cultivating the fields."
Reading this tradition in conjunction with the historical documentation,
it would seem that the Omaha had their village on the Big Sioux in 1702
and some years earlier. Next the Omaha tradition tells how the three
tribes, the Omaha, Ponca, and Iowa, were pressed by the Dakota and resumed their wanderings, moving together westward up the Missouri, passing
near Lake.Andes; near Platte, South Dakota; and to the mouth of white
River. The 1718 Delisle Map confirms this movement: and dates it some
time to 1718. I

(c) .At the mouth of White River, tradition reports that the Omaha
suffered greatly, crossed.the Missouri and, still together with the Ponca
and Iowa, moved.dom1the river on the south lbadk, making no stop or encampment until the Omaha established a village called the "Bad Village"
between the mouth of the White River and Bow Creek, near the present
town of wynot, Nebraska. The location of this “Bad Village" has been
confirmed.by archaeological diggings. At the same time that the Omaha
were at the "Bad'Village,“ the Indian tradition separate the Ponca and
Iowa from.the Omaha, the Ponca making their village further up the
Missouri River just west of the Niobrara River, the Iowa making their
village at a site further down the Missouri River near the present town
of'Ponca. The Omaha tradition next tells how the Omaha left the "Bad
Village" and moved further down the Missouri River, passing the Iowa at
their village near Ponca, and.making their next village within the area

in issue at the site of South Sioux City, formerly Covington. According

to tradition, the Iowa village remained at Ponca and the Oaha village

h 633

h 63h

remained at Covington until a raid of Dakota Indians drove both the Iowa
and Omaha away from their village at the same time. The tradition then
tells how the Omaha moved their village to "Big Round.Spring," still
within the area in issue, where they made a new village known as
“Zandebuta,9 only a short distance from the former Covington site, and
about two miles northwest of the present site of Homer, Nebraska. .At

the same time, the Iowa passed the Omaha andzmoved further down the

» Missouri to a site on the outskirts of the present Omaha City, where

is now located the surburban area called Florence.

(d) Here historical records again corroborate the Indian tradition. I
In a report made in the year 1758, Governor Kelerec located the village
of the Iowa on the Missouri River ten leagues above the Platte River
and in the same report placed the Omaha village eighty leagues further
up the Missouri. This report, read in the light of the Indian tradition.
places the Omaha Tribe at their "Big Round Spring“ village some time
prior to l7S8. Dr. Champe gave to the location of the Omaha village at
Covington an estimated date of 1755 and to the earlier “Bad Village" an
estimated date of 1735. It is reasonable to conclude that the Omaha Tribe
probably established its first village in the Omaha lands west of the
imissouri River not later than 1735 and its first village in the area in
issue not later than 1755. ‘

Finding No. 6

When.the Omaha Tribe established its village at Big Round.Spring,
the lands extending for about one hundred.miles up and down the Missouri
River and to the west were unused and'unoccupied by any other Indian tribe

so far as is known. Archaeological research in the area in issue has

failed to disclose any manifestation of occupancy from about lhOO.A. D.
until the Omaha Tribe came into the area. By the time that the Omaha
were settled at Big Round Spring, the Ponca had made their village west
of the Niobrara River extending their territorial interests still further
west and north of the Niobrara. The Pawnee had for many generations their
villages on the lower Loup River extending their territorial interests
fTcm.that place westward and southward, and the Otoe had more recently
established their village south of the Platte River extending their
territorial interests southward along the Missouri River. The Iowa
Tribe for a brief time remained at Florence, but in l765 resumed its
migration eastward and never thereafter returned to the area in issue.
From the time of the "Bad Village" forward, the Omaha Tribe always:maintained its village at some point within the Omaha lands west of the
Missouri, its village location changing but again and again returning
to the general vicinity of Homer, Nebraska. The Omaha Indians were the
earliest Indians found by the white man in the area in issue. 'We conclude, therefore, that the migration of the Omaha Tribe probably ended
early in the l8th century when the Omaha Tribe settled in the Omaha land
west of the Missouri River, and that the Omaha Tribe was living in the
area in issue when the white man first visited this area.
' Finding No. 7

The record shows eleven locations of the Omaha tribal village within

the area in issue.

Dr. Champe testified that the Omaha village customarily'would not remain at the same site longer than eight to fifteen years

1: 633

and that, on account of raids or other pressures, might be moved more OftenHe located the Omaha village sites in the vicinity of Homer, along the

Elkhorn River from West Point to Stanton, on Logan and Bell Greeks, and On

the Papillion near Bellevue where the United.States Indian.Agency was
established from about 1820 until years after the Treaty'of'March 16,
l85h°

The movements of the Omaha village were traced in the testimony

of Dr. Champe, and are summarized in Plaintiffs‘ Exhibit 2hO, and have been generally confirmed by the testimony and report of Mr. Hubert Smith.

The general area just north of Homer, where the so-called "large Village
of the Omaha," Tonwonjinga, was excavated archaeologically in 19hO and
l9hl, was probably occupied by an Omaha village in 1777 and possibly
earlier. It is known to have been occupied by an Omaha village in l79h
and 1795 when the fur traders Trudeau and.McKay traded with the Omaha

tribe, and.was probably the site of the Omaha village in the summer of

l80h when the Lewis and Clark expedition reported this village deserted--V

the tribe probably being away on its summer hunt.

by and Omaha village in 1811 and 1812 when the Omaha village was visited

and described by the highly regarded group of travelers, Bradbury, Luttig,

Brackenridge, and Irving, and was the Omaha village site in 1818 when
Joseph LaF1esche was born there and in 1819 when Long's expedition
traversed a part of the Omaha lands; it is reported by the Indian agents
to have been the location of the Omaha village from l83h through 1839,
and again from l8h3 through 18b5, and at least for brief periods from
l8hS to 1855, in which last year the Omaha Tribe moved on to the Omaha

Reservation a few miles south of Homer, reserved in 18Sh Treaty. There

is evidence that for a period some time shortly before 179b, the Omaha
village was situated on Bell Creek, that about 1813 the village was on
the Elkhorn near West Point and remained there for about five years, and

was moved from there to Shell Creek for at most a brief stay, and that

1: 636

It was certainly occupied

in 1820 was moved to the Elkhorn from the Missouri, and about l823

the village was again on the Elkhorn, near Stanton, where archaeological digging has found a good manifestation of a considerable

Omaha occupation, principally near Stanton and tora less degree near
Pilger, where it is believed the village remained for about ten years,
1823-1833. In l8h1 the village was near the mouth of Logan Creek. In
l8hS the Omaha village was established on the Papillion, where the
village remained until the movement onto the reservation in 1855, except
that during this last ten.years there was some changing of the village
back and forth from the vicinity<3f "Large Village" to the Papillion.
lhroughout these years, no record has been found of any Omaha tribal
ivillage outside the area in issue.

‘We conclude that for at probably one hundred years prior to l8SS, and
certainly after l79h or 1795 the Omaha Tribe maintained its tribal village
at all timeswithin the area in issue and the village movements during
these years took the Omaha tribal_village location back and forth over
most of the length and breadth of the area in issue.

Finding No. 8

The Omaha Tribe lived in their village only about five months of
each year, yet the village was never wholly deserted, even when most of
the tribe left for the annual buffalo hunt. The village consisted principally of lodges made of poles covered with earth. These lodges were not
as easily heated as the smaller buffalo hide teepees used by the Omaha when
away from.the village. About the first of November, after their crops had.

been harvested, most of the Omaha who were able to do so left the village

to live in their hide teepees, moving either with the tribe on its long

winter hunt or else traveling in smaller groups or as individual families

hunting meat and trapping furs, About the first of.April, the Omaha would

return to their village to prepare their farm.patches for planting corn,
squash, melons, pumpkins, and beans. Through April, May, and June most
of the tribe lived in the village, the women, with some assistance from
the men, tending to planting and cultivating their crops, the men for the
most part hunting and trapping in the area surrounding the village. About
the first of July, all except the sick, or infirm, or very'poor, and a
few to care for these, left their village on the annual summer buffalo
hunt. ,This‘was an occasion of important ceremonies. The tribe did not
return again to the village until late August when the harvest season ,
began. at that time, the Omaha again gathered in the village to treat
the hides and.meats taken on the summer hunt and to harvest and cache
their crops. In this manner, the tribal village served the Omaha as the
home to which they always planned to return. Also the Omaha village was
the site of the tribe's farming activities. However, the village and itsenvirons comprised only a part of the area used and occupied by the Omaha
Tribe over its annual cycle. (See subsequent findings).
Finding No. 9

The Omaha farms were located on the flat alluvial plains by the banks
of creeks and streams in the neighborhood of the Omaha village. Ordinarily a man with his wife and family would farm from one to one and one
half acres. Suitable land was abundant in the environs of each Omaha
village location. .As long as a patch was cultivated by one family, other
Indians did not molest or intrude on the patch.

If a patch was abandoned

for a season, it was free to be used by any one. In this manner, the

h 638

..-‘,_'- . 

tribe cultivated in the ordinary season an estimated five to seven
hundred acres stretched out along the streams in the neighborhood of
the village. They raised primarily corn, secondarily, squash, pumpkin,
watermelons, and beans. These products constitutedan important part of
the tribe's food.supply, beins usually stored for winter use, and.many
of the rituals of the tribe concerned the planting and harvesting of

the corn. ‘We conclude that, for probably one hundred years prior to

1855, or in any event for at least 60 years, the Omaha Tribe had its

farms within the area in issue and that, as the Omaha village changes
its location, these village movements took the locations of the Omaha
farms back and forth over most of the length and breadth of the area
in issue.
Finding No. 10

(a) Each year the Omaha Tribe had two tribal hunts directed at the
buffalo herds that were usually found in the plains about the headwaters
of the Elkhorn River. The summer tribal hunt featured religious cere'monies important to the Indians. All the Omaha, who were.able to,
attended this hunt. The longer winter tribal hunt lacked religious connotations and accordingly was less fully attended. Otherwise, the winter
tribal hunt was a similar tribal undertaking, its object being to hunt
the buffalo herds. Buffalo meat, bones, and hides served many uses indispensatle to the Omaha life. On these tribal buffalo hunts, the Omaha
moved in a body, generally following where possible the banks of streams,
most of the tribe afoot, going first from the tribal village, wherever
located, to the Elkhorn and then up the Elkhorn westward until the buffalo

herds were found. .At times the buffalo herds were found.in the northwest

h 639

part of the area in issue. More frequently, according to Dr. Champe,
the Omaha Tribe traveled on its buffalo hunts further to the west and
outside the area in issue.

(b) In addition to these tribal buffalo hunts, all year around, to
a greater or lesser degree, the Omaha Indians hunted in small groups and
individually. when the tribe was in its village, this small group and
individual hunting was concentrated in the area about the village. when
on the tribal hunt, this small group and individual hunting scouted the
area along the route of the tribe. But generally in the winter:months,
November to April, small groups and individual Omaha Indians spread far
out across the Omaha land west of the Missouri River, hunting whatever
meat or fur bearing animal could be obtained. In this manner, the Omaha
Indians, hunting individually and in small groups, secured incidental
buffalo that had departed from the great herds, secured elk, deer, bear,
wildcat, racoon, badger, squirrel, otter, muskrat, and beaver, the last
three teing trapped almost exclusively for the fur.

(c) Commencing shortly before 1777, fur trapping for purpose of
the white man's trade had become a most important factor in the Omaha
The records of

economy. The Omaha country was rich in beaver streams.

the early fur traders show that the Omaha were_a large contributor to

the traffic in fur carried by white traders down the Missouri River. The

trap lines were ordinarily run by an individual Indian and his family.

h 6hC

While these Omaha trappers ran their trap lines, they hunted the area around

for the meat on which their lives depended.
(d) Hunting and trapping, extending over a wide area of land, was

beyond question a major occupation of the Omaha. Dr. Champe testified

that the Omaha Tribe in its tribal hunts and smaller group and individual hunting and trapping exploited fully the area in issue, and even
beyond its western boundaries. He explained this conclusion thus:
"They (the Omaha) could exploit any part of this area and even beyond

it for whatever purpose they chose. That is, wherever the game might be
they could go there and set their trap line if they liked, or go hunt
the large animals that were not trapped." IMr. Smith testified that
Dr. Champe‘s description of the hunting and trapping activities of
the Omaha was generally confirmed by documents known to him. He confirmed that the Omaha "did hunt and trap within this area at different
times." 7We conclude that in its hunting and trapping, the Omaha Tribe
used and occupied the area in issue in accordance with its manner of
life.

Finding No. 11
In addition to hunting, trapping, and farming, the Omaha used.many

other products of the land within the area in issue to support their way
of life. The Omaha were well acquainted with the natural botanical resources of this area and exploited practically everything within-their
means. Important among these resources were various roots, in particular
ithe; Indian turnip and Indian potato, various nuts, in particular walnuts
and hazelnuts, various berries, in particular blackberries, plums, chokeberries, raspberries, and, of course, the wood used for their fires and
for building their lodges and teepees. The Omaha took fish from the
rivers and streams, though this was a relatively unimportant part of the

Omaha diet. The ethnographic studies made of the Omaha by Dorsey,

Fletcher, La Flesche, and Gilmore show the tribe to have used a wide

h 6h

range of products of the area in issue to feed, house, and clothe the

gpeople and to satisfy the rituals of their religious, social and

medicinal customs. We conclude that in its quests for these products
of the land and water, the Omaha Tribe used and occupied thezarea in
issue in accordance with its manner of life.
Finding No. 12

(a) Dr. Champe testified that the area of land that was used and
occupied.by the Omaha Tribe in the foregoing.manners from a date not
later than 1755 not earlier than about 1715 and until the Treaty of
March 16, l8Sh, included all the area in issue, together with lands to
the west, and also together with the Omaha land north of the Ayoway
river line. Dra Champe testified that the movement of the village from
place to place within the area changed the concentration of the tribe‘s
use of the land from location to location and tended from time to time
to deplete the resources in the neighborhood of the village, but that
these changes did not change the tribe's general exploitation, in
accordance with its manner of living, throughout the entire areas ‘Mrs

Smith agreed in general with Dr. Champe's description of the area of

ilanduused.by'the Omaha Tribe. iMr. Smith described the area in issue as

the "habitat" of the Omaha, meaning the area in which they were usually
or always found. Fletcher and LaFlesche defined the area "occupied"

by the Omaha Tribe to be the area in issue together with the Omaha land
north of the Ayonay River line. Dorsey, between 1877 and l892, using
in Part information supplied to him by an Omaha Indian reputed to have
seen the tribal historian and born about 1800 in the Omaha "Large

Village," made a map designating in the Omaha language the names of

1: 6h2

places known and used by the Omaha. This map is persuasive evidence that
the Omaha for years prior to 185k used and occupied the entire area in
issue together with other lands to the north and west.

(b) To the same effect are the reports of the United States Indian

agents and officers having charge of our relations with the Omaha Tribe.

The earliest agents, beginning shortly before 1820, were Benjamin 0‘Fallon

and John Dougherty who were followed about 1820 by Henry Ellsworth. Each
of these agents provided the United.States with good descriptions of the
Omaha Tribe and its manner of life. Each located the tribe in the area
in issue but none of these agents attempted in their reports to define
the precise boundaries of the Omaha land west of the Missouri River.
This was first attempted in l83h by a Committee of three Commissioners
appointed.by the Secretary of War to make recommendations on the matter

of negotiating with tribes west of the Mississippi for the movement of

eastern tribes into that area. Henry Ellsworth was one of these Commissioners. The report of these Commissioners, transmitted to the
Secretary of War in 183b, bounded the Omaha country by the Platte River

on the south, by the Niobrara on the north, and by the Pawnee country on

the west, and, as to this west boundary, stated that the boundaries between

the Pawnee and Omaha country "are not very definitely settled or known."

The earliest report that attempted to fix this west boundary is that of the

Missionary, Reverend.John Dunbar, then serving with the Pawnee Tribe. In
1839, after "performing an exploring tour in the Pawnee country,"
Reverend Dunbar reported.to Major Hamilton of the United States Army,
stationed at Leavenworth, that "Shell Creek bounds the Pawnee country

on the east." The ealiest Indian agent's report to fix the west

h 6h;

 

boundary of the Omaha country is that of Agent Daniel Miller in l8h2¢

In that year.Agent Miller in his annual report bounds the Omaha country
"by the Missouri River on the east, by Shell Creek on the west, by the
diver Platte on the south, and on the north by the Poncas Country." No
different report in respect to this west boundary was issued by any agent
or officer of the United States until after the Treaty of March 16, l8Sh.
At that time Commissioner Manypenny, who negotiated the Treaty for the
United States, signified his approval of Eastman‘s Map in August of l8Sh
showing the Omaha country ceded by the Treaty. This map placed this
west Omaha boundary somewhat to the west of Shell Creek and outside the
area in issue.

(c) In addition to these agents‘and officers‘ reports, the reports
of early explorers, travellers, and missionaries, and the later studies
and researches of ethno-historians and archaeologists, who have attempted
to reconstruct the history of the Omaha Tribe, confirm and corroborate
the conclusion that the Omaha Tribe used and occupied the entire area in
issue. The earliest report that describes the boundaries of the Omaha
land was written by the trader.August Chouteau in l8l6 and reports the
entire area in issue within what Chouteau called "the country of the Mahas.
The most recently published conclusion of a competent expert in this area
is that of Dr. Waldo'Wedel, who wrote in 1936: "r r e the Omaha con»
trolled.a large area north of the Platte from Shell Creek to the mouth of
the Niobrara." No report or record has been found of any Indian settlement later than about lhOO A. D. until after l8SS by any tribe other than
the Omaha within the area in issue, with the exceptions only of the b?i35

stay of the migrating Iowa Tribe prior to 1765, described in Findings 5

I!

and 6 above, and a brief stay by the Otoe next to the Merrill Mission
from 1835 to about 1815, described in later finding.

(d) we conclude that the area in issue, probably from 1755 and
certainly from some date not later than 1796 until after March 16, 185k,
was exclusively used and occupied by the Omaha Tribe as heretofore deescribed.

Finding No. 13

During the entire period the Omaha Tribe used and occupied in the
manner described the arealinsissuel, the Ponca Tribe had its permanent
villages in the area between the Niobrara and the Ponca Rivers not far
from the Missouri River, the Pavmee had their permanent villages on the
Loup River and to the south and west, the Otoe Tribe had their permanent
villages just south of the Platte River; but none of these tribes had
any permanent villages in the area involved herein during these years;
and, the only tribes having any permanent villages during these years
in lands neighboring the Omaha lands west of the Missouri River were the
Ponca, Pawnee, and Otoe Tribes.

Finding No. 111

(a) Dr. Champe testified that the Ponca Tribe did not utilize any
of the area in issue at any time, although individual Ponca, or small
groups of Ponca, from time to time were known to have raided Omaha

villages and to have joined the Dakotas in such raids. Such raids or

attacks never resulted in any tribal war of any kind whatever. Mr. Smith
testified that he found no record of any group of Poncas coming into the

area in issue to hunt or to fish or to get roots or berries for an)’ Sub“

sistence, but from his knowledge of the practices of the tribes he would

presume they did.

11. 6!;

I ‘"1

(b) Dr. Champs testified that he knew of no time prior to 1856 when
the Pawnee entered the area in issue, or made any settlements in that
area, as a tribe, but that individual Pawnees would steal or raid for
prestige against the Omaha from time to time, but there was never any
Pawnee tribal movement into the area in issue, any permanent occupancy of
any of the area or any claim by the Pawnee of any right of occupancy.

Mr. Smith testified that the only known documentation of Pawnee and
Qmaha hunting together in the area in issue occurred in 1856 after the
Treaty involved‘herein. The missionaries Dunbar and Allis, each of

whom served with the Pawnee for many years before 1855, each reported
that the Pawnee lands were bounded on the east by Shell Creek. In 1857,
,the United.$tates negotiated a Treaty with the Pawnee Tribe, later
ratified, by which the Pawnee Tribe ceded to the United States its land
west of the Omaha land. Before negotiating this treaty, Commissioner
Denver, on behalf of the United States, determined that the Pawnee Tribe
"justly owned up to Shell Creek,“ but not further easto

(c) The record is barren of any historical documentation that the
Ponca or Pawnee Tribes at any time prior to 1855 either occupied, claimed
to occupy, or sought to occupy, any part of the area in issue. The exclusive use and occupancy by the Omaha Tribe in the manner of that Tribe
to the entire area in issue was at no time prior to March 16, 185k, disturbed or defeated.by the Ponca or Pawnee Tribes, or any other tribes.

Finding No. 15

Dr. Champs testified that, except for two brief periods of time, he

L1 6135

found that the Otoe Tribe was not in the area in issue. For a brief period Prior to 1765, while the Iowa village was located at Florence, Dr; ChamP9

testified that some Otoe Indians may have been residents at the Iowa
nllage. Second, Dr. Champe found that in 1835 the Otoe were induced
by the Missionary Merril to establish their village near the mission
north of the Platte River. In 18141 or 181:2, Dr. Champe testified, the
Otoe burned the mission and moved their village nearer to the trading
post and Indian Agency headquarters at Council Bluff.. The Indian
Agents.‘ reports for this period show that this Otoe village, near the
Council Blu.ff‘s Agency, was itself burned by the Otoe in February, 181:1.

After this, the Otoe returned their village to various sites south of

I the Platte River. Moreover, the Agents‘ reports show that even while the

village was located north of the river, it-xappears that the Otoe continued to hunt in their country south of the Platte. Dr. Champe testifie d

that the Platte River, below the town of Ashland, enters a rather narrow

gorge, where the river is rapid, deep, and difficult to cross without a

good boat. The Otoe reported difficulty in crossing the Platte to reach

their hunting grounds when their village was located north of the Platte
and in 18142 gave this as one reason. for their being opposed to returning
their village to a location north of the Platte. There is no report

of any Otoe village located north of the Platte after the burning of the
Otoe village in February, 18111. Fir. Smith testified that the earliest
documentation that he had found of any Otoe residence in the Omaha lands
is for the period beginning 1835. Mr. Smith corroborated Dr. Champe's
testimony that the Otoe village in 1835‘ was moved north of the Platte

River, attracted by the mission and more especially by the availability

of trade and trade goods at Bellevue. Mr. Smith testified that the W008

1:61

"village" remained north of the Platte River only until the middle of the
l8h0's and that the Otoe had no village north of the Platte River in
lash; Both Dr. Champe and Mr. smith located the Omaha Village from
l8h5 until the Omaha Tribe moved upon the Reservation in 1855 to have
been most of the time on.Papillion Creek, close to Bellevue and only

a few miles north of the Platte River. In the Commission*s Docket

No. 11, the United.States and the Otoe and Missouria Tribe of Indians
have stipulated that the Platte Riverimarked the north boundary oft
lands claimed by the Otoe Tribe in lash; Accordingly, we think, the
exclusive use and occupancy by the Omaha Tribe of the area in issue

was never defeated by the temporary incursion of the Otoe Tribe.

h 6&8

Finding No. 16

War parties of Dakota Indians, commonly called the Sioux, raided
in.the Omaha lands west of the Missouri River from.time to time from
some time before 1800 until after the Treaty of March 16, l8§L. These
were raids or attacks for prestige, horses, women,_and scalps. In
general, these war parties came down the Missouri River from southern
South Dakota. These raids occurred where the Omaha were found, sometimes upon Omaha hunting parties, sometimes upon the Omaha village,

sometimes upon an Omaha winter encampment. There are agents‘ reports

of raids taking place in the years 1825 or earlier, 1829, 1835, 18b2,

l8h3, 18b5, 18b6, and possibly l8h8. Though no records have beenzfound

of Dakota raids in any of the intervening years, other raids may have

occurred. In.any event, the reports of the United States Indian Agents

disclose that the Omaha Tribe for a time following the Dakota raids

lived in fear of the next raid, from time to time moved their village
to a new location as the result of a Dakota raid or for fear of a next
raid, and at times may have restricted the areas of their food quests
because of the dread of Dakota.war parties. It is not disputed.that
the Omaha were largely without effective means of defense against these
raids, and had.become committed by Treaty with the United States not

to retaliate vdth warfare. Also, they were in no position to retaliate

against the Dakota, being as a people outnumbered and out—armed.by the

Dakotas and without the warlike traditions of the Dakotas. On tho other
hand, the Dakotas were in no way interested in territorial acquisitionDra Champs testified that the Dakota at no time moved into the Omaha

1: Eng

lands west of the Missouri and established any settlement or village there.
He testified that at no time did the Dakota establish any rams or trap
lines or anything of that kind in the Omaha lands. Dr. Champe testified
that the Dakota war parties came into the Omaha lands from time to time,
raided, robbed, scalped, murdered, and then left the next night as soon

as the raid was completed. Mr. Smith differed with Dr. Champe in the

idegree of importance that he would give these raids, but agreed with Dr.

Champs that these raids were not undertaken by the Dakota for the purpose of obtaining new lands in.which to reside, that the Dakota did retreat after each raid, that these "attacks were in and out, without
residence, or the attackers remaining in the area for long periods of
time."
Finding No. 17

Accordingly, the exclusive use and occupancy by the Omaha Tribe, in
the manner of that Tribe, of the entire area in issue, though from time
to time disturbed by these Dakota raids, was not defeated or ended by
the Dakota at any time prior to the Treaty of March 16, 185k.

Finding No. 18

The earliest treaty between the United States and the Omaha Tribe
is a treaty of peace and friendship which was negotiated on July 15;
1815, between the Commissioners'William Clark, Ninian Edwards, and
Auguste Chouteau on behalf of the United States and eight Omaha Chiefs:
including one of the Omaha principal Chiefs, the Big Elk. By this
Treaty the Omaha Tribe acknowledged itself “to be under the pr0t€Cti0U

Of the United States“ and agreed that "there shall be perpetual P9309

and friendship" between the Omaha Tribe and the United States. This
Treaty was ratified by President James Madison on December 26, l8lS.
Finding No. 19
On September 23, 1820, the Omaha Tribe undertook by Treaty to

cede to the United States "all right, title, interest and claim.which
they have" in a tract of land fifteen miles square "so located that

the flag—staff in the area of the new cantonment on Council Bluff shall

be the centre of the aforesaid tract." This tract is included.within

A the area in issue. The treaty was negotiated on the part of the United

States by Henry Atkinson, Brigadier General of the United States Army,
and Benjamin 0'Fallon, United States Indian Agent for the tribes on the‘
Missouri.River, each being specially authorized by the Secretary of War
to make the purchase. The Treaty stated that "in consideration of the
relinquishment of title by the Maha nation," the United States would

pay to the Omaha Tribe a certain stated price in guns, kettles, blankets,

and other articles of trade. The treaty was signed by chiefs and headmen of the Omaha Tribe and by Brigadier General Atkinson and Indian agent

O'Fa1lon. The Treaty was never ratified and so far as the record shows

"no payment was made to the Tribe for the land, though the United States
established Fort Atkinson on this land and maintained the fort until
1827.
Finding No. 20
On October 6, 1825, the United States by its Commissioners

Brigadier General Atkinson and Indian Agent O'Fallon negotiated a third

treaty with the Omaha Tribe. This Treaty was designed to perpetuate

h 651

"the friendship that has heretofore existed,“ to remove future causes

of dissention, and in particular to regulate trade with the Tribea By
this Treaty, the Omaha Tribe acknowledged the supremacy and claimed the
protection of the United States, agreed to admit only American citizens
duly'authorized by the United States to trade with the Tribe, and agreed
in the event of any misconduct of individuals that "no private revenge
or retaliation shall take place" and that instead complaint shall be
made by the Omaha Tribe to the Indian Agent to the end that punishment may be had “agreeably to the laws of the United States." By
Article 1; er the ‘Treaty, the Omaha Tribe bound themselves to extend
protection to traders authorized by the United States "whilst they remain within the limits of their (meaning the Tribe's) particular district
of country," agreed "to give safe conduct" to persons authorized by the
United States “to pass through their country," and, on the other hand,
undertook to arrest and deliver to the Indian Agent any person not
authorized by the United States who "shall come into their district of
country.” This Treaty was ratified by President John Quincy Adams under
date of February 6, 1826. Though this Treaty did not define the bounda'ries of the Omaha lands, by this Treaty the United States did recognize
that there existed at that time a district of the country which.was used
and occupied by the Omaha Tribe.
Finding No. 21

At Prairie du Chien in the territory of Michigan, on July 15, 1830:

the United States made a Treaty with the Omaha Tribe and other tribes

wherein the Omaha Tribe ceded to the United States all its right and

L: 652

.":.-'4.;'.|

title to all the lands claimed by the Omaha Tribe east of the.Missouri

River, it being understood that the United States would assign this
ceded land to the Omaha and other Indian tribes for hunting purposes.
In respect to the lands of the Omaha Tribe "not embraced in the cession
herein made,” this Treaty expressly stated that such land "shall be
occupied and held by them (the Omaha Tribe) as heretofore,5 and that
nothing contained in.the Treaty shall be construed to affect any claim
of the Tribe to such land. The price provided to be paid by the United
States to the Omaha Tribe included one blacksmith and "also instruments
for agricultural purposes to the amount of five hundred dollars." iPrior
to the Treaty, the Omaha Chief, Big Elk, had sought from the United
States tools with'which "to suck nourishment from the soil,“ someone

to instruct the tribe in agricultural pursuits, and had stated to the
United States Indian Agent his anxiety that his people farm a part of

the Omaha lands west of the Missouri River. This Prairhadu Chien Treaty

was ratified by President Andrew Jackson under date of February 2h, l83l.

By this Treaty, the United States recognized the use and occupancy by
the Omaha Tribe of lands not embraced.within the cession of all the
-Omaha lands east of the Missouri.River and thereby recognized that

there existed.west of the Missouri River lands used and occupied by

the Omaha Tribe.
Finding No. 22
The first determination of the boundaries of the Omaha lands by

officers of the United States acting in the course of official duties

was made in 1833-l83h. At that time the Secretary of War appointed a

h 653

committee of three Commissioners to investigate, report, and make recommendations in.respect to the negotiation of treaties with tribes
west of the Mississippi. This Committee in its investigation and report determined the boundaries of the Omaha Tribe and its neighboring
tribes. It determined that the Omaha land was bounded by the Missouri
River on the east, the Niobrara on the north, the Platte on the south,‘
and the Pawnee lands on the west. Thereafter, in l8h2, the Indian
agent for the Pawnee and Omaha Tribes reported that Shell Creekimarked
the west boundary of the Omaha lands. In this manner, prior to l8Sh,
officers and agents of the United States recognized the boundaries of
the land used and occupied by the Omaha Tribe and defined those boundan
ries to encompass the entire area in issue.
Finding No. 23

On October 15, 1836, at Bellevue, the United States by its agents
dohn Dougherty and Joshua Pilcher made a Treaty with the Omaha Tribe
and certain other Tribes wherein the Omaha Tribe ceded to the United
States all its “right, title and interest of whatsoever nature" to a
portion of the hunting lands provided.under the Treaty of Prairie du

Chien. The Omahas

Article 3 of this Treaty reads in part as follows:
"having also abandoned their former situation, and established at the
place recommended to them on the Missouri River, and finding it difficult without the aid of ploughs to cultivate land near their village
where they would.be secure from their enemies, it is agreed as a further proof of the liberality of the Government and its disposition to

advance such tribes in the cultivation of the soil as may manifest a

h ssh

'.L.-J.§L...o..  

1:. 655

disposition to rely on it for the future means of subsistence; that they
shall have one hundred acres of ground broke up and put under a fence
near their village, so soon as it can be done after the ratification of
this convention." The said “former situation" of the Omaha.village was
at a site near Bellevue. The Tribe had left this site to return again
to the neighborhood of the Omaha "Large Village" about 100 miles north
of Bellevue. Both these village sites were, of course, within the area
in issue. This Treaty was ratified by President Andrew Jackson on
Februarr 1S, 1837. Bythis Treaty the United States recognized that
the Omaha Tribe were using and occupying an undefined.area of land
either encompassing or lying within the area in issue.
Finding No. 2b

In November l8hl, Mr. Mitchell, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs
at St. Louis, reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that, since
the annuities owing to the Omaha Tribe under earlier treaties had now,
expired, the Omaha "are exceedingly anxious to sell a portion of their
lands" to the United States. From this time forward, until the Omaha
lands west of the Missouri.River were acquired by the United States in
the Treaty of March 16, 185k, the Indian agents for the Omaha Tribe, and
other officers of the United States, were concerned from time to time with
this matter of purchasing from the Omaha Tribe its lands west of the
Missouri River. In September of 18b2, Daniel Miller, Indian agent for
the Omaha Tribe reported that the Omaha "are desirous of selling a portion
of their country to the Government, in order to obtain a small annuity and

assistance in.their agricultural pursuits." In the same report Agent Miller

defined the Omaha lands in these words: The Omaha "claim the country
bounded by the Missouri.river on the east, by Shell Creek on the west,

by the river Platte on the south, and on the north by the Poncas country."
In February l8hh, Agent Miller reported that the Omaha "now say they wish
to sell all their country, reserving six miles front on the Missouri
River (some 20 or 30 miles above this Agency) and running back to the
Elkhorn River." In September l8h§, Thomas Harvey, the Superintendent

of Indian Affairs at St. Louis, recommended.to the Commissioner of

Indian Affairs that the United States "purchase from the Omaha their
country." In l8h7, Superintendent Harvey again pressed his recommendation
upon the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, citing the Omaha's "distressed
condition" as cause to expect “they would consent to any arrangement

that the Government would propose." In l8h8, the Commissioner of Indian

Affairs, W} Kedill, advocated in his annual report that the United States

“purchase cut" the Omahas. Of the Omahas he reported, “They are thei

original owners of the soil % % %. Their country is estimated to contain

from five to six million acres of valuable land, which could be obtained
at this time at a.very moderate price; and so tractable is their character,
there would be no difficulty in.making ample provision out of the purchase money for their civilization and improvementa" In 1850, Indian
Agent Barrow requested permission for a delegation of Omaha, Otoe, and
Pawnee Chiefs to go to‘Washington “to treat in regard to the purchase Of

some of their lands.” Agent Barrow's keenness for such a purchase is re—

flected in his report to Superintendent Mitchell in October 1851: "A11

the lands inhabited by the Otoes and Missouris and Omahas, extending from

p. 657

the mouth of the ‘Big Memahaw"up the Missouri, about two hundred and fifty

miles, can be purchased for a very small annual payment in cash or goods.

By the addition of a part of the Pawnee lands a territory could.be formed,

a which, for agricultural purposes, would rival any of the rich lands of the

Missouri and Iowa." The next year, in 1852, a delegation of Omaha chiefs

3 '_l. K '
*1  -,9 Q. _ __ 4 .
I. n ' ‘-kw “" “"-II-A-v-In-7.149 I ‘O14’; ““"""" ‘H-V .. J _ X .1-dcwas brought to'Washington to present to the President the claims of the
tribe under their Treaty of October 6, 1825. One of the motives of the
agents of the United States who brought this delegation to'Washington;was,
by giving reasonable consideration to these old grievances, to lay a foundation "for an amicable and satisfactory treaty for their lands.“ In‘Washington, the Omaha chiefs represented that "the country which they inhabit“

had become a thoroughfare for travelers and.had thereby been made almost

cdestitute of game, that the tribe had often been wronged by Indians and

"by whites passing over their country" but that they had always kept

the peace and had.not undertaken to avenge themselves, that now they
were anxious to turn to agriculture but that they needed the assistance
of the United States. Stating that he was satisfied of the correctness
of these representations, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs recommended
an appropriation of $25,000 and.this appropriation was shortly thereafter
enacted by the United States. Over this course of fourteen years of
dealings with the Omaha Tribe in respect to this matter of purchasing,

in whole or part, the lands used and occupied by the tribe, the officers

and agents of the United States charged with these Indian affairs became
well acquainted.with the claim of the Omaha Tribe to lands west of the

Missouri River and came to recognize and acknowledge that the Omaha tribe

Wused and occupied a large body of land;

Finding No. 25
By an Act of March 3, 1853, Congress authorized the President

“to enter into negotiations with the Indian tribes west of the states
of Missouri and Iowa for the purpose of securing the assent of said
tribes to the settlement of the citizens of the United States upon the _
lands claimed.by said Indians, and for the purpose of extinguishing the

title of said.tribes in whole or in part to said lands." In August of

1853 the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, George W. Manypenny, was instructed.by the Secretary of the Interior to visit with the Indians in
the Indian.country to obtain.the information necessary to the making
of such.treaties. That fall, Commissioner Manypenny held a council’

with the Omaha Tribe at'which time the Tribe determined to sell "the

half or more“ of their lands. Next spring, the Indian Office reported

to Congress in respect to the treaties it proposed to make and the title

to be extinguished by such treaties. For the Omaha Tribe, this report

gave the “boundaries of present residence" of the Tribe as follows:
"Bounded N. by Eau - qui - court river (Niobrara), E. by Missouri,
3. by the Platte, and W. by longitude 98 degrees west." The report
stated.that the Omaha Tribe was "indigenous" to "their present country"
and that it resided on its claimed lands. It is well established,
therefore, that prior to the Treaty negotiations with the Omaha Tribe
in 185b, the Indian Office and the House Committee on Indian Affairs
‘Were fully informed in respect to the claimed boundaries of the Omaha

lands west of the Missouri River and their occupancy of same to the

exclusion of other tribes, and had recognized that the Omaha Tribe

claimed.these lands by Indian title.

‘.h 658

Finding No. 26

In.December 1853 Commissioner Manypenny instructed Agent Gatewood
to obtain from the Omaha Tribe a delegation of Chiefs "with plenary
power to visit'Washington to make a treaty with the United States for
the surrender of their country in.whole or in part to the Government."
In January,.Agent Gatewood met in council with the Omaha Tribe and
secured from.the Tribe, in lieu of the delegation with plenary power,
the terms of a treaty together with a delegation of Omaha Chiefs.
authorized "to fully ratify, and confirm.and to slightly modify,
alter, or amend.any or all of the" provisions of this Treaty. When
Agent Gatewood and.the Omaha delegation arrived in'Washington, Commissioner Manypenny disapproved of the provisions in the Gatewood Treaty.
Accordingly, on.March 16, 185k, Commissioner Manypenny negotiated a
changed.Treaty‘mith the Omaha delegation in Washington. This Treaty
was signed fer the United States by Commissioner Manypenny and for the
Omaha Tribe by the Chiefs who were members of the Omaha delegation.
Thereafter,_on June 21, 185b, this Treaty wasiratified by President

Franklin Pierce. By the terms of this Treaty of March 16, 185b, the

Omaha Tribe undertook to, and.did, "cede to the United States all their,

lands west of the Missouri.River and south of“ the Ayoway River line.
.
Finding No. 27
By Article 1 of'the Treaty of March 16, l8Sh, the Omahas were
given the option to take 300,000 acres of land "within or outside the

ceded country” in lieu of the 783,365 acres lying north of the Ayoway

river line "which is reserved by the Omahas for their future home."

h 659

The Indians elected to take a tract within the ceded area south of said

line and.the following described lands were assigned to the Omaha.Indians

for their future home:

Part of Tps. 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 N., R. 2h East, Prin.
Meridian; Part of Tp. 5, all of Townships 6, 7, 8, 9 and
part of Tp. 10, N., Range 25 E., P.M.; part of Tp. S and
all of Tps. 6, 7, 8, 9, North, Range 26 E., P.M. and part
of Tps. 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9, North, Range 27 E., P.M., comprising 330,000 acres as estimated and shown on Eastman's

Map No. 5, shown opposite p. h7h (also the enlargement .
thereof) of Defendant's Exhibit 2 offered on Plaintiffs‘

motion of October 12, 1953 for interlocutory order. (See
also Royce, Nebraska 1, Tracts Q67, 570, 636, 637).

Finding No. 28
The Commission further finds that at the date of the Treaty of

March 16, 185b, the plaintiffs had the exclusive use and possession

of the lands situate in northeast Nebraska 1ying'within the following

boundaries:

Commencing at a point where the nest line of Range 5
West of Principal Meridian, Rebraska, intersects the
Nebraska—Dakota State line, thence south along said range
line to where it intersects Shell Creek near the northern
boundary line of Tp. 21, N., R. S West, thence along the
meanders of said stream to its junction with the Platte
‘River in Tp. 17 N}, R. hE, 6th P.M., thence along the
Platte River to its junction with the Missouri River, thene
northerly along the Missouri River to the place of beginning,
consisting of 5,283,365 acres from which is excluded the
area described in Finding No. 2?, supra, which was reserved
as aforesaid for plaintiffs, consisting of 330,000 acres;
leaving the acreage of the area claimed at h5953,36S.

Finding No. 29
The Commission also finds the Omaha received in payment for said
cession of March 16, 185b, the sum of $881,000 for the land south of

the 8Y0way River line and by the judgment of the Court of Claims in

1: 661

Case No. 31,002 (53 C. C15. 5149) they received $911,739.51; for the lands

north of said line, or a total consideration of $975,739.51; for all

the lands ceded and for which claim is herein made.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

w; M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

