BEFORE HE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE POTTARATDMIE TRIRE OF INDIANS, )
THE PRAIRIE BAND OF TEE PDTTAEATOMIE)
TRIRE OF INDIANS, et a1s.,

Plaintiffs,
vs. Docket No. 15-B

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

‘-.¢"~u..J’*-~—-O"-nu-/\~...d'\.../N--J‘|~u-v"'In-Id’

Defendant.
and

CITIZEN BAND OF POTAFATOMI INDIANS
OF OKLAHOMA, AND POTAEATOMI NATION
et als.,

5

Plaintiffs,
vs. Docket No. 111

THE UNITED STATES OF AREEICA,

\..../'~...-v’~.../\.d\....d-...f\..J\..o0‘-..J‘~..d ‘--J

Defendant.

Decided: September 21, 1956

OPINION AND FINDIEGS COXCERHING ATTORESIS’ FEES ARE EXPEDSES 23 THE

ATTOREEYS EEPRESEHIING THE_PRAIRIE BAND OE POTTAHATOHIE INDIANS,

..-._..

Due notice having been given, these consolidated dockets came on for
hearing before this Commission on August 20, 1956, upon the Application
for Allowance of Attorneys’ Fees and for Reimbursement of Expenses Ina
curred by the Attornys Representing the Prairie Band of the Pottawatomie
Nation of Indians filed Eovember 3, 1955, the Revisions and Supplement
thereto and Answer of Counsel of the Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Nation

of Indians Regarding Statement of Allowable Expenses filed March 20, I956,

hSh0

;he Motion of Attorneys for the Prairie Band of the Pottawatomie Nation

2f Indians for Hearing and Allowance of their Fees and their Respective
ilaims for reimbursement of Expenses Incurred to July 7, 1955, filed
Iune 18, l9S6, and upon the Defendant's Response to Application for

lllowance of Expenses of Attorneys filed August 13, 1956, and the Memoe

fandum in Reply to Report of Commissioner of Indian Affairs filed

August 15, 1956, the attorneys for the Prairie Band being represented
qy 0. R. McGuire, attorney of record, and the defendant United States
being represented by Sim T. Carman, Esquire.

At the conclusion of said hearing, said matters were taken.under
advisement by the Commission. Thereafter the Citizen Band and Prairie
Band entered into a stipulation, which is now on file, providing that
the attorneys‘ fees properly payable to the respective attorneys for
each of said bands and the sums allowed said respective attorneys upon
their claims for reimbursement of allowable expenses, shall be deducted
from the respective shares of said bands in the final award heretofore
entered in these consolidated dockets.

The record discloses that the services rendered and expenses for
which reimbursement'is sought, were rendered or incurred under a cone
tract between the Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Indians and Messrs, Stone,
McClure,‘Webb, Johnson, and Oman, dated October 22, 19b7, approved by the
Commissioner of Indian.Affairs on December 19, l9h7; that by subsequent
assignments approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs the following

I s s wi in eres in ai oncra o «wit;
persons posses" the follo ng t ts s d c * c‘, to 1‘

h Sh?

‘Robert Stone, 19%; Robert Stone Johnson, 19%; Beryl R. Johnson, 12%;

3. R. McGuire, 50%; and that said contract of employment reads in part:

It shall be the duty of said attorneys to advise and represent the said band of Indians in connection with properly investigating and formulating the claims of said
bands against the United States with respect to the suits
which said Indians are authorized to institute against the
United States % % %.

* * * and to represent them before all courts, departments,
tribunals, the Committees of Congress, and other Officers
having any duty to perform in connection with the investigation, consideration, or final settlement of said claim

II

and matters embraced in the suit authorized % % w.

It is agreed that the Compensation of the party of the
second part for the services to be rendered under the
terms of this contract is to be wholly contingent upon
a recovery for the tribe. The party of the second part
shall recieve such compensation % % % as may be determined by said court or tribunal equitably to be due for
the services theretofore rendered under this contract,
but in no event shall the aggregate fee exceed ten per
centum of any and all sums recovered or procured % % *

The attorneys % % % shall also be allowed and reimbursed

from the amount of any judgment received.such actual expenses incurred.by them as may be fixed by the Indian

Claims Commission pursuant to Article 15 of the Act of

August 13, 19b6, Public Law 726.

It is represented that the Application for Allowance of Attorneys‘
Fees and for Reimbursement of Expenses Incurred by Attorneys on Behalf
of the Prairie Band contains in one tabulation all expense items incurred by 03 R. McGuire, and that all expense items incurred.by others
interested in said.contract of employment are thereafter set out under
the name of Robert Stone in a second tabulation. It further appears

from the record that as a result of the order of this Commission

entered July 25, 19b9, in original Docket No. 15 then pending before it,

the claimants, Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Indians, thereafter filed
Dockets Nos. 15-A to 154M, inclusive, with this Commission asserting in
each docket a separate claim theretofore jointly plead in said original
Docket 15, and the expense accounts presented by the attorneys include
items incurred prior to such separation of causes of action. It is
further apparent that while each item of expense was incurred in con»
nection with the preparation and.presentation of Pottawatomie Indian
claims against the United States, that many of said items have appli«
cation hoth to consolidated Dockets Nos. 15-B and 111 and other dockets,
presenting other claims of said Prairie Band against the United States,
and that a few such expense items have been incurred wholLy'with respect
to dockets other than Nos. 15-8 and 111. It is the Government‘s conu
tention that the attorneys are entitled to recover from the present

award for only such expenses as are shown to have been incurred after
approval of the attorneys’ contract by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
and prior to July 25, 19b9, and such expenses incurred thereafter as have
relation to only Dockets 15-8 and 111, and for only such services as were
required in the proper preparation and presentation of said.two dockets.

Under the wording of the contract as above quoted, and the provim

sions of Section 15 of the lndian Claims Commission Act, it appears that
said attorneys are entitled to recover for all reasonable expense actually
incurred.by them in investigating, preparing and presenting all claims of
said Pottawatomie Indians under the contract of employment of Octoter 22,

19h?3 and that such right of recovery is contingent upon the recovery of

an award on behalf of said Indians against the United States but not upon

H 5&3

a recovery for each claim which may have been honestly and conscientiously
gresented; and that in the determination and allowance of attorneys’ fees
and remuneration of expenses incurred, this Commission may take into con+
sideration the services rendered by said attorneys under said contract,
and expenses legitimately incurred by them in the proper, diligent and
zonscientious investigation, preparation and presentation of all claims
of said claimant Indians.

The record and evidence disclose that after the interlocutory order
of this Commission entered in these consolidated dockets on April 23,
195k, finding claimant Indians entitled to recover certain amounts from
the defendant, subject to a subsequent determination of proper offsets,
that said Prairie Band in general council, and its Board of Councilors
and Business Committee, on May 15, l955, each approved an attorneys’
fee of 10% of the amount to be realized by said Band; and each also
approved for payment from the sum to be realised by said Band the expense accounts of their said attorneys which have been presented to this
Commission for allowance herein; and that under the final award entered
in these consolidated dockets on August 8, 1955, the Prairie Band.are
entitled to receive a total sum of $l26,30é.2h; that said award was the
result of services rendered by said attorneys under the contract of employment of October 22, l9h75 that under the provisions of said contract
and Section.l5 of the Act of August 13, 19b6, 60 Stat. lOh9, said attorneys may receive a fee of not to exceed 10% of such recovery, or a total
fee of $12,630.62 and that said amount is a fair and adequate compensation

to said attorneys for the services performed and the results obtained, and

h Shh

said sum will be allowed as an attorneys‘ fee to the attornys represent»
ing said Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Indians from the final award granted
said Band as above recited.

Under the assignments of interest in the contract of employment said
attorneys‘ fee is payable to the attorneys representing said Prairie Band

of Pottawatomie Indians in the fbllowing sums, toawit:

O. R. McGuire, 50% or $ 6,3l5o3l
Robert Stone, 19% or 2,399.82
Robert Stone Johnson, 19% or 2,399.82
Beryl R. Johnson, 12% or 12515.6? $ l2,630.62

The Commission finds that the itemized list of incurred expenses
i"iled by o. R. McGuire properly totals $11,315.60; that the follo'm',ng
items included in said account are ordinary expenses incident to the
practice of the legal profession and the maintenance and operation of a
law office for the general practice of the law and are not properly ale
lonable against and chargeable to the Prairie Band, to=wits

Taxi fares paid for transportation.within the
District of Columbia where said O. R. McGuire main»

tains his business office, incurred between April
39    73  oooocooooooeooooooooooeoc

$ 22.90
and that the said O. R. McGuire has requested that a duplicated item
of $9hob7 be stricken from said account.

The Commission finds that said O. R. McGuire's account includes an
item of $3l0Oo0O as deferred salary due one Ivy Lee Buchanan on a time»
andyhalf basis for stenographic and other services rendered by her to

the

$1-xv

said O. R. McGuire for the benefit of the Prairie Band after coma

pletion of her usual working hours under a contract of employment at

eight hours per day, five days a week, in the office of the said

O. R. McGuire; that such services were distinct from the usual work of
said Ivy Lee Buchanan and possible of performance during ordinary working hours; that the compensation therefor chargeable to the Prairie Band

should not exceed a sum comparable to regular compensation for the time

involved and services rendered, and that said item should be allowed in

the total sum of but $2,066.66.

The Commission finds that the expense account of Robert Stone

(and others) filed herein is in the total sum of $27,8h7.S0; that the
following items which are included therein represent personal expenses
of the individual or individuals involved and in no manner contributed
to the prosecution of the claims of said Prairie Band or toward obtaining the final award heretofore granted said Band, and remuneration for
said items should be denied, touwitz

October 12, l9h8: Valet $1.25, Laundry $2.2 ,

 

included in hotel bill of $79.93 ea............ 3 3.53

March 23 to April 1, l9h9: Barber Shop 31°00,

Valet 33.75, Laundry $1.75, included in hotel

   ...3‘..... O I C D C Q CC.-GGCQCCOQQOQ. 

Trip Insurance on April 2, l9h8 .....=....¢.... 1.00

Trip Insurance on_March 22, 19h? ........o..... 3.50
33 111.53

The Commission finds that the expense account presented by Robert
Stone includes an item of $ll,?lS.69 paid one'K. D. Davis upon a statement of $20,050.27 rendered for services performed and expenses incurred
by said Davis at the request of Stone and other attorneys in connection

with the preparation of the claims in these ccnseiidated dockets and in

h Sho

other dockets containing claims presented.to this Commission in behalf
of Pottawatomie Indians; that said $11,715.69 item includes therein a
payment of $750000 made to the said W. D. Davis upon his said account
by Adams;_Moses and Culver and a further payment of $750.00 made to the
said We D. Davis upon his said account by Blake, Voorhees and Stewart,
attorneys representing the Citizen Band of Potawatomi Indians; that
said.two firms have each filed expense accounts with this Commission
seeking to recover for expenses incurred in the prosecution of the
claims of:said Citizen Band, and that said payments are included in
those accounts; that the payments were made by said firms and not by
Robert Stone, Robert Stone Johnson or Beryl R. Johnson; that said items
are not proerly allowable in the account of said Robert Stoneo

lt appearing from the affidavit of James N. Beery, attorney for the
Administrator of the Estate of one Dorr E. Warner, deceased, photostatic
copies of cancelled.checks attached thereto, the itemized statement of
3. D. Davis, and the record, that the said'w. D. Davis operates under
the firm name of Farm.Hanagement Company; and that said $11,715.69 item
in the expense account of Robert Stone contains three payments totaling
$2500a00 which.nere made to W} D. Davis to apply upon his account of
$20,0S0o2? by the said Dorr'E.'Warner, deceased, and.not by the said
Robert Stone; and said affidavit reciting that the estate of Dorr E0
Earner, deceased, is not requesting the allowance of said item.as an

item of expense reimbursable from the final award heretofore granted the

Prairie Band.of Pottawatomie Indians in these consolidated dockets; the

Commission therefore finds that $2500.00 of said.expense item of $l1;?lS.69

in the account of Robert Stone should.be disallowed, said.amount representing payments made upon the account of'W. D. Davis by one Dorr E.

‘Warner during his lifetime.

Upon disallowance of the items above specified, the Commission finds
that the expense account of O. R. McGuire is properly allowable in the
sum of $l0,19h.89; that the expense account of Robert Stone (including
expense items of Robert Stone Johnson and Peryl R. Johnson) is properly
allowable in the total sum of $23,832.97; that upon payment of said expense items of $10,l9h.89 and $23,832.97 to the persons entitled thereto
and attorneys‘ fees in the sum of $12,630.62 as hereinbefore apportioned,
the balance of the final award heretofore granted the Prairie Band of
Pottawatomie Indians is distributable to said Prairie Band.

Dated this 21st day of September, 1956.

Edgar E. Wi-tt

.--u--nun

Uhief Commissioner

 

lm&sJ.O%aw
.e 'ommissioner

 

21>
r3
m
as
( 

Em. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

1: SW

