8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:36
BEFORE .~TH.E INDIAN CLAIMS CO1‘-EMISSION

UPPER CHEHALIS TRIBE, ET AL.,
Plaintiffs,

v. Docket No. 237

THE UNITED STATES,

V-q....r’\Iu.uW‘\.u"iu..J‘\..u*'\_.af\~..I‘\..d"In.p’

Defendant.

Decided: arch lh, 1960

Appearances:

Joseph'W. Creagh and
E. L. Crawford,

Attorneys for Plaintiffs

Donald R. Marshall, with whom
was Mr. Assistant.Attorney
General, Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION _o§_ g_H_E_ co:-sass: on

WITT, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case is before the Commission for a second time. ‘When previously considered and dismissed (h Ind. Cl. Comm. 301) this Commission

found that within.the area claimed by plaintiffs on the basis of
Indian title there was aboriginally a number of autonomous villages,°
or tribelets, and.that there was no evidence of a merger of these
village-tribes into a ”Chehalis Tribe“ or into two tribes -- the

“Lower Chehalis" and the ?Upper Chehalis." The Commission further

found that there was no substantial evidence that the plaintiffs herein

1163

8 Ind. Cl. Com. £36

were the successors in interest of the village—tribes and that the
proof did not shou from what predecessor oribes or bands plaintiff,
The Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, was organized or
formed. The Commission also noted that plaintiff had failed to prove
the tribal affiliation of the individually named plaintiffs. In addition to the claim based on Indian title, plaintiffs had filed a claim
in.the same docket for the alleged taking of 3,753.63 acres of land from
the Chehalis reservation by an Executive Order of_October ll, 1886. The
Commission found that this land had been allotted and patented to the
Indians residing thereon, except for those lands reserved for school
‘purposes, and dismissed said claim. The plaintiffs appealed to the
Court of Claims and in an opinion (lho C. Cls. 192), that Court sets

aside our final determination with respect to the claim based on Indian
In '

title and remanded the case to the Commission for further proceedings

not inconsistent with its opinion. No mention is made by the Court of
Claims of the claim pertaining to the 3,753.63 acres of reservation
land so the Commission's determination with respect thereto is final.

The Court of Claims, after discussing the findings of the Commission, held as follows:

After consideration of the record in this case, the
briefs and arguments of counsel, and in View of the purposes of the Indian Claims Commission Act, the background
of the various Indian tribes and groups, and the authorities on the subject of Indian affairs and modes of living,
"we are of the opinion that the Upper Chehalis and the
Lower Chehalis Indians constituted tribes or identifiable
groups of Indians within the meaning of the Indian Claims
Commission Act. ‘We are also of the opinion that the evidence in the record does not support the findings of the
Commission and its conclusion that there was no political
organization of the Upper Chehalis Indians and the Lower
Chehalis Indians to the extent necessary to constitute

hob

”Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation" as plaintiffs.

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1.135

tribes or other identifiable groups of American Indians.
Neither is there substantial evidence to support the
finding and conclusion of the Commission that the Upper
and Lower Chehalis Indians did not use and occupy at
least their villages and the land surrounding them as
identifiable groups or bands of Indians. Absolute
accuracy of location and extent of occupancy is not
essential, and the record in this case is sufficient for
the Commission to determine with reasonable accuracy the

location and extent of the areas actually occupied by the
tribes involved herein. Snake or Piute Indians v. United

jin-. 

States, 125 C. Cls. Zhl; Alcea Band of Tillamooks, et al., v. United States, 103 C. Cls. H95, affirmed 329 U. S. E ;

Nooksack Tribe of Indians v. United States, 1 Ind. Cls.

Com. 333, and 3 Ind. Cls. Com. E79; huckleshoot Tribe of
Indians v. United States, 2 Ind. Cls. Com. E25, 3 Ind.

Cls. Com. 633.

The Court of Claims was further of the opinion that the claim asserted

by plaintiffs would seem to fall squarely within the provisions of

clause h of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. l0h9).

This claim was filed with the Indian Claims Commission by the Upper
Chehalis Tribe, Lower Chehalis Tribe, Satsop Tribe, Humptulip Tribe,
Upper Chinook Tribe, Lower Chinook Tribe, Chinook Tribe, Hoquiam Tribe,
Clatsop Tribe, Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation and
portions and desmendants of such tribes and bands as plaintiffs.‘
Plaintiffs were permitted by this Commission to omit the Upper Chinook,
Lower Chinook, Chinook and Clatsop tribes as plaintiffs and to add
“Ralph.A. heck, Frank F. Pete and Murphy Secena, who are members of
the Chehalis Tribe individually and on behalf of all other members of
the Chehalis Tribe and subordinate bands not members of the Confederated
The Confederated
Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation is organized and recognized by the

Secretary of the Interior. The other named plaintiff tribes are not

L6‘

8 End. Cl. Com. h36
organized. In the original and amended petiti'ns, it is alleged that
the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation is "composed of a
confederation of the other plaintiffs named above, and as such confederation of Indian tribes, said plaintiff has capacity to maintain
this proceeding and to prosecute the claims hereinafter named.“ (Par. I).
In the original petition, plaintiffs alleged joint and several occupancy
of certain lands in what is now the State of'washington (er. VI). In

the amended petition, plaintiffs apparently allege joint ownership by

Indian title to a large area of land in northwestern'Washington (Fdg. 2), ‘

bordering the Chehalis River and its tributaries (Par. VII), totaling

an estimated l,hhh,h80 acres (Pl. Reply Br., p. 22). Plaintiffs contend

that the alleged taking of their tribal lands occurred on March 3, 1855
(P1. Req. Fdg. 22).    

‘With respect to the capacity of the plaintiffs herein to maintain
this action the Court of Claims stated (150 C. C15. 192, at pages 198199):

The Commission has held that the proof before it was
insufficient to establish that the plaintiffs bringing
suit were the descendants of the Upper and Lower Chehalis
tribes. Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act
provides as follows :

Any claim within the provisions of this Act
| may be presented to the Commission by any member

of an Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable
group of Indians as the representative of all its
members; but wherever any tribal organization
exists, recognized by the Secretary of the Interior
as having authority to represent such tribe, band,
dr group, such organization shall be accorded the
exclusive privilege of representing such Indians,
unless fraud, collusion, or laches on the part of
such organization be shown to the satisfaction of
the Commission.

héé

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 536

All the groups covered in the evidence are named parties
plaintiffs, and individuals are named as their representatives. Under section l0 above, an identificable group of
Indians may be represented by an individual as a representative of all the members of the group. It would
therefore appear that the Indian groups having a cause

of action would be adequately represented for the purpose of bringing this action through the representation
of one of their members. If there is some doubt as to
the identity of the Indians entitled to share in the
judgment, if any, such a problem would appear to be
tadministrative.

The question of the right of plaintiffs to present the claims having
been so determined we may now discuss the remaining issues before the
Commission and the contentions of the parties.

Following the remanding of this case a further hearing was held
before the Commission at which time the parties indicated they would
file additional briefs pertaining to the action. Defendant thereafter

’lg§iled supplemental requested findings of fact and plaintiffs filed a

lwvstatement calling the Commission's attention to certain facts in evidence and a copy of plaintiffs‘ brief in its appeal to the Court of
Claims. Plaintiffs urged in their brief before the Court of Claims
that the Upper Chehalis Indians and the Lower Chehalis Indians constituted tribes with a tribal organization and were not merely a number
of autonomous village units. .Plaintiffs further urged that both groups
(or tribes) used and exploited the entire watersheds of their tribal

. lands. Defendant in.its statement accompanying its supplemental requested findings of fact and in said requested findings calls the
attention of the Commission to certain cases pending before the Commission and to decisions already rendered pertaining to land in or

L67

8 Ind. Cl. com, n35

adjoining the land claimed by plaintiffs, and to testimony in other
cases relative to the Indians in the claimed area. It is defendant's
position that the plaintiff should not be allowed to recover under any
View of the law and the evidence.

The Court of Claims, as previously stated, agreed with plaintiffs‘
view of the evidence since it was of the opinion that the record didi
not support the findings of the Commission and its conclusion that
there was no political organization of the Upper Chehalis Indians and

the Lower Chehalis Indians to the extent necessary to constitute tribes

or other identifiable groups of American Indians. The Court of Claims

further stated "neither is there substantial evidence to support the
finding of the Commission that the Upper and Lower Chehalis Indians

did not use and occupy at least their villages and the land surrounding
them as identifiable groups or bands of Indians.“ In considering the
claim subsequent to the remand, these views of the Court of Claims have
been carefully followed in order that the findings of fact now made,

and conclusions reached by the Commission, would not be inconsistent with
the opinion of said Court.

» The record has been reviewed and analyzed again to determine

(1) which Indians belonged to the Lower Chehalis Tribe or identifiable
group and which Indians were part of the Upper Chehalis tribe or identifiable group, and (2) what areas were held by these tribes or identifiable groups under Indian title. As stated in the previous decision

of this Commission (L Ind. Cl..Comm. 335.336), Doctor Hebert c. Taylor,

anthropologist, in testifying for plaintiffs was of the opinion that

M68

—the Lower Chehalis seemed to have been made up of at least five bands,

i.e., the Satsop, the Wynochee, the Humptulips, the Copalis and the
Lower Chehalis proper. Historically, George Gibbs, in l8§h; differentiated between the Upper Chehalis and the Chehalis Indians living

I along the Chehalis River from the Satsop River down to Gray's Harbor.

John Swan, a settler in the area under consideration, also seemed to
consider the Upper Chehalis as separate from the Lower Chehalis.
ispecial Indian Agent Ford in 1857 also noted the separation of the
Upper and Lower Chehalis Tribes. Ford identified the Lower Chehalis
as consisting of the ”Clickouanmish‘[Cloqualln§7, Satsop, and Walnoochie
Bands, as well as the Indians living at Gray's Harbor, which latter are
the Lower Chihalis, properly so called."

‘While ethnologists are far from agreement as to the propriety of
considering many of the Indians along the Chehalis River or north of
Gray's Harbor as subdivisions of the Lower Chehalis, many of the early
writers did divide the Chehalis Indians into Upper Chehalis, that is
those dwelling above the Satsop River, and the Lower Chehalis from
that point downstream. The Lower Chehalis Tribe or identifiable group
may be identified therefore as including those Indians located in
villages located on the Satsop, Humptulips, Hoqniam,‘Wynoochee and
‘Wishkah Rivers and inhabiting the southern side of Grayis Harbor and
the country to the east thereof and also on the south side of the
Chehalis River.

The exact number of bands or villages composing the Upper Chehalis

Tribe or identifiable group is not ascertainable from the record.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. L36

Accor ing to Doctor Taylor, plaintiffs’ witness, the Upper Chehalis
consisted of four bands but this information is based solely on his
informants. There is no doubt that Indians often referred to as the
Upper Chehalis Indians or the Upper Cbehalis Tribe aboriginalLy'used
and occupied the upper part of the Chehalis River from near the Satsop
River to-the vicinity of Chehalis, Washington.

Before proceeding to a discussion of the boundaries of the Upper

lchehalis and Lower Chehalis Indians brief mention should be made of the

Copalis Indians. The Commission has found (Fdg. 22) the Copalis to be

a separate tribal and land holding entity. These Indians were considered
by Swan in about l8S7 to be a separate tribe. In its prior findings of
fact (h Ind: Cl. Comm. 319, 320) this Commission noted the testimony in

The Quinaielt Tribe v. United States, Docket No. 2L2, that the Copalis

 

Indians were part of the Quinaielt Tribe. Later in the Quinaielt case,
7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1, 27, this Commission held the Copalis Indians were
not part of the Quinaielt Tribe and stated:

Undoubtedly, there was great similarity both in culture
and language of the Copalis and Quinaielt. Such likeness
existed between the Copalis and the Chehalis and many other
fish-eating Salishan speaking tribes and bands of Indians
west of the Cascades, such as the Humptulips, Satsops, and
those of the'W .oochee and Hoquim.Rivers, yet such evidence
does not establish sufficient ties of blood, subsistence,
and social unity to identify all of these as one tribe of
Quinaielt Indians. In our Finding 6 we have set out the
views exchanged between Dr. George Gibbs and James G. Swan
where a contrary view was expressed, listing the Copalis
as a separate group from the Quinaielt Indians. In deference to such respected authorities who had personal contact with the Indians of the Northwest Pacific Coast, we
have excluded the area of the Copalis River watershed from
the aboriginal boundaries of the Quinaielt in Finding 13.

h7o

8 Ind. C1. Com. 1136

The lands claimed herein by plaintiffs which were used and occupied by
Copalis Indians are therefore excluded from the territory found to have
been aboriginally in the possession of the Lower Chehalis Tribe.
The question as to what Indians composed the Upper Chehalis and

Lower Chehalis tribes or identifiable groups having been resolved it was
necessary to examine the record with respect to their land use and
occupancy in order that the land areas to which they respectively held
-Indian title might be delimited by the Commission. The Indians of the
northwest region of the United States for the most part are spoken of

as "fish-eating" Indians. Their dependence on other means of subsistence
revolved around their location. If they lived near the sea they relied
heavily upon the supply of fish and shell fish so abundantly provided

therefrom. If, however, they were an inland people they, of necessity,

r_3 ‘
rweirelied more on hunting to supplement their diets. Both types also

relied on roots and berries as part of their subsistence.

The Lower Chehalis Indians aboriginally lived in a region of

D

abundance. They had their villages on Gray*s Harbor and at or near
the mouth of the streams that flowed into the Harbor or into the
Chehalis River from the Satsop river downstream to the Harbor. These
Indians relied heavily for their subsistence on fish such as salmon
and sturgeon and on shell fish since there was an abundance of clams

and oysters on the beaches.

Hunting was not important to them. They

had few horses. Roots and berries were gathered to supplement their
diet. Aboriginally they had villages on the south side of Gray's

Harbor and several on the north side such as at the month of Chenois

h7l

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1436

Creek and the mouths of Humptulips and Hoquiam Rivers. Other villages

were located at or near the mouths of the rivers which were tributary

to the Chehalis such as the Wynoochee and Satsop Rivers.

The Upper Chehalis Indians, an inland people, were primarily
riverine, canoe Indians. Although relying upon fish, roots and berfies
they also depended upon hunting for their subsistence. They owned a
number of horses after the beginning of historic contact and were somewhat more nomadic than the coast Indians. Their villages were located
along the upper part of Chehalis River from about the Satsop River to
near what is now Centralia, Washington. Sources with respect to location of their villages are scarce but it would appear they aboriginally
had villages at least on Grand Mound Prairie,-at.the mouth of Black River,
on Cloquallum creek, and near Porter,'Washington. . C.

In setting the boundaries of the Lower Chehalis Tribe or identifiable
group the Commission has taken into consideration the mode of living
of these sea oriented Indians; the abundant food resources within easy
access of their villages; the recorded population of this group; their
lack of dependence on hunting; and the well established fact that from

1820 on there was a southern movement of these people into the Shoalwater Bay region, outside of the claimed area, where fish and shell fish

were also abundant. In considering the boundaries for the Upper Chehalis

the Commission has considered the fact that although primarily an inland, riverine, canoe people, these Indians did resort to hunting for
subsistence in addition to relying on fish, roots and berries.

In

fixing their boundaries the Commission has also noted their movement

1:72

‘L-«4...a+..r;:-I-='-"'

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 535

in the early part of the 19th century into the Willipa Hills region,
outside the claimed area, to the south and west; the fact that there
were doubtful areas between these Indians and the Cowlitz Indians to
the south with whom the Upper Chehalis were becoming intermingled;

doubtful areas of use and occupancy between the Nisqually and Upper

Chehalis Indians; and the population figures of these Indians in the

.period under consideration.

The Commission concludes that the Lower Chehalis Tribe or identifiable group has proved aboriginal Indian title to the lands described
in Finding 23. The Commission further concludes that the Upper Chehalis

Tribe or identifiable group has proved aboriginal Indian title to the

lands described in Finding 2b. The Commission also concludes that the
Indian title to the lands described in the aforesaid findings was

extinguished for all intents and purposes on March 3, 1855, the day on
which negotiations looking to a treaty terminated, since from and after

that date the United States dealt with such lands as part of the public

domain. In this manner, and as of that date, the_lands aboriginally

‘ occupied by said tribes were taken from them without their consent andl

without compensating them for such lands.

Accordingly, an interlocutory order will be entered herein adjudging

the defendant liable for the value of the lands of each of said tribes

or identifiable groups, subject, however, to whatever offsets, if any,

1:73

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:36 » . } 1:71:

including land that the defendant may later prove it is entitled to

under the provisions oi‘ the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring :

Wm. H. Holt
Kssociate Commissioner

Commissioner Watkins did not participate in this opinion.

