BEFORE TE-E INDIAN CL1‘«.D'3.5 COI7_I-EISSION

The SKAGIT TRIBE OF INDIANS, also known )
as THE IOWER SKAGIT TRIBE OF IKDIAKS, )
also known as HHIDBEY ISLAND SKAGITS, )
)
Petitioners, )

)
vs. ) Docket No. 29A

) .

THE UHITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
)

Defendant.
Decided: Mar. 20, I959
Appearances:

Warren J. Gilbert, Frederick
H. Post and Kalcolm S. Kcleod,
Attorneys for Petitioner

Donald R. Karshall, with whom
was Er. Assistant Attorney General Perry W. Horton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPIKIOE OF TH; COEMISSION

 

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case presents claim in behalf of the tribe
of American Indians alleged to be the lower Skagit Tribe df‘Whidbey'
Island Skagits. ‘He find that petitioner is an identifiable group of
American Indians within.the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission
Act (60 Stat. IOA9) and as such is entitled to maintain this cause of
action.

Petitioner alleges that the United 3tates by the Point Elliott

Treaty of January 22, l855 (12 Stat. 927, II Kapp. 669) secured a ces-n&

A

sion oz Indian land aboriginally'belonging to said petitioner for an

unconscionable consideration (Petition, Par. VII). The "land ceded to

313

Ind. Cl. Con. 292 33.1;

the Government in the Point Elliott Treaty by various tribes and bands
of Indians consisted of a large area in what is now the northwestern
part of the State of Washington and petitioner’s claim is a specified
portion of the lands so ceded to the United States.

The only issues to be determined at this time are (1) whether petitioner has capacity under the Indian Clairns Corzmission Act to maintain
this action, and (2) is it successor in interest to the original owners
of the land involved; and (3) whether petitioner or its predecessors in
interest held aboriginal Indian title to the land described in the petition, paragraphJN, or any portion thereof (I Tr. P. 3).

Since the first white contact with the native inhabitants of the
Puget Sound area, historical sources have referred to "Skagit Indians”
as being located on parts of §hidbey Island.and about the mouth of the
Skagit River. It is also true that "Skagit" from early times has been
used as an identification of one dialect of the Salish language. George
Gibbs, Governor Stevents able assistant, in pre-treaty times defined
”3kagit” as a dialect spoken by at least four tribes. But aside front
the usage of “3kagit" as a classification of dialect, Gibbs also described not only "Skagit" as an entity of American Indians but also drew
a distinction between "up—river” bands of Skaglts and those situated
along the mouth of the Skagit River and on.Whidbey Island. This ;;E*'
P18 usage of the word "Skagit" in reference sonettaes to ”Skagitea'~
and at other times in reference to the Skagits residing on'central"nniubey
Island and the lower portion of the Skagit River, and at other times need

in reference to those Indians residing along the upper portions

 

Skagit River has given rise to confusion and controversy in Indian

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292 3l

In 193A decision which antedates the Indian Claims Commission
Act of l9h6 (Duwamish, et al. V. United States, 79 C. Cls. 530, Finding IV and Op., p. 581).. The Court of Claims found that the Iumni
Tribe, Sanish, Whidbey Islands Skagit and Upper Skazit, among others,
were parties to the Point Elliott Treaty.

Indian Agent lane in an annual report of l8&9 noted "the Skagets
live on the Skagit river down to the ocean, toward the north end of
Whidbey's Island, a total.number about 500 * * *.”

George Gibbs, in l854, classified the Ehidbey Island Skagits as a
separate identifiable group of Indians in this language, "the next
tribe proceeding northward are the Skagits, who live on the main around
the mouth of the Skagit River, and own the central parts of Whidbey Island,
their principal ground being the neighborhood around Penn‘s cove."

Also pre-treaty reports of priests, explorer, and government men,
Blanchet, Bolduc, Kautz,'Wilkes, and others all mention the Sachets,
Shatchets, Skagats, etc., as living on Whidbey Island and adjacent areas.
The Government men treated with the Skagit in the Point Elliott Treaty
and also before and after said treaty. The fourth signature to this
treaty is ”Goliah, Chief of the Skagits and other allied tribes." It is
‘well known that Goliah as well as Chief Neetlum and other prominent Skagits
resided on'Whidbey Island.

Sally Snyder, petitioner‘s ethnologist, pointed out in her testimony

‘that various methods were used in Indian classification among scholars who

.-u

--.r___

have made special studies of Indians and their culture, particularly in
‘the Puget Sound region, Some classifications used are ecological, geographical, linguistics, tribal caste systems, potlaching, etc. Snyder

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292 I 316

commented that in her classification the term "tribe," among Indians of
this region, would be applied to a group of Indians inhabiting, ordinarily, contiguous territory with a degree of solidarity that would approach
a political level -- something more than by mere physical habitatior ecological grouping. In defining the lower Skagits as a tribe she drew a distinction between them and the up-river (upper) Skagits (II Tr. pp. I2-IL).

It appears beyond question that these Skagits spoke a common dialect,
roamed about'ug¢ther in their canoes around Whidbey Island and lower portions of the Skagit River, constructed pole barricades at Penn's Cove as a
common refuge against their common enemy, the Queen Charlotte Indians or
the "Yugoltah" of Frazier River. They potlacged together, had areas of religious ceremonies, buried their dead in a common cemetery, had arbitration
councils to settle internal disputes, followed the leadership of Chief Neetlum
and others. While, perhaps, their social order appeared crude and loosely knit
when compared to such groups as the powerful and warlike confederacy of "the
Six Nations" among the Iroquois,, and other organized tribes east of the Hississippi, nevertheless, we have concluded upon the basis of these.factors, and
in the light of the history of Government negotiations in treaty times treat153 with them.and their leaders as representatives of Ftribes and bands? that
the lower Skagits were an identifiable group of Indians within the moarivy
the Indian Claims Commission Act. Our finding is thus based not pgxge ;;:n;

4

modern sources and studies but also upon reports of religious, no3"‘+“‘

administrative relationships by missionaries, explorers, and Government r%v

with these Indians at a period when they had not abandoned their naiiwe nuke

ture, l792~l850‘s.

Ind. Cl. Com. 292

Petitioner has established that it is the successor to the aboriginal tribe of lower Skagit Indians. The testimony of three members of
petitioner whose ancestors were well known Skagit Indians, identified by
their native culture, 1792-1850's.

This Commission believes that petitioner has established that it is
the successor to the aboriginal tribe of lower Skagit Indians. The testimony of three members of petitioner whose ancestors were well known Skagit
Indians, identified by Blanchet, Bolduc, and others, who came in contact
‘with the Indians on Whidbey Island and the North Fork of the Skagit River,
supports our Finding No. l0, that petitioner represents the descendants of
said aborigines and is the successor to said aboriginal group or tribe of
American Indians.

The fourth signer of the Point Elliott Treaty is subscribed ”Goliah,
Chief of the Skagits and other tribes.” when considered with Colonel
Simmon's report, this fact considered with other early reports of Skagits
on Whidbey Island set out in our Evidentiary Finding No. 10, establishes
that Chief Goliah3s group of Skagits were a party to the Point Elliott
Treaty and.their principal residence, at least, was on central Whidbey
Island.

Thervalidity of the treaty is not challenged by defendant but only
the identity of "so—called lower Skagit Tribe or Hhidbey Island Skagits,"
as a party to such treaty.

Petitioner seeks additional compensation for lands ceded by the

Lower Skagits under the terms of the a:"oIem:ntioned Point Elliott Treaty

(l2 Stat. 927; II Karp. 669) and alleges such Indians held exclusive use

an é

1 .
:

and occupancy of lands described by metes and bounds in the petition,

rnmnes set out on the map.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

Far. IV. Said lands of Island and 3kagit Counties,'Hashington, generally comr

prise two parcels, namely, all that portion of Hhidbey Island south from
Dugula Bay and north of the entrance to Holmes {arbor and a triangular shaped
area on the mainland generally circumscribing so much of the Skagit River as
comprises the North Fork, from an apex about three miles north of Rt. Vernon,
with one leg extended down to a point on Skagit Bay near Swinonish Slough, and
the other leg roughly dividiing in half the area between the North and South
Forks of the Skagit River, and with that segment of Skagit Bay shoreline thus
cut by these forming the base of the triangular tract claimed.
The locations of villages, campsites and use areas of the lower Skagit

)

Snyder in her testimony in this case located and explained the place

were detailed by petitioner’s ethnologist, Sally Snyder. (Finding l"

.1.

(Clainant‘s Exhibit 4) with aboriginal boundaries delineated in red pencil. She reported Skagit villages beginning at

the north end of Hhidbey and along the eastern coastline down to Holmes
Harbor. Snyder listed Ben Ure, Dugula B y, Crescent Harbor, Oak Harbor,

Penn Cove, Konroe‘s landing, long Point, Snakelum Point and Greenbank, and

on the mainland opposite Bald Island, at the fork of the Northeand South

Forks of the Skagit River and near Mt. Vernon, all as permanent Skagit village

sites (II Tr. pp. 25-LO).

This Commission believes that the evidence, both of modern sources and of

.3.
L1

such eminent authorities as George Gibbs, and other writers who were among he

first to report on the Skagits, establishes hat Skaaits lived on Whidbey

in-so-'\

.'_‘LC‘~

Island and "on the in" along the North Fork of the Skagit River, and were an

identifiable group.

3l8

‘W

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292 J

In considering the issue of aboriginal boundaries of territory exclusively used and occupied by petitioner’s Indian predecessor -- that is,
possession that was real, and not merely constructive -- that was exclusive and not jointly used or held in common with other groups -- we have

noted two particular portions of the areas claimed by petitioner which
claims are not supported in the record, because said area were not egclusivelx used or possessed by Whidbey Island-Skagits.

Claimant‘s map, Exhibit A, shows a broken red line marked
”Swinomish" at Dugula Bay. The areas around Deception and Canoe Passes
on the north of whidbey were widely used by the marine-oriented Indians
of this area, especially Kikiallus, Sklallams, Skokomish, Snohomiau,
Swinomish, as well as the Skagits (Cl. Ex. L; Dkt. 125, Snohomish Fdg.9)
Re have excluded this area from the above-mentioned "First Tract”, This
does not necessarily contradict petitioner‘s witnesses in their assertions ”3kagits used Hhidbey'from Greenbanks to Chutes", except that aboriginal Skagits were not the eiclusive users and occupants of this area.
Deception Pass and Canoe Pass obviously constituted a principal thoroughfare of canoe traffic through the whole north Sound area, since the alternate waterways available would be many miles around the south end of
Whidbey Island or the north end of Fidalgo Island.

I
Agent lane s report,

1849, places Skagats “toward”the north end of Whidbey, Myron Eell‘s l88

J."

I
-h

report listed north Ehidbey as "Swinonish“. The Handbook 0 American

9 T ‘

Indians lists Skagits ”on.the middle portion" of Whidbey Island. Curtis

in North American Indians, l9l , placed Skagits on the "upper eastern”

.\l_
I‘

\)
.coast of Whidbey Island. 5peir assigned ”Skagit proper A * central

pu.

Hhidbey'Island” (underscoring supplied) althoug

h Speir also reported his

19

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 292 320

doubts “if a single one of the Washington tribes thought in terms of
boundaries.” President Pierce, in an official message to both Houses

of Congress, December 4, 185; (which was contained in a September, l955
supplement thereto and was based upon the report of Governor Isaac

Stevens and apparently compiled by George Gibbs) stated, "the next

tribe proceeding northward are the Skagits who live on the main around the
mouth of the Skagit river and own central parts of Whidbey Island * * * ."

Also we have concluded that the present site of Skagit City, situated

at the confluence of the Eorth and South Forks of the Skagit River, marked
the northern limits, or boundary of that area of land exclusively used and
occupied by the lower Skagits on the mainland as said limit is described
in "Second Tract" of our Finding l2. Petitioner's ethnologist, Sally
Snyder, testified in Docket 263 (Kikiallus) that "Now in the case of

Upper Skagit coming down the River, they had camping places of their own
upper Skagit territory, on the kagit side of ht. Vernon. This place is
3ositia * * *and then they have the privilege of traveling on the river
(South Fork ?) for visiting their relatives in Kikiallus territory. I
don't know if they ever came down the north fork. I doubt it.” (Dkt.
263, 2 Tr. p. 6A) Our conclusion as to this northern boundary is also
5UPP0rted, we think,from the great preponderance of reports which describe that territory of the Skagits on the Skagit River as being “nan:
its mouth," or “down river to the ocean,” “About its mouth”, etc.

evidence seems to show that these use areas farther fron the centers of
the Skagit population, the larger villages at Coupeville and at the mouth
of the Skagit River, were often jointly used by Skagits and others. *3

principal village locations were nearest the best fishing sites and other

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292 3 l

10

food sources. The record does not seem to justify finding exclusive use
and occupancy of northern Hhidbey Island and above the confluence of the
forks of the Skagit River as included within the exclusive aboriginal possession of petitioner's ancestors.

Defendant alleges (Answer, Par. 2 and 6) that petitioner’s claim is

barred by the decision of the Court of Claims in Duwamish et al. v.

 

United States, 79 0. Cls. (Cert. Den. 295 U.S. 755). This Commission

 

has in a number of cases involving other clainscwerruled this plea in
bar. For the reason that this cause of action is brought under provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act enacted by Congress years after the l93h Duwanish decision, and for reasons which are more fully
stated in earlier decisions of this Commission, said plea of res judicata

is overruled. (The Sklallam Tribe v. United States, 5 Ind. Cls. Con. 6973

The Quileute Tribe v. United States, 7 Ind. Cls. Com. 31; The Skokomish

 

Tribe v. United States, 6 Ind. Cls. Con. I54; The Suouamish Tribe v. United

 

 

States, 5 Ind. Cls. Con. l58; The Snohonish Tribe v. United States, A Ind.
Cls. Com. 5A9).

In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that as of the date of
the Point Elliott Treaty cession the petitioner’s predecessors in interest
held original Indian title to the land described in Finding N . l2, and the
date oft;aking was the date of ratification of said treaty by the United
States, March 8, l859. Such questions as the consideration paid to petitioner, the acreage and value of said lands, and whether or not unconscionable, must await a further hearing and additional evidence.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Ye concur:

Louis J. O‘Earr Wm. H. Holt
Associate Coznissioner Associate Commissioner

 

