1 Ind. C1. Comm, 20?

20.7

EEETEEEEEE EEDZ&N CL$IMS GQMMISSIQH

EH3 EQYAL GREEK.B&§D OE GEQUP
  Z?§:"1>1J.:1§'S, ALJD '.i“'?£E-3 LOYAL
GREEK GLAZEAETS3 GOEMIEEEE9 on
the reletioa of Joseph Qruner,
So W. Beowno Jesse M3?e:no3%9
Lesley Haynes? Ben J0?msen3
Robert Savers, Eoea He icyo

Noiey Book, Joha En Jeeeeg

N-:/¢NJ\J'%¢/\a"~mP‘h:J"Ma'\J%.t09~J°\.I\gP‘\.d'\uI\..¢¢h.f\_#

Elmer E1119 Thogpeon King, and
Sebore-Seithg
Plaintiffs,
V89
THE'EHlEED STAEES OE AMEEIG,
Defeniento
Aygeereeeess
Geerge E9 E0
£0; Eleietiize

Docket No. 1

wilfred Eeorno with ween was
rvell, ettorneye

Ralph A. Barneyg with whom was
Ere Assistant Attorney General
Am Deviot Vaneoh, Attorneys for
Defendeoto

..§?,§z1.. TL 4 ‘E853

Q?I§EOH OF THE CGXEISSIC3

nee,

Q3Merra Coenissio

The claim here involveé is prosecuted by Joseph

and Jesse Me3e
known as “Loyal Sreeke” and

grouy of Xnéiens is a part of the Creek Nation of Indienso

“Loyal Refu

3

  

delivered the opinion of ehe Commission:

gt

eruners 50 W, Brown

reotto as deeoendenee of members of a group of Indians

ee Indians and Freedmemo” This

fhere are

other individuals named in the title but by stipulation of the per*1es

O8
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207 2

«.2...

filed herein on the inn day of March, 1950, the three persons mentioned are
the only ones of those named in the title who are shown to be qualified to
prosecute this action. The action is a representative one brought by the
individual three plaintiffs in their beha1f'and on behalf of the members
or descendants of menbers of a portion of the Creek Nation and will here»
inafter be referred to as "Loyal Creeks" or “Loyal Greeks and Ereedmene”
as to the capacity of the individuals to prosecute this claim see opinion
of the Commission, dated My 6, 19H9.

There is no dispute about the facts, which are documentary, and they
may be summarised as follows:

The CreekIHation of Indians, in the year 1861 and prior thereto, was
a political group of Indians located in the Indian Territory, and in that
year, at the outbreak of the Civil War, the Indians, through the governing
body of the Creek Nation, joined the newly organized Confederated States of
America, and became an ally of the Confederacy: About onenhalf of the members of the Greek Nation refused to sever their allegiance to the United
States, and therefore became the subject of attack by the disloyal group
and'units of the Confederate.Army, so that about 3,000 of the loyal Indians
were compelled to seek refuge and safety behind the lines of the.army of
the United States in the State of Kansas. This part of the Creek Nation
became known as the "Loyal Greeks” and ”Loyal Crooks and Ereednene“

Following the close of the Civil War, the defendant desired to reorganize the Indian tribes and renew the relations which existed between
the defendant and the lnians prior to that war, and pursuant to that policy,

concluded a treaty with the Creekrhation of Indians on June 1%, 1866 (1%

1 Ind. o1° Comma 2o? ' ?99

\
“.3 a.

Stat. 785) by which. among other things, the Creek Nation of Indians ceded
-to the United States upwards of 330OO,CO0 acres of their lands for the sum
of $9‘{5,,168.-.00 (Arte III) and 14:. was pro"'~'idr3d. that .~3::c.o_,«::oo of’ that sum
be divided between the soldiers who enlisted in the Teieral armya and the
Loyal Greeks and Freedman, to reimburse than tor the losses sastained when
they were driven free their homes Ty Poafsaeraee fcreesc
.Artiele XV of the treaty also provided that e.cene:s of the surviving
Loyal Creeks be taken and that representatives of the government determine
from the roll of those Indians the amount of loss eaeh had sustained through
enemy actions .aecordingly, a roll was made of the Loyal Greeks and Freedw
men, and the Commission provided for in said Article fixed their aggregate
losses at the sum of $l,S36q830ohl and said s1oo9oeo was paid to the Indians
in proportion to their respective losses as determined by the Commissions
The'United States listed 1523 Loyal Creek Indians and Freedman on the roll
taken pursuant to said Article IV9 and the Commissioners named to investiw
gate and determine the losses fixed the amount that each Indian and freedw
man claimant sustained throonh enemy actions Cclaimants‘ E. 3, pages 13 ta
am
Following the 1365 street;-9 on M.a;-:c~.h 13 19:31 (31 Stat. 861) the United. sea
and the Creek Nation of Endiane made an.agreement which provided that the
Loyal Creek claims he subziteed to eho Senate of *he'United States for a
final determination, and if an award were see? to provide for the immediate
payment of the same” {Se-a 2539 §urseant to said authorization, the Senate
first awarded the Loyal Creeks the sum of $1:2GOoQO0 in full settlement and

satisfaction of their claimso This award was included in an amendment to

the Indian Annrnnr'i:14:-1 rm HH1 (.1:--h r.-P 1;-n-;1‘.—. ‘.2 ':on.'-:. '1'’) C'f+r\-5- oczo 0011‘!

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 207 210

a-no-o

shich 3111 had passed the House of Representatives, and which the
Senate was considering but as passed by the House it contained no

appropriation for the award of the Senate, The Indian spprepriau

tion Bill as amended by the Senate, was passed by that body and went to

the.Eeuse, which refused to concur in the Senate's amendment covering the
award and the appropriation therefor, so that a Conference Committee was
appointed which agreed upon a reduction of the amount of the Senate anard
to the Loyal Creeks to $600500, and tho.d;propriation Bill was passed
containing said award and an appropriation for the letter amount which was
paid (less $90,000 paid plaintiffs’ attorney and agent} to the indizidnal
Loyal Crooks, their heirs or representatives, as a full settlement of said
claims, The details of the treaty agreement and action of the Ccnnress,
including the Senate, will be mentioned hereafter in connection with the
points argued in the briefs.

Ehe plaintiffs contend that when the Senate made the award of $1,200,000,
the government became obligated to pay that sum, in.that the Indians, in
effect, had a vested right therein, and therefore, when the Senate and the
House compromised on the amount of the award and appropriated money to pay
only onenhalf thereof, that that sum should be applied upon the original
award of the Senate and that the Endians are entitled to recover the balance,
or $600,000, with interest.

The Indians also contend that under the Treaty of 1866, the government
became obligated to pay the Indians for the losses they sustained through

enemy action, which were determined by the Commission provided for in the

treaty, and since the government failed to carry out that obligation, the

1 lind. (31. Comm. 207 2-11

Endiass were compelled to pay out $900000 for services of an attorney and
an agent to prosecute their alleged claim. This sum was deducted from the
appropriatioa of $600¢O00 so that only $510,000 thereof was distributed to
the Xaaiaaso ‘

The plaintiffs have advanced certain legal points in support of their

-c1aim,.whioh wil1_hereafter be discussed under the headings set forth int"

their briefo as well as those of the defendant, however, before discussing the legal points we wish to mention a quotation from our opinion in
denying defendantVs aotion for a summary judgmente Ehis quotation is set
forth in plaintiffs‘ brief as a conclusion on the meritse a.most cursory
reading of the text will show that we were discussing the theory of the
sees as shoes by the pleadings one had no intention of deciding the case
on its merits before issae was gained and a heariag on the meeitso That
these may be so misunderstanding as to what was intended by the language,
whieh plaintiffs have taken out of context, let it be said we only has
reference to the apparent theory of the case as disclosed by the amended
petitioao

.- v-1  -. ,.. .-2   ~... - . -=-. -.-. ._ -. .
sag 333213 ‘de3J.sJ3 CQJ3E3§SXClaL.&§:IG§
' ' :w &—c‘.§

Iaje -iuXiZQwI---in-.|.l-.. —¢ml. g1}

   

‘Plaintiffs maiataia that andor the provisions of Sections 3 and M
of the treaty oi Enos 1%, 1856a 13 tato ?85 (Einding Boo 3), the defenda
ant obligates itself to asoestaie and pay the losses sustained by the
Eoyal Creeks dariag the $ivil Hare A.reading of those sections fails to
suggest the plaiatiffs‘ contention? for plainly all tee dofesdest agreed
to do was to asoorteia the members of the Loyal Creek and Freedman gross

and the amount of taste resooetive losses resultiae fzon enemy aetioao

...'.§;

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207 212

and to apportion among them the sum of $100,000 out of tribal funds of the
Creek.Nation of Indians, as required by the treaty; This having been done,
as the plaintiffs admit in their amended petition, the obligation of the

defendant was fulfilled; This same question was passed upon by the Court

of Claims in Connor et al. v,‘United States (188%): lg 09 Clsg 675, and

 

there decided the question here contended for against the Indiansa We ‘
agree with that decision. The treaty of 1856 (11 Stat. 699)9 being a
treaty between the United States and the Creek and Seminole Tribes, is
also mentioned in plaintiffs‘ brief. This treaty was not for the benefit
of the Loyal Greeks but for the Creek Nation, in fact the Loyal Greeks as
a group did not exist at that time, as it was brought into existence as
the result or their adherence to the Union cause and their sacrifices in
supporting their country during the Civil War which occurred many years
after the 1856 treaty. But even if these two treaties had any bearing
upon plaintiffs‘ claim (which we do not admit)9 they have no relevance
here because, according to the amended petition, this claim is based upon
the failure of defendant to pay the full amount of an alleged award of the
Senate, made pursuant to the contract of 1901, which will be referred to
ltero .As to the importance of pleadings, we quote from the recent case,
—h L

Standard.-Vacuum Va United States, ma. 1:. 14: “after all, pleadings

     

and the making of a proper record have not been dispensed with, hhey still
have a function to performs‘

He shall now consider the alleged award plaintiffs rely upon for
recovery in this cases 0

Following the treaty of 1856, the Loyal Creeks continued to press

their claims for losses sustained by them because of their loyalty to

213
1 Ind. C16 Comm. 207

-=7

the Union.dnring the Civil war, so when the government began a readjustment
of its relations with the Indians following the termination of that were it
made an agreement with the Creek:Natdon of Indians on Mareh 19 1901 (31 Stat.
861) in which the Loyal Creeks were recognized, and by Section 26 thereof

it was agreed that the Loyal Creek claim be svbmitted to the Senate of the
United States for_fina1 determination; ’and_in the event that any suns are _
awarded 9 * ¢ provision shall be made for immediate payment of same.“
(Finding Noe 5).

The Senate in carrying out the requirement of Section 25, referred the
same to its Committee on Indian Affairs, and on February 16, 1903, the Committee recommended to the Senate the payment of $lD2OO,OOO to the Loyal
Greeksg .t the time of the Cenaittee5s report, the Senate had before it
the Indian Apgropriatien Bill (H, n.., 15eo1+), which became the not of March 3,
1903 (32 Stato 9$2a 99%) and which bill had also been referred to the same
Connitteea (Finding £00 63 Claimants“ Eng 2)g

In order for the ‘enate to act upon the UonmitteeBe reeonmen ntion, it

reported an amendment to eaid appropriation bill which contained an award

- is .ereby awarded as a final deter? nation thereof
on the semeallod 31233; Greek aiding’ named in enid seetion 25°

the sun of $13EQO9$GQ3 and the same is hereby appropriated 5 ° “o”
And the bill containing that amendment was paeeed by the Senate (Einding
Eon 6), and sent to the Eeusea

Ehe House refused to eeeept the Senate9e amendment to the bills and
6ehe disagreement between the two heaeee was referred to a eonferenee com»

mittee which finally egeeed upon a eettlenont of their differenees by

1 Ind. C1. Com. 207 214

-3....

striking out the amount of $1,200,000 from the Senate amendment and inserting in lieu thereof the sum, $600,000. [Aside from the change in the amount
of the award, the language of the Senate's award remained exactly as stated
in the Senate amendment. The conference committee report was agreed to by
both houses of Congress (Finding he. 7) and the approved act contained the
‘language stated above. _(Finding ho. Sic 0 O

It is the effect of what the Senate did, as stated aboveg that presents
the real controversy in this case. The plaintiffs‘ claim that the Senate's
award of $l,200;0O0 is the actual award and the action of the two houses
sneunted to merely an appropriation of $600,000 to apply on that award,
leaving a balance of $600,000 which the defendant is obligated to pay, while
the defendant contends that the final award was $600,000.

It may he stated that ordinarily one would expect that the Senate's
award would have been an act separate from any legislation; however, there
is nothing in the submission (Section 26) of the determination which required
the Senate to act in any particular manner and we see no objection to the
way it proceeded, for by the language it used it is plain beyond argument
that it intended to and did originally make an award and fix the amount
thereof at $1,200,000. It is no doubt true that the Senate, when fixing
the original amount thought it proper, for the record shows that days were
spent by the conference committee in reaching an agreement as to amount
which should be paid, the Senate managers contending until the last for
the sum of $la200,000. (Finding Ho. 7), But did the Senate in fact change
the amount by reducing the award to $600,000? We think it dido There can

be no doubt but that the Senate acted advisedly in adopting its amendment

U1

1 End. C1. Comma 20? _ 31

a 9 containing the award, for Senator qnarles, in discussing the amendment
most forcibly explained its nature when he said (36 Cong, Reco 2252);

"It has occurred to me, sir, that the Senate ought to be
advised as to the nature of this amendment, and that it ought
not to be gassed, seeing as it does solely from the committee,
leaving the Senate cngirely in ignorance of the fact that in ,
regard to this amendment it is sitting_as a court or arbitration
and is not engaged in the rdiiary method of legislation * * *e
This is a provision which arises out of an agreement made with
the Creek Eation in 1891 (1901), whereby it is provided that the
Senate shall within two years sit in the capacity of a court of
arbitration and decide upon this claim, which arises from several
treaties made by this Government with the Creek Eation. The dctcrmination of the Senate upon this proposition will amount to an
award, upon which an action will lie quite independently of the
fate of this provision in the other House of Congressi"

How, then, can it be said that the Senate meant something different when

Kn!

it gassed the acereyriation e111 (act of March 3, 190 ; 3

dentical to that

It...‘

containing language concerning the Loyal Creek award *

2

(except as to the ascent} it composed for the amendment?

It is argued that the Senate was acting in its legislative capacity
when it passed the appropriation act. That it was so acting there can
be no dcaht bat it does not necessarily follow that it was not also mak»
ing a final atarde Of ccnrscg the house, because of the form of the Senate
aaendaentc did in effect approve the award of seee,eeo, but that fact does
not destroy the character of the Senate‘s action in maxing it for the
red-eed amount, It may be that the Ecase was primarilr interested in the

amount to be aeerogriated but the agreement of the two houses in accept? _‘ _ 0 I
ing tee language proaesed by tne Senate was eensisten

et‘in
ii
.-.-I
;_=..J
0
Ch
gal o
0
w
as
0-!
a
<1
9-‘
o
«'0
‘N

-3  “' 9 '3--" "“' ' ‘ ' «I: out? ov .a-." -- ‘ ‘ n
o- e-e Senaee~s amenanene to tee ~ease hill eeicn ccntained ne anerenriatlon

L:
(until amended by the senate} for C?‘
ES‘
C)
b‘
0
33
Q
|-~'
CI}
‘*3
(‘J
<‘o_
iv 1
O
2...:
Q‘)
QJ:
1'3
C’)
O

1 End. C1. Comm. 207 216

_ 10 _

Furthermore, had the Senate intended, by its compromise as to the amount,
to make only an appropriation to apply on its award of $1,200,000, and not
a final award, we would expect that it would make such intent unmistakably
clear, and most certainly it would not have agreed to the language making
the acceptance of the $600,000 "by said Indians in full payment and satisfaction of all claim and demand growing out of said Loyal Creek claims,
and the payment thereof shall be a full release of the Government free any’
such claim or claims." (Findings 6 and 8). We must, therefore, conclude
that the Senate's final determination and award was $600,000,

Counsel for plaintiffs also say that the only final award was that for
31920090000 Had the Senate stood on that amount there would be some basis
for plaintiffs‘ argument, but it did not do so, as we have shown above. Nor
is there anything appearing in the record which makes the first determina~
tion final. For ought that appears, the Senate could either increase or
reduce the amount if first fixed without violating any agreement or law,
for by the terms of the agreement the Senate was made the sole judge of the
amount and of the manner it was arrived at, and it was given two years from
March 1, 1901 to make the award. (Finding 5). The Senate's final action
was on February 25, l903, and that of the House on February 27, 1903, both
actions within the two-year period. (Finding Ho. 7), It cannot be said the
Loyal Creeks acquired any vested right in the first amount fixed by the
Senate.

There is authority (referred to by plaintiffs) to the effect that an
award once made and delivered to the parties to an agreement for arbitration is final and cannot be altered. Bayne v. Morris, 17 L. Ed, #9 ; cases

       

cited in Anne. l0h.A, L, R, 711-716. The reason for the rule is that having

once acted the arbitrators exhaust their powers as such, The cases which

1 End. Cl. Comm. 2o? ‘ 217

M 11 H

adhere to this rule involve submissions by private parties. These cases
are not authority here because the agreement contemplates not only a
final determination of the claim but that "provision shall be nade for
iamediate payment of same," Thus, the Senate acted as an arbitrator,”
and in order to make-its award effeotive.it.also had to act in its legislative capacity to approgriate money for its payment. The parties to the
agreement of course are charged with knowledge of the fact that it took
legislation on which both the Senate and House must agree in order to
aypropriate the money with which to pay the award, hence, it is implicit
in the very terms ani nature of the agreement that the award must be in
an amount that would receive the sanction of the House of Representatives
in order that it may be paida We believe there would have been no final
determination of the claim without its payment and when the Senate rem
eedei from its original determination of the amount ani concurred with
the House in reiuoing the anonnt, that action of the Senate became the
final determination of the claima Furthermore, in face of the undisputed
facts in this record the plaintiffs hy accepting the award soroo and new

are, estopped to deny its finality.

 

FAiR.a§D n0§C2aBLB.DEaLIEaS
By the ploaiings and brief plaintiffs slain tnat the government

acted unfairly and iiohoiorably in not paying the full amount of the
Senato‘e first aware, namely” $l,200,000¢ Whether the allegations of
the petition bring this case within the terns of clause (5) of Section 2
of the Act of August 13, l9%6 (25 U¢S¢C,ao 70) we need not disease? for

5 I. 0 -  . 11 F‘: -.1 , -‘i ll 3 ‘nu ~ -I I--- .9 at ‘U! Q-v-9
st lo plain one government aia not ocal EA§Q the inaians u§ia¢41J or

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207 218

a 12 .

dishonorably by awarding then $600,000 in settlement of their Civil War
losses. The claim had no legal basis (Grant V, United States, 7¥'U. S.
333, 19 L. Ed. 193; Vatell, Law of Nations, Seen #03), but was recognized
to the extent of paying out of tribal funds of the Croek:Nation $l009000
by.Sections 3 and H of the treaty of June IN, l866. (Finding 3). This
payment was, perhaps, in the nature of a penalty imposed upon the Creek
Nation for its disloyalty to the Union during the Civil Her and when that
payment was made the government was under no obligation to do more. Had
the matter ended with the payment of $100,000 there would have been no

legal or moral obligation on the part of the defendant to pay anything

more. Connor et al. V. United States, 19 C9 Cls. 67§.

.--—-.--:5-q..-«I-2-...---o :k2¢ 

   

The agreement of 1901 (Finding Nov 5} did not create any liability on
the part of the defendants; it merely provided for the submission of the claim
for losses sustained to the Senate and provided for the payment thereof "in
the event that any sums were owarded,3 Clearly: no obligation arose until
the Senate determined that a sun of money should be paid the Loyal Greeks,
and then only the amount of the final award. We have already decided that
the final award of the Senate was $6009000, so the Government cannot be
charged with unfair or dishonorable dealings in doing what the Creek Nation
agreed it could do, namely, pay a gratuity which had been fixed by the
Senate, as required by the agreement,

DURESS ~ 33 EASE

In the brief, counsel for plaintiffs claim that the releases executed

by the Indians were brought about by duress exerted by defendant in make

ing the payments conditional upon the signing of releases thereforo It is

1 Ind. c1. cm. 207 219
_ 13‘. '

true, of coarse, that the claimants were required to, and did sign releases
(Eindingsiheg 9 and 10), but we give the releases no place of controlling
importance in deciding this case because the Indians accepted the final
award of the Senate, which was the only amount they were entitled to, so
if the releases were-declared void, as-having been involuntarily signed,
claimants could not recover since they accepted the amount of the award.
ATTOREEY'S FEE

By paragraph 1% of their amended petition, plaintiffs allege; in sabstance, that had defendant caused payment to be made of the Loyal Creek
claims Gas it agreed to do under * * 3 the treatv of Angust ll, l866,"
there would have been no necessity to employ an attorney and an agent to
yresent ‘hon before the committees of Congreess he have already stated
above that the United States was under no obligation by the treaty of 1666
to pay the Loyal Creeks anything except the $100,000 which it paid out of
tribal funds of the Creek:Nation in accordance with the provisions of said_
treaty. Furthermore, the Court of Claims in 0V0onnor vi United States,

19 Co 015. 67g (188%) decided that the United States was under no obliga»

 

tion by said treaty to pay more than the amount provided for in the treaty,
We agree with that decisions So, since plaintiffs (according to the allegations) employed an attorney and an agent to obtain compensation for an
obligation which did not exist, there was not, in any View of the claim for
fees, a basis therefor.

En plaintiffs‘ brief, counsel also argue that it was defendant“s duty
as guardian of plaintiffs to settle the guardian‘s account at the time

settlement was due and failing to do that elaintifis were rcenired to employ

220
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 207

....1l:,..

attorneys to prosecute their claims at an expense to the Indians of $90,000
for legal services, etc. No attempt has been made to show where the relationship of guardian and ward arose, nor do we think any such relationship
16 Shown by'the record in this case. Furthermore, the allegations of the
petition disclose no such basis for the claim for this item of damages, as
has been shown above."
But aside from the above change of position, the Indians were represented

for the purpose of presenting.a claim under Section 26 of the.Act of 1901,
and it was necessary and proper for them to employ skilled persons to submit
their evidence to the Senate. The defendant had nothing to do with such
employment and is under no fiduciary duty to pay therefor. ‘£8 we have shown

above, whatever payment the Senate could be induced to award would be a

p gratuity and it requires no discussion to show it was not incumbent upon the

government to urge such an award, on behalf of the Indians. Nor do fair

and honorable dealing require the defendant to pay any of the expenses
voluntarily incurred by the Indians in that matter. The amount of the final
award of the Senate was paid in accordance with the 1901 agreement and the
defendant is under no obligation to reimburse plaintiffs for obligations the
Loyal Creek incurred for attorney and agent fees.

The defendant has by answer questioned the capacity of the plaintiffs
to sue. The conclusions we have reached here make it unnecessary to pass
upon that question or any of the other defenses not herein abeve—mentioned.

The amended.petition of the plaintiffs must be dismissed.

Commissioner Eblt concurs in the foregoing opinion,

July lh, 1950

221
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207

-um.

Chief Commissioner Hitt dissenting:

The determination of this case depends on (1) whether or not the
action of the Senate of the United States on February 16, 1903, in fix»
ing the man of $1,200,00 as the amount to be awarded in settlement of
the Loyal Creek claims, was a final award; or (2) whether the later
action o£.the.Congress in appropriating~$600,000 "in full payment and
satisfaction” of said Loyal Creek claias was the final award; and (3)
if the first action of the Senate is determined as being the final award and makes the amount of $1,200,000 a liquidated demand, was the
subsequent appropriation of $600,000 as full payment and satisfaction
and its acceptance by the Loyal Creek Indians as snch a valid and binding release of the United States from any further liability.

I an of the opinion that the first action of the Senate in awarding the amount of $1,200,000 became the award contemplated by the agreement and the legislation confirming the same between the United States
and the Indians, and that said award created a legal and liquidated
claim in favor of the Indians for that amount; and that the subsequent
action of the Senate along with the House, in awarding said Indians
only $600,000 and making appropriation of that amount, and the acceptance
of same by the Indians in full settlement, did not constitute a legal
and binding release of the United States from liability for the balance
of the $1,200,000. I therefore must respectfully dissent from the decision of my colleagues.

The facts are undisputed, and are to be found in the findings made

by my colleagues, except as may be added in this dissent. I have repeated

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 207 232

- 7 _ 3 ,
some findings in order to obviate the necessity of having to refer to
another document to make the application of my comments.

The agreement concluded on September 27, 1897 between the United
States and the Creek Ration provided among other things that the Loyal
Creek claim which had been the subject of controversy betseen the Government and the Indians since the Civil War should be submitted to the
Senate of the United States £3£_determinatien¢ This agreement was ratified and confirmed by an act of Congress approved June 28, 1898; and
under date of March 8, 1900 another agreement to the same effect was
concluded with the Indians which was ratified by an act of Congress of
March 1, 1901 (31 Stat. pp. 86l~8?3),

Section 25 of the latter agreement and act provided that the Legal
Creek claim, among others, should be submitted to the Senate of the
United States :23 determination? and that within two years of the ratification of the agreement the Senate should gage glngl determination

thereof, and that in the event any suns were awarded the said tribe,

 

provisions should be made for immediate payment of the sameo

At the first session of the 57th Congress (1902), following the
action of the 56th Congress, the Indians presented a memorial to the
Senate seeking action, as provided in Section 26 of the agreement of
éareh 8, 1900 and of the statute of March 1, 19913 Ehis memorial was
presented to the Senate and was referred to the Senate Committee on

Indian Affairs. This conmittee examined the treaties involved and all

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 207 223
...3...

records pertaining to the claim, heard testimony, arguments, and briefs.
(Hearings before Senate Committee on Indian.Affairs, 57th Congress, 1st
Session, pp. 961-995.) This committee reported to the Senate——its report being in the form of an amendment to the Indian Appropriation.Act
which had come over from the House and which had been referred to said
committee.” The said amendment reads as follows:

(2?) In pursuance of the provisions of section 26 of
an act to ratify and confirm an agreement with the Muskogee
or Greek Tribe of Indians, and for other purposes, approved
March 1, 1901, there is hereby awarded, as a final determination thereof, on the so-called “loyal Creek claims" named
in said section 26, the sum of $1,200,000, and the same is
hereby appropriated out of any money in the Treasury not
otherwise appropriated, and made immediately available. And
the Secretary of the Treasury is hereby authorized to pay,
under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior, to the
loyal Crook Indians and the freedaen named in articles 3 and
Q of the treaty with the Creek nation of Indians of June 1%,
1866, the said sum of $1,200,000, to be paid such Indians
and freedmon only whose names appear in the list of awards
made in their behalf by W, B. Eazen and F. A, Field, as commissioners on behalf of the United States to ascertain the
losses of said Indians and freedmen as provided in said
articles 3 and M; and such payments shall be made in proportion
to the awards as set out in said list, and shall be in full
settlement and satisfaction of all claims under said articles
3 and H, etc.

,.Prior to the adoption of this amendment by the Senate, considerable discussion was had in regard to the same and it was adopted (Cong. Recs,

V019 36, Pt. 3, pp. 2252-225%). Senator Quarles, a member of the committee
submitting the said amendment, in discussing the same before the Senate,

among other statements made the following:

It has occurred to me, sir, that the Senate ought to
be advised as to the nature of this amendment and that it

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207 _ . _ , 224

--r.  :--7

ought not to be passed, coming as it does solely from the
committee, leaving the Senate entirely in ignorance of the
fact that, in regard to this amendment, it is sitting as a
court of arbitration, and is not engage in the ordinar

method of legislation, (underscoring supplied)

 

 

 

Thereafter he went into great detail in giving the Senate the basis of
the claim, the reasons that actuated the committee, and called special
attention to the agreement made with the Creek Nation in 1901 "whereby

it is provided that the Senate shall within two years sit in the caggcitg of a court of arbitration ad decide upon this claim, which arises from several treaties made by this Government with the Creek Nation.

 

The determination of the Senate upon this proposition will amount to an

 

award n on which an action will lie nite indeeendently of the fate of

   

this Erovision in the other House of Congressa" (Congo Reeo, pp. 22523353o) (underscoring supplied) Senator Qnarles further said:

There is no doubt in the world that they (the Loyal
Creeks) sustained this loss and that the loss was greater
than the amount they are asking at the hands of the Senate
sitting here as a court of arbitration. (Cong. R9093 p. 225“)

{underscoring supplied) 1
and again;

The only question now before the Senate, sitting here
as a court of arbijgggion, knowing _nll well that there is
no legal foundation for this claim, is, shall wep in view
of our gratitude to these men, in view of our sympathy for
their children, pass over to them out of the Treasury
$1,200,003 of th5'533EI5?E"EBEE§:""§EE"EE”§EEEif§”§E*npon
the ground of gratitude or sympathy? That is the question;
and I felt, Mr, President, tho the Senate at least ought
to know from some member of the committee that it was not
_§§§tinQ here on this measure simnly as thow§eE§tE“o:”t§5*

h*H#_H*““#“_HHi as a tribunal or arhi:ratien,

 

   

     

United tates but as a eoirt

    

   

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 207 225

_ 5 _

to render an award upon which an action might be brought
:':1'—:z't

If the Senate shall conclude, sitting here in the caw

pacity I have described, that on the grounds of sympathy

and gratitude it can justify itself in passing over this
large sum to those people, I shall certainly not feel any

tinge of disappointment, but shall have satisfied my
conscience by laying the facts before the Senate. (Cong.

Rec., p. 2254) (underscoring supplied)
Imn°d1at°lY following the above statement, another reading of the

amendment was asked for and it was read again and "the amendment was
agreed to," (p, 225h)
It is significant that this amendment had been reached previously
f a e ,
or consideration, but had been "passed over“ and was the last committee
amendment considered (Cong. Recs. pa 2252),
Wh - .
en the Indian 3PPT0PTiatiOH 3111, carrying the Loyal Creek.amendt .
men as well as others, reached the House of Representatives and that
b d‘ di ,
0 J sagreed to the amendment and asked for a conference committee and
this a ti .
c on r°P°rt°d to the Senate: the Senate adopted a notion insisting
“POD 138 amendments, but consented to the conference (Cong Rec p 23h1)
D9 09 O O
Wh th n . .
on e report of the conference committee, which carried substantially the la 0 - G .
sane nguabe except changing the amount from $1,200,000 to $600,000
in settle t f
59“ 0 the Loyal Creek claim, was called up for the consideration

of the senate! the r°P0rt W33 aarecd to without discussion (Cong,.Rec.,

Pa 2627),

In the ab . ~ ' ' - .
sence of any provision in the Indian Claias COmmission_A£t

that would do th 1 - .
R? e application of recognized principles of law to the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 207 226

M5...

United States, I an of the opinion that the first action of the Senate,
in the adoption of the Loyal Creek claim amendment to the Indian Appropriation Bill, was the only action of the Senate tahen by it in the

gagacity of arbitrator and that its action in making an award of

 

$1,200,000 was a final determination of the claim of the Loyal Creek
Indians and became as Senator Quarles stated when he presented it to
said body "an award upon which an action might be brought."

The repeated repetition by Senator Quarles of the fact that the
first action of the Senate was in its capacity as a body of arbitration
and not in the ordinary legislative capacity makes its action unquestionably that of a body of arbitration, The subsequent action, by reason of
the disagreement of the House as to the amount of the appropriation, was
also referred to by Senator Quarles as a possible action that would have
no relevancy to the action being taken by the Senate while it was acting
as a body of arbitration. The second action of the two bodies was; in
my judgment, not a subsequent action by the Senate as an arbitrator,
even if it had a right to reconsider the matter, but was action in a
legislative capacitys

The original provision (section 26 of the act of Congress of March 1,
1901) shows by its very language that the making of the award was regarded
as one act; and the making of the appropriation to carry out the award
another act, This is because section 26 says that this claim "shall be

submitted to the Senate of the United States (not the Congress of the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 207 227

a 7 _

‘United States) for determination, ‘ * * and in the event that any sums
are awarded to said tribe, or any citizens thereof, provision shall be
made for immediate payment of the same." Of course it was recognized
that the Senate alone could not make an appropriation and therefore the
language of said agreement shows conclusively that two acts were centem»
plated and necessary, but that only one~—that of the Senate alone-was
to determine the award,

It is a well established rule of law that if an award of arbiw
trators is an honest decision, after a full and fair hearing, that it
will not be set aside for error, either of law or fact, Burchell v,

March, 12 How, §Nh; Williams V, Paschel, M Dahl 25%; Harrie V, Hainsa

2? Ark, §Q9, It is also an established principle that an award is con~

clusive and binding, even though no legal cause of action existed in

the party in whose favor the aeard was rendered, 3 A2, Jur,.9S3:

Q-I-$-m--cu-no-1---—.—-—-----u:I-‘ii-I-—I-F

ul A£LoRa §n,s.) HM}; §aegerbund vt_ann, 3§_§£y, H29,

o-w-1-'&- -0-on-2

 

Proceedings to enforce awards are analogous to those for the en»

forceuent of contracts generally (3 Am, Jar, 9Y9)a It is well es~

   

tablished, also, that arbitrators having once acted have no power to
amend or reconsider the matter in controversy, 3 Am. Jar, 323; Bazne

V» M02338, 17 L, ed, M35; §3,_gha:1cs vo_§§c:EeV, 15h Fed, 721; Cert,

den: 2 Lo Gd, 5hl;‘§i*izCns Building» etc. v, Western Union Eels, Cot,

-3-.—-.u1-2-nu-—¢w:—...-nun.--_.avn_.-—n...—

     

             

130_F3d. Rep. (2nd Series) 982,_g§§, I quote from this last case:,

 

(u~6) Appellant, after urging the in"alidity cf the
f;rS$ award, insists that the second award is the proper

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 207 228
181

act of the arbiters and should be enforced. This does not
take into view the rule that arbitrators are appointees
with but a single duty, and that the performance of that
duty terminates their authority. when an arbitral board
renders a final award, its powers and duties under the submission are terminated. Its authority is not a continuing
one, and, after its final decision is announced, it is
powerless to modify or revoke it or to make a new award
upon the same issuesg The first award disposed of all
questions before the arbitors, and was final; the public~
ation of that decision exhausted the powers of those
appointed even though the action taken was void, and the
second award is no more valid than the firsts

Having concluded that the first action of the Senate became a final
award and created a liquidated demand on and a liability of the United
States Government to the Loyal Creeks in the amount of $1,200,000, the

question then arises~—did the appropriation of $§0O9OOO, with the proviso

 Said Sum  ‘hp, ;-;.¢"~_.;-'~_{_-;:*~,§_'_,r*.r:'3I_ ?";v_7  I:r_1.'_*:'_§_.**r~ac~ in -63:11 <:-\r\1-rr'-1("sv'\{r- nu-.A

‘-'-Iv-oG.J -.4.u A-5.4-¢p¢g  ..—su-in-.aQ.l Ir!‘-an-4\-In

satisfaction of all claims and demand growing out of said Loyal Creek
claim, the payment thereof shall be a full release of the Government

from any such claim or claims” and the acceptance of said amount by said
Indians, constitute an accord and satisfaction of the liability of the
United States.

There is no prineigle of law better established and more generally

recognized than that a payment of a part of a liquidated indebtedness

is not satisfaction of the whole indebtedness, and that a receipt in full
elven upon such part payment is nudun eactun as to the unpaid balance,

and not binding ugon the makero That such rule of law is applicable to

the United States Government just as it is to individuals is the decision

of the Supreme Court in the case of La 89 vs Postvien, at ‘. ed. 626 In

 

that case the United States had a positive aereenent to Dav rental for'a

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 207 I 229
Tgj
year on property at the rate of $500 a month, It paid the rent at this

rate for the first six months of the year, but thereafter paid only $250
a month and secured from the landlord a receipt for payment in full, The
Supreme Court directed the Court of Claims to render judgment for the
landlord against the United States for the rent of the premises for the

last half of the year for the additional $250 a month, and used this

language:

Payment by a debtor, of a part of his debt, is not a
satisfaction of the whole, except it be made and accepted
upon sone new considerationo It is not found that there
was any new consideration in this case.

In this case the following significant language is used which it

seems holds the law as to arbitrations applicable to the United States

      1-'\n1rr-u-as-:4-0

read a..J1-no-6 U’ f

The United States, when they contract with their citizens,
are controlled by the same laws that govern the citizen ° * ¢,
All obligations which would be implied against the citizen
under the same circumstances will be implied against these

I an of the opinion that plaintiffs should recover $600,000. I do

not think they should recover on claims for interest or attorneys fees.

July in, 1950

