7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 266

"BEFORE THE D1I)Iz3..-E CLADZS COM'ET_SSIOI\I

THE WASHOE TRIBE 01? THE STATE )
OF NEVADA AND cALD‘oB:~IL1, )
Plaintiff, i
tr‘. 3 Docket No. 288
THE UNITED snrr:-as, 3
Defendant. g

Decided: March 20, 1959

FIEEDINGS OF FACT

1. The Washoe Tribe oi‘ the States of Nevada and California, petitioner herein, was formally organized under a constitution and by--laws
ratified by its members December 16, l93S, and approved by the Secretary of the Interior January 2h, 1936, and a corporate charter was
issued to it by the Secretary of the Interior February 2b, 193?, and
the same was duly ratified by the tribe February 27, 1937, in accordance with the provisions of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18,
l93l4 (148 Stat. 98);), as amended (commonly called the Wheeler-Howard
Act).

2. Institution of these proceedings was authorized at a special
meeting of members of the ifashoe Tribe on April 21, l9h8, and the tribal
council, as directed at that meeting, proceeded to employ counsel and to
cause the claim herein to be filed in behalf of the entire ‘rfashoe Tribe.

3. t is estimated that there are approximately l,OCO E-Iashoe

7 Ind: Clo COmo  

Indians living principally in the States of Nevada and California, and
records of the United States Bureau of Indian Affairs indicate that
about three-fourthsof the Washoes live in Nevada and one-fourth live
in California. Although accurate figures of tribal membership are not
maintained, it is indicated that substantially all of this number are
‘members of, or are eligible for membership in, the Washoe Tribe under
the provisions of its constitution and by-laws which extend membership
to all who are of one-quarter or more Washoe blood, or who are of onehalf or more Indian blood and are married to a member of the Tribe.

h. The Washoe Tribe of the States of Nevada and California, a corporate entity, is an identifiable group of American Indians whose membership is composed of descendants of an identifiable group of American
Indians known as washoe Indians whose ancestors exclusively used and occupied certain lands in what are now the States of Nevada and California,
which will be more fully described hereinafter. The present organization,
The Washoe Tribe of the States of Nevada and California, petitioner herein, has therefore the capacity to maintain.the claim of the Washoe Indians
under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act, 60 Stat. lOh9,
for and in behalf of the descendants of the Washoe Indians.

5. Petitioner originally sought to recover for the alleged uncompensated taking, without treaty and without cession, of some 6,318,080

acres of land, located in Nevada and California. Following the hearings,

the claim.was reduced substantially, by at least one~half, through the
filing of petitioner's Exhibit 9-l, amending the petition. The amended

description of the claimed area is as follows:

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 2l9 268

Commencing on the South at Sonora Peak, north of Sonora
Pass, Alpine County, Cal£ornia;

Thence northwest along the crest of the Sierra-Nevada
Mountains passing over Disaster Peak, Ebbetts Pass, Raymond
Peak, Carson Pass, Echo Surrnit Pass, Donner Pass and Yuba
Pass, all in California;

Thence north on the summit west of Sierra Valley, in
Siew and Plumes Counties, California, and crossing the
Middle Fork of the Feather River between Portola and Beckwith, California;

Thence north about LL miles where the line turns almost
at right angles due east to the summit of the ridge directly
west of Long Valley, California; '

Thence along the crest of the said ridge in a north:-resterly
direction to the southwestern extension of Honey Lake in California;

Thence in a general easterly direction, around the peninsula which is the extension of Long Valley, California;

‘1'hence_from the southeasterly arm of said Honey Lake, running in a southeasterly direction to cross the CaliforniaNevada Border at a point about equally distant b€uW€€I'l Doyle,
California and Flanigan, Nevada;

Thence almost south along the crest of the mountains west
of ’-'3innenucca Valley, Nevada to cross the Truckee River at a
point about 2 miles East of Sparks, Nevada;

*' Thence about due south, along the ridge of the Washoe Hountains and the Virginia Mountains to cross the Carson River and
thence in a general southeasterly direction at a point about 2
miles west of Dayton, Nevada and thence to the top of the Pinenut ‘éiountai ns, in Nevada;

Thence south along the crest of the Pinenut Mountains to
Mount Siegel and thence in a general. southerly direction to
Leviathan Peak, just across the Nevada-California Border;

Thence nearly due south to Sonora Peak, California, the
place of beginning.

5. The Hashoe Indians were long believed by anthropologists to
form a distinct linguistic family. Washoe culture had strong affinities
with that of the California area and also with the culture of the Great
Basin area but in general it was somewhat more closely allied to the
latter than to the former. In recent years the Washoe Have been considered by some authorities to be an aberrant Hokan group, geographically,

far removed. from their linguistic cousins, the Shasta, The Porno and

7. Ind. Cl. Com. 266   U 269

others. The separation from the great mass of Hokan-speaking Indians
is evidence of.‘ their migrationteast of the Sierra Nevada Mountains at
some period m the pre-histor.ic..period- As a. result, the Washoe are
the only people in Nevada who are not members of the. great Uto-Aztekan
family. The identification of the Washoe culture being closely related to the Basin-Plateau culture:res1i'].ts from the contacts‘ of the
Washoe Indians on the western margin of the arid Great Basin area with
the Northern Paiute Indians to the east.

7. While white men such as. Jed Smith, the trapper, in 1825,
Captain John C. Fremont, the explorer in 18143,. and the disastrous Donner party in l8I.L6 passed through the claimed. area it was not until the
period following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 18348 with Mexico
that the records cast any lightupon the location of the Washoe Indians. By the treaty Mexico ceded to the United States California and
the vast expanse of the Southwest from which Nevada was later carved.
One of the earliest to mention the Washoe Indians was Indian Agent
Holeman, of Utah Territory, whoin'l8S2' reported severd tribes or bands
scattered through the mountains and. valleys on‘ and near Carson River.
In addition to the “Washawa” Holemansmentioned the "Lokos" (not identified.) and a. few scattered bands oi‘. "White Knives" (Northern Painte).
(Pet. Ex. 3-20). In 1856 Garland Hunt, Indian Agent, reported" the Mashoes lived mostly in the Sierra Nevada Mountains but also claimed
"the Carson" as their land (Pet.. Ex. 3-uh). On January 14, 1859, Indian
Agent J. Dodge, sent in a report to’ the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Utah Territory. In this report Dodge stated in part:

'7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 270

The 1-Iasho Nation number about 900 souls, and inhabit the
country along the base of the Sierra Nevada mountains, from
Honey Lake on the north, to the west fork of 'vIalker‘s River
on the south.

They are divided into three different bands.

‘Capt. Jim’s' band is located in the vicinity’ of__Carson,
Washo and Eagle Valleys, and Lake Bigler ake Tahoe .
J

This band numbers lh5 men, llO women, and 87 children.
Total - 322. “

I have talked with this band and given them some presents.
‘Capt. Jim‘ is the head chief of the nation.

‘Pos-Larke’s‘ band is located in Little Valley between the
east and west forks of Carson River, and numbers about the

same as Capt. Jirrzs band, 3&0.

‘Deer-Die!-:’s' band lives in and claims Long Valley southeast
from Honey Lake, and numbers about 300.

Total Washes’ visited 3112

In this letter Dodge was also reporting on the Paiute Indians and among
those listed was the "San-Joaquins band” which he stated "stays in
Carson Valley at the forks of the River, and numbers 170” and "Had-San
poke band" stayed at Gold Canyon on the Carson River. (Pet. Ex. 3-68).
Superintendent of Indian Affairs Forney of Utah Territory in his l859
report to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs stated that the Washoe
lived along the base of the Sierra Nevada Mountains from Honey Lake to
one of the forks of Walker's river (Pet. Er. 3-71). A.ct@' hdian
Agent tfasson of the Carson Valley agency stated in l86l that the Washoe
lived along Lake Sigler (Tahoe) and the head waters of__ Carson, Walker and
Truckee rivers and in Long and Sierra valleys (Pet. Ex. 3-97). Governor

Nye of Nevada Territory reported to the Secretary of the Interior in 1861

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 271

that the Washoes roamed over “the Valley of the Carson and Washoes"
(Pet. Ex. 3-100). Indian Agent Jacob T. Lockhart in 1861; stated the
"Washoe Tribe of Indians inhabit the immediate Eastern slope of the
Sierra Nevada Mountains“ and that “Carson City is the centre of their
oountrylying North and South." (Pet. Ex. 3-I27). In l8é6 the Washoes, .
were reported “scattered over an extent of country beginning at or near
Lake Washoe, and running thence south along the western border of the
State, a distance of about 50 m&es, to the California State line.”
(Pet. Eng. 3-133). The Superintendent of Indian Affairs in 1866 stated
that the Washoe Indians spent the winter months about the villages and
habitations of the whites while the rest of the year was spent by these
Indians in fishing about Washoe and Tahoe Lakes and the streams which
flowed "through their country“ and that they gathered grass-seed and
pine nuts, hunted rabbits, hares and ducks (Pet. Ex. 3-139)‘.

8. Ethnog-aphic material directly pertaining to the hfashoe Indians
is meager. The earliest study of these Indians was probably made by
Stephen Powers for the Bureau of American Ethnologr in l876. Powers
wrote that he believed the Washoe migrated eastward over the suIrmn°.t of
the Sierra Nevada Biountains, and that later the Paiute expelled them
from the lowlands about the sinks of the Truckee and Carson. rivers and
drove them into the mountains on the upper reaches of these rivers.
Powers was of the opinionsthat:

'3

when the Americans arrived in the country the habitat of
the ‘J-Iasho was as follows: The Truckee River down to the
Truckee Meadows (Reno). These large and rich mead ws, so
valuable in this desert country as a resort for game, were

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 272

always in dispute between then and the Paiute. In the fish\I \I

ing season, w w %, they were all wed by the Paiute to descend
the Truckee to Clark‘s Station, eighteen miles below the
Meadows. They occupied Carson.River down to the first large
canyon below Carson City. Besides this, they held Lake Tahoe,
Sierra Valley, and certain other summit valleys up to the
first range south of Honey Lake; though they resorted to these
elevated valleys only in the summer, or on hunting excursions
in the winter. Within the American period it is said they have
never visited Lake Tahoe; they have a superstitious terror of
that lake on account of the lightness of its waters and the
fact that a man drowning in it never rises to the surface

(Pet. Ex. 5-19 ).

S. A.I%uTett's ethnographic study of the Washoe Indians was published in
1917. Barrett stated that the western limit of Hashoe territory could
in general be stated as the crest of the Sierra Nevada range while the
eastern limit was, generally speaking, the low range between the Carson
river and the Walker river drainages. Barrett wrote that the Hashoe
occupied "a very small territory in the Sierra Hevada, bordering Lake
Tahoe, and on the upper courses of the Carson and Truckee rivers."

A map prepared by Barrett confines the washoe territory in the north

to the Truckee Valley. (Pet. Ex. S-2)

9. Doctor Alfred L. Kroeber in.l907 wrote that the territory of
the Washoes was situated.both in California and Nevada in the vicinity
of Lake Tahoe and the lower Carson.valley, east of the Sierra Nevada
(Pet. Ex. S-l0). In Kroeber‘s "Handbook of the Indians of California"
(1925) the author wrote that "The Washo have been unduly neglected by
students of the Indian. what little is on record concerning them
makes it difficult to place them.” ‘With respect to territory, Kroeber
wrote (Pet.‘*. S-ll):

‘Q

The Washo territory is the upper and more fertile drainage

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 273

of the Truckee and Carson Rivers -33- % *1‘. How far down they
ranged on these rivers has not been ascertained with accuracy.
It seezas to have been but a little beloa Reno and Carson City.
Long Valley Creek, 1-rhich drains northwestward into Honey Lake,
a California stream, was also in their possession. West

of the crest of the Sierra they had no settlements, but the
Miwok acknowledged their hunting rights on the upper Stanislaus nearly as far down as the Calaveras Big Trees. They

may have enjoyed similar privileges elsewhere. Where there
are not winter vinages, information is often conflicting;
boundaries may have been in dispute, or amicably crossed.

If the ‘Hasho hunted on the North Stanislaus they may have

come down the Middle Fork also, or frequented the Calaveras,
Cosunnes, or American. Sierra Valley has been assigned both
to themand the northeastern I-iaidu. The deep snows prevented
more than temporary occupation. Honey Lake, too, may have
been more largely ‘E.-Jasho than the map (Pl. 1:6) shows, or entirely forbidden to them.

Lake Tahoe is central to Washo territory, and was and is
still resorted to in summer, but its shores are scarcely
habitable in the season of snow.

Kroeber in his Handbook in writing of the I-iaidu Indians wrote as follows

?

with respect to Honey Lake and Long Valley:

'35 * '3' Honey Lake was not far from where liaidu, Paiute, and
Washo net. It seems not to have had pe manent villages, and
_may have been visited by all three of the tribes in question.
On the map the problem has been compromised by" extending all
territories to its shores. Long Valley Creek was most likely
I-Iasho. any maidu claims to this stretch are likely to have
been counterbalanced by rights or visits of the Washo to
Sierra Valley on the Haidu side of the Sierras. Long Valley
was probably habitable throughout the year, at least in
places: Sierra Valley could be occupied nnly in summer.

Its winter snows are unusually deep.

lO. According to Robert H. Louie's "Et ographic Notes oi.‘  
Washo”, 1939, (Pet. Ex. S-l3), the Washoe consisted of three dfi   
STOIIPS, (a) the ha‘nalelt‘.i, located about Woodfords, California ard
in Antelope Valley, (b) the p‘a‘*.-:alu, near I-linden and Gardnerville,

Nevada, and (C) the Reno ‘L-Iasho-'r:eln.elti. Louie reported the 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 27h

ranged about Lake Tahoe and that Carson City, Reno, Minden, and Gardner9?

ville, Nevada, fell within ancient nashoe Territory, as did Truckee,
Tallae, and Woodfords, California. The hashoe did not consider Antelope
‘Valley as ancient Hgshoe territory according to Lowie's informant.

These three divisions of the'Washoe are also noted by Siskin (Pet. Exo
S-l5) who contacted the p’auwalu (Valley Dwellers) and the la'nalelt'i
(Southerners) on a field trip in 1937. The third division "welmelt‘i"

are called "Northerners" by Siskin. According to this ethnologist the
boundaries of the contiguous Valley and Southern'Hasho groups were:

"on the east, the Pine Nut Rance running south to Antelope Valley (West
‘Walker River drainage); on the south, Coleville, California and the territory bounded by a line running gradually northwest as far as the southernend of the Lake Valley; andcnlthe west, Lake Valley (Upper Truckee River
drainage) and the crest of the Sierra Nevadas. The northern limit of

the Valley Washo is in the vicinity of Carson City, Nevada (northern
end of Carson Valley). The present California-Nevada border at Woodsford Canyon (woodsfords, California) divides the Valley Dwellers from

the Southerners." Siskin stated that "the only certain data regarding
Northern Washo boundaries is that Long Valley, south of Honey Lake,

marks the northernmost ljrst." Siskin's Rep of Vasho territory limits
the Washo territory in the north as did Barrett (Fdg. 8). In the text

of his article Siskin seems to agree with Kroeber that the'washo were

in possession.of Long Valley Creek and disagreed with_Roland.E.Dixon

(Pet. Ex. 5-28). A note to Siskin‘s map states "The northern boundary

of'Washo territorv should be at Long Valley, south of Honey Lake, accord»

U

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 266 275

ing to new information." According to Siskin “At best, however, intertribal boundaries were vague, inexact, with marginal areas equally
available to tribes living in geographic contiguity.“ Roland B. Dixon
in his "Northern Haidu" (1905) reported that Sierra Valley seems to
have been regarded as distinctly Maidu territory to which the Washo
occasionally sent strong hunting-parties (Pet. Ex. S-28).

ll. (a) As is evident from the preceding findings exclusive use
and occupancy in at least two areas of the territory claimed is questionable based on the historical records and ethnographic studies of the
Washoe and other Indians. These areas are Long Valley and Sierra Valley
in the northern part of the territory claimed by petitioner. Agent

Dodge reported Washoes living in and claiming Long Valley although his

‘report was based on information apparently received from the Washoes

living in the vicinity of Carson (Fdg. 7). Acting Indian Agent Tsfasson

in 1861 also reported Washoes living in Long Valley as well as Sierra
Valley (Pet. Ex. 3-97). Other substantial evidence of Washoe occupation
of Long or Sierra Valleys is lacking. Ethnographic studies of the Washoes
and other tribes are conflicting with respect to Washoe use and occuption of Long Valley. Powers stated that the Washoe held certain summit
valleys up to the first range south of Honey Lake; Curtis e.‘-ttended their
territory to Honey Lake (Pet. Ex. 5-34) as did Bancroft (Pet. Ex. 5-1);
Barrett did not include Long Valley; Kroeber‘s description of Washoe
territory in l907 apparently did not include Long Valley but in 1925 he

stated Long Valley Creek was in ‘dashoe possession; Kroeber‘ s discussion

of Maidu territory (Pet. Ex. S’-ll) casts some doubt in his design.ati<:::1

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 276

of Long Valley as Washoe territory. Lowie does not include Long Valley; Omer Stewart (petitioner‘s witness) stated the Washoe territory
extended to the southwestern shore of Honey Lake (Pet. Ex. 5-22).

(h) The only historical document placing the washoe in Sierra
Valley is the report of Acting Indian Agent Wesson in 1861 (Pet. Ex.
3-97). Of the ethnologists who have studied the area Dixnn, Barrett
and Lowie do not include the Sierra Valley as Washoe territory.

‘Merriam confine the Washoe to the eastern part of this valley and
states the west belonged to the ”Hidoo"3 Kroeber states this valley has
been assigned to both the'washo and northeastern Naidu and indicates
apparently that both groups used the area (Pet. Ex. S-ll). Powers ins
eluded Sierra Valley as Washoe. «Dixon while stating Sierra Valley was
disti.ctly'Haidu territory also reports Washoe occasionally sent strong
hunting-parties there (Pet. Ex. 5-28). I~Eost other ethnological studies
are too general in describing'washo territory to indicate w ether Sierra
Valley was included in.the territory of these Indians. Omer Stewart,
petitioner's witness, states he assigned Sierra Valley to the Washoe
because his informants in 1936 told him it was Washoe territory and because Agent Wassondin 1861 reported Hashoes lived in the valley and
Powers in l875 reported it to be washoe country.

l2. Doctor Omar C. Stewart, Professor of Anthropology at the University of Colorado, a qualified anthropologist, appeared as petitioner‘s
expert witness before the Commission. This anthropologist testified that

his Contact with the'Hashoe began on field trips in 1936, and l938, 1939.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 277

Doctor Stewart's research of the Northern Paiute Indians, who were eastern neighbors of the Washoe, involved a study of the relationship between
these Indians. Petitioner‘s witness was of the opinion that the Washoe
Indians exclusiyely used and occupied the area of land delineated on petitioner‘s exhibit 7-l3 which is described in petitioner's exhibit 9-1

' and in Finding of Fact Number 5. Doctor Stewart was of the opinion that

the Washoes were a tribe (Tr. 125) and had.a chief "who was attributed
authority over the entire group" (Tr. I25) but he said “whether the band
or the tribelet should be defined as the landowning unit, or whether the
Washoe tribe should be defined as the landowning unit, is unclear.” The
witness said he felt safe in saying that the Washoes in their three bands
"had a tribelet organization which appeared definitely developing into
or had many characteristics of a national unity among the'Washoe" (Tr.
13A, 135).

13. .Appearing as expert witness for defendant was Doctor Julian H.
Steward, Graduate Research Professor at the University of Illinois, a
qualified anthropologist. Doctor Steward did not do field work with the

'Washoe Indians'but expressed his opinion based upon published material

. of others and his knowledge of Indians to the east of the Washoe such as

the Northern Paiute and the Shoshoni. Steward testified (Tr. ?i4w133}
that he found it extremely difficult to say there was an overxkg ;«“i’§
Organization of Washoe Indians. Defendant‘s witness stated he at; "»
how in a "subsistence society” as found in the Washoes “there could have

been any idea of actual ownership of the soil itself, the subso:l_ $?Q?§w

thing on the soil.” (Tr. 238). This witness believed that :*:~

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 278

rights'nere concerned reference is to certain special resources (Tr. 286)
such as pine-nut patches by certain individual families or possibly to
fish (Tr. 238; and see Tr. 305, 306).
lb. ‘While Dodge referred to three Eashoe “bands” and other officials
‘wrote of the ”Washo" Tribe, the Washoe Indians did not constitute aboriginu
ally a tribe nor did the three divisions compose separate bands in the
orthodox:sense or use of the words "tribe" or “hands”. Barrett's ethnography of the washoe Indians states (Pet. Ex. 5-2):
The social organization of the Washo is primarily based
upon the family unit. The village community is the largest
division and each village is entirely distinct from all
others. apparently there is no approach to a tribal organization, though this exists among the tribes immediately to
the east. '
According to Lowie‘s informant settlements were minute with none containing as many as ten huts, usually being two to four. Apparently the
'Washoe on occasions would gather for communal deer or rabbit hunts or
for social purposes when "chiefs" or “bosses” would lead in the activity;
Louie found that individual rights in clumps of pine-nut trees were
maintained.by the Washoe (Pet. Ex. 5-13). The Eashoe from all accounts
had no horses. The pine-nut was one of their main sources of food supplemented.with fish, deer, antelope, small game and fowl, and grass seed.
Whether the'Washoe villages were permanent is not shown by the evidence

nor does the record satisfactorily locate the situs of any of these villages or settlements.

15; The three divisions of the Vashoe Indians, that is the “Southerners”, tie "Valley Dwellers” and the "Northerners" lived on lands that

‘mare contiguous. These divisions together formed a distinct linguistic

{as amended by order of June 25, l9S9)

7 Ind- c1. Com. 266 9 C 279

family and shared a common culture. The lands in the vicinity of any of

the divisions appear to have been used by all Washoe Indians. The‘Nashoes
were distinguishable from neighboring Indians. ‘While there was a tendency
after white contact toward political organization within the three divisions their mode of life and the fact that the United States agents

and officials apparently deemed it unnecessary to deal with the Washoes

concerning their lands or apparently for very few other reasons deterred

the development of this identifiable group of Indians into an orthodox
tribe in the usual sense of the word.

l6. The Commission based on the foregoing findings of fact and
the record as a whole, and cognizant of the fact that ”intertribal
boundaries were vague, inexact, with marginal areas equally available
to tribes living in geographic continuity” in the region within which
the claimed lands were situated, finds that the‘Washoe Indians, petitioner's predecessors in interest, aboriginally exclusively used and
occupied in customary Indian fashion the following described lands:

Commencing in the north at Adams Peek, thence south along
the summit of the ridge between Long Creek and the Feather
River drainage across Beckwourth Pass east of Vinton; thence
in a westerly direction on the summit of the ridge between
the drainages of the Little Truckee and the Feather River to
the crest of the Sierra Nevada Mountains just west ofidebber
Lake; thence in a southeasterly direction along the crest of
the Sierra Nevada Mountains passing over Donner Pass and Echo
Summit Pass to Raymond Peak; thence in a northeasterly direction to Leviathon Peak; thence (as depicted on Pet. Ex. 7-13)
nortbeasterly to Mount Siegal; thence northerly along the
summit of the Pine Nut Mountains to Lyons Peak; thence northWesterly, crossing the Carson River, to a point two miles-west
of Dayton, Nevada, the same being latitude thirty-nine degrees
fourteen and one-quarter minutes north (Lat. 390 lag“ North)
and longitude one hundred nineteen degrees thirty-seven and
three-quarters minutes west (Long; ll?” 37 3/h" West ; the ce

north, northwesterly to Mount Davidson; thence following the

(As amended by order of June 25, 1959)

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 280

summit’of the Virginia Range, northerly, to its intersection

with latitude thirtyanine degrees twenty-eight and one-quarter

minutes North (Lat. 390 28%“ North); thence north, northwesterly

along a line running towargs a point at latitude forty degrees

six minutes north (Lat. ho 06" North) and longitude one

hundred nineteen degrees fifty-two minutes west (Long. 1190

S2” West) to a point directly east of Adams Peak; thence west

in a direct line to the place of beginning."

l7. (a) The Washoe Indians from time immemorial exclusively used

I

and occupied the lands in Nevada in the tract of land described in Finding l6 until by gradual encroachment by whites, settlers and others, and
the acquisition, disposition or_taking of their land by the United
States for its own use and benefit, or the use and benefit of its citizens the way of life of these Indians was disrupted and the Washoes were
deprived of their lands. In View of the gradual encroachment the date
of acquisition of these lands of the'Washoe Indians by the United States
may not now be definitely set by this Commission. The Commission, however, finds that the United States, without payment of compensation, acquired, controlled, or treated the lands of the Washoe Indians as public
lands from date or dates long prior to this action to be hereinafter determined upon further proof unless the parties may agree upon a date.

(b) The date of acquisition of the lands described in Finding 16,
which are located in the State of California, by the United States from
the Washoe Indians may now be definitely determined by the Commission.
California was admitted to the Union by the Act of September 9, 1850
(9 Stat. M52). On March 3, 1851, Congress passed (9 Stat. 631) "An Act
to Ascertain and Settle the Private Land Claims in the State of California.“

Under the provisions of this act all claims to land had to be presented

to commissioners within two years for confirmation and at the end of that

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 281

time all lands the claims to'@aich had.not been presented were to be
deemed to be held and considered part of the public domain of the United
States. Two years later Congress on March 3, 1853, and in accordance
‘with the provisions of the l85l Act, passed (10 Stat. 2th) legislation
entitled an "Act to provide for the survey of the public lands of Caliw
fornia and the granting preemption rights to settlers." From this date,
IHarch.3, 1853, the United States fbr all intents and purposes treated
the lands of the Washoe Indians in California as public lands, and so
considered said lands to be public lands. The United States, therefore

extinguished the Indian title to the washee Indians to the lands in California on March 3, 1853.

/s/ EDGAR E. E-ETT
Chief Commissioner

/s/ LOUIS J. ornaaa
Associate Commissioner

/s/ mi. N. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

