7 Ind. 01. Com. 763 783
BEFORE Tn; INDIAN CLAIHS COHHISSI N

THE SNOHOHISH TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Petitioner,

vs. Docket No. 125

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

..-’ \..J‘~.../\.....u-"u...u’\-.../\~._/\._.l‘s.._./

Defendant.

‘cu.

Decided: July 23, l9S9

Appearances:

Frederick W. Post and
Malcolm S. McLeod,
Attorneys for Petitioner.

I Donald R. Marshall, with .
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General, Perry W.
Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant.

OPINION 93 _';_:_~I§ comnsslom

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Sommission.

..-. 3.... 

Bylo. prior determination (L Ind. T01. Comm. 519) this Commission
found that petitioner, The Snohomish Tribe, had held Indian title to

a certain area of land in what is now the State of'Washington and that

psaid title in the Indians had been extinguished by the Treaty'of

January 22, 1855, 12 Stat. 92?, II Kap. 669, whereby the lands were
ceded to the United States. The Commission further held therein that

the effective date of said 1855 treaty was March 8, 1859. This pro~

ceeding has been held to determine the value of said lands as of

March 8, 1859,

.A.TL‘. .

7 Ind. c1. can 768 781»

‘-9

"l \

The oonnoaries of the lands found to .ave been exclusively used and
A ‘F! «p ‘ ‘ an-. ‘ H’ ~-:o-v—a-u v- -‘ #1.‘ -r -L ' -" '
occupied by the SnCHOmlS§ lnalans are lnl_r set forth in Finding 1?, as

'5

amended, of our prior findings oz fact {E Ind. Cl. Comm. SE9). Said
lands, which will hereinafter be referred to as the Snohomish tract

or the subject tract, are located in Snohcmish and Island Counties in
what is now the State of Washington. Generally speaking, the subject
tract consists of the southern parts of'whidby and Camano Islands, all
of Gedney (Hat) Island, and an irregular shaped piece of land on the.
mainland in Snohomish County fronting on Puget Sound stretching from
Mukilteo in a northerly direction to Warm Beach. The mainland portion
of the tract fronting on Puget Sound is deeply indented in its western
or coastal.border by the waters of Port Gardner. This part of the tract
is drained by the Snohomish and Filchnck R'vers. .At least 20% of the
mainland area lies in the low broad valley of the Snohomish River and ,3,
the narrow, entrenched valley of the Pilohuck iver. There were good

soils but fairly extensive swamp and marshy lands along the Snohomish

River which later were diked and drained to be made cultivable. The

Snohomish River was navigable. The portion of the tract located on

Canano and Whidby Islands were for the most part forested regions and
k - . ‘ .. S . - . . S .
the land was high, rolling, and hilly with the shore line banks being

5b?UPt- Gedney Island contained good soil.

The Snohomish tract as described in Finding 17, as amended, in
C“? Prior findings of fact consists of a gross area of l5h,26S acres
of l C

1N0. Within the subject tract, however, is located the Tulalip,

or as sometines called the Snohomish, Reservation set apart by Article 3

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 768 . 785

of the 1855 treatv, su ra, containing 2h,320 aC?8S- From the award,
if any, which may later be made in this case there will be deducted
from the gross value of the tract, the value of the acreage within the
lreservation in which petitioner's interest may be shown based on the
ratio of the average population of Snohomish Indians on said reservation
to the average of the total Indian population thereon.

The subject tract has been classified as containing 12,153 acres
of bottom or potential agricultural land; S6,h6? acres of accessible
timberland; 65,790 acres of inaccessible timberland; 2h,83O acres of
marsh, overflow or swampland; and 5,025 acres of inland waters. A

considerable amount of the marsh or overflow land would be considered

ipotential agricultural lands which would require draining or dining.

The subject tract primarily, however, was a forested area containing on
the average 12,000 board feet of timber per acre hn.the accessible
itimberlands and ll,SOO board feet per acre on the inaccessible timberlands. hThe highest and best use of the subject tract as of March 8,
1839, has for timber production. As of the valuation date there were
no minerals of anv importance known to be present on the tract.
iTheiSuget Sound region was sparsely settled as of 1859. irhé first
American settlers in this region arrived in 15hS, and in 1851 they established the first Puget Sound town, Tumwater, near the present site
of Olympia. In 1853 the plat of the town of Seattle, in King County,
not far south.of the subject tract, was filed and that hounty in 1850

had a population of 302. ‘Hhidby Island was one of the first Puget

Sound areas to attract any noticeable early settlement and many of the

0'

I
"“~s.<4AJ"‘_‘

7 Ind. 31. Con. 768 786

._I

settlers during l8§O to l85:'nho reached the Puget Sound region found
their way to the islard. These early settlers concentrated for the
most part in the prairie area around Penn Cove to the north of the part
of the subject tract on the island. Island County in l8S8 was said to
have a population of ISO mostly on'Ehidby‘lsland. Some ho whites are
said to have been located within the mainland portion of the subject
tract by 1861 principally around Tulalip Bay. The slowness of settlement in the Puget Sound area prior to the 1880's has been attributed
.to the inaccessibility of the region and the lack of transportation‘
facilities. As of_l8S9 all the settlements of western Washington were
-virtually dependent upon water transportation there being few roads
and no railroads. The Northern Pacific Railroad was not completed

until 1883 and did not reach the Puget Sound area until 1887.

 

.Early timber operations were crude and for a long period the
timber first cut was that along the waters of the Sound and those
streams which could be used to drive logs. Timber operators usually
selected only the best stands of trees for a distance of only one '
to two miles inland.i Until the coming of the railroad making transP0Ptation to the eastern part of the country feasible and profitable
and until lumbering operations in the Great Lakes area and in the south
diminished, the market for'dashington timber was limited to local demand and to far away'markets such as California, South America, Hawaii
and the Orient. rThe only means of transporting the lumber at that time

was by ship,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 758 757

The witnesses for the parties agree that as of the valuation date
there was no market for the subject tract. Er. James A. Crutchfield,
a professor of economics, appeared as a witness for petitioner. Mr.
Crutchfield utilized two methods of valuing the tract and arrived at
an opinion of value under each method. In his first approach this
witness said the term “market valuation“ referred to the values which
could be imputed to the lands under commercial utilization of their
marketable products. In applying this method the witness states he
followed the procedure outlined in the earlier cases (The Nooksack Tribe

v. United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 578; and Muckleshoot Tribe v. United

States, 6 Ind. C1. Comm. 608). By the first approach he computed what

 

he considered to be the value of the timber on the subject tract based
on an average stand of 13,500 board ft. BM per acre valued at an assumed
valuation figure of $1.00 per 1000 BM in 1902 discounted to 1859 at 8”.
To this figure was added an additional 30 cents per acre representing
his opinion of a residual value of the Snohomish tract for agriculture.
Combining the timber value and the agricultural value, Mr. Crutchfield

.uas of the opinion.that the lands in the subject tract were:worth $3.70

—per acre. pThis Commission in the Nooksack and Mnckleshoot cases, supra,

stated that Mr. Crutchfield‘s opinion could not be given much weight

. under this approach because "his method of evaluation is not in accordance

with legally approved standards but rather involvesjmethods based on
conjecture and speculation, which methods have been specifically rejected
by the courts and this Commission.“ For the same reasons the Commission

Can give little weight to the witness’ opinion of value in this case.

 

7 Ind. Cl. Cent. 763 ' 788

Petitioner‘s witness in his second method of evaluating the la“.
arrived at an opinion based on a “subsistence valuation.“ By this
approach he was of the opinion that the net subsistence value of the

Snohonish tract was $660,000.00. The Commission refused to give any

weight to an opinion of value based on such a method in the Nooksack

 

and Muckleshoot cases, supra, and will not do so in this case since

the approach is entirely theoretical and is not based upon any judicially accepted method of evaluating land. "Mr. Crutchfield-also would
increase the valuation by multiplying his appraisal figures by a 2.?
factor, which, he claims, should be allowed to provide equal purchasing
power in terms of current dollars. Such a method of increasing the
valuation amount was denied in the Nooksack and Muckleshoot cases, supra,
and is also herein denied.

Mr. 0. Marc Miller, a qualified appraiser, testified as an expert
witness on value for defendant. Mr. Miller also prepared a comprehensive
appraisal report (Defk Ex; 205-A). "Defendant's witness used the market
value approach to determine what in his opinion was the fair market
value of the subject tract in 1859. Lacking_comparable sales this witness testified the fair'market value is arrived at by taking into consideration all matters that a hypothetical purchaser and seller would
have in mind such as condition of the area, demand, population, and
settlement. Mr. Miller classified most of the subject tract as timberland, accessible or inaccessible, a small amount as potential agricultural land and a small part as inland water. This witness took into

consideration the various elements to be studied in evaluating land

C0
\O

7 Ind. c1. Corn. 768 7

such as soil, topography, transportation, climate, markets, demand,
settlements and highest and best use of the subject tract for which it
was then adaptable or likely to be needed in the reasonably near future.
Mr. Miller was of the opinion that the hypothetical prospective purchaser of this tract would realize that only through the resale or use

of these lands could he expect to recover his original investment, taxes,
fire protection, administrative costs and costs of resale and he would
expect to realize interest upon his investment for the period that the
investment remained unliquidated.

Defendantls appraiser felt that a hypothetical prospective purchaser
‘would have noted that approximately 50% of the subject tract, was ac-0
cessible or desirable lands. The purchaser, according to Mr. Miller,
would have expected to dispose of the most desirable land within 20 years,

or in an average of l0 years, and dispose of the remaining 50% (the inv «Iaccessible and least desirable) within ho vears, or an average of 30
years. iMr. Miller was of the opinion that the fair market value of the
Snohomish tract less the reservation as of'Harch.8, 1859, was $16,200.00
or approximately 12 cents per acre. '“’
Defendant*s expert witness in arriving at his evaluation figured
concluded that the hypothetical willing seller and willing buyer would
have recognised “that the price at which comparable government lands
could be secured would effectively establish a ceiling on the price the
buyer could hope to secure from the resale” of the Snohomish lands, that

13: $1.25 per acre. Using this $1.25 per acre figure as a ceiling Mr.

Miller calculated what in his opinion an investor would have paid fort

 7 Ind. (31. Corn. 768 790

the subject tract. While the availaoility of Government lands and the

Quantity subject to disposal in the area would be taken into co

$by a prospective purchaser it does not follow that the price set for
such Governnent lands would result in a ceiling which one might expect
to apply to all lands in the area. There is evidence in this case of
some sales of select timberlands in excess of $1.25 per acre at or
reasonablj near the time of valuation.

In 1859 a prospective purchaser of the subject tract would have
taken into consideration the accessibility of some S6,h67 acres of
timberland upon the tract, the favorable location of the tract with its
island lands and the mainland portion fronting on the Sound and the

navigability of the Snohomish River. Such a purchaser would also have

 

been aware of the potential agricultural lands within the tract. ‘with
respect to the timber he would have realized that along the Sound there
was a great amount of other competitive accessible timberland to supply
the markets that then existed for the region and that there was no
immediate value for the inaccessible tinberlands. i

The Commission based upon the findings of fact herein made and the
record as a whole and giving due consideration to the size of the tract,

its location, the then accessibility of part of the lands including

1- k
vi?-'-u

erland and potential agricultural land, and the average stand per
Iacrc concludes that the fair market value of the Snohomish tract of
l53;355 acres as of March 8, 1859, was $180,700.00, or at the average

rat? Of $1.10 per acre.

-.
“U

3

I

L1
U]
‘.1:
O;
(D
w
(13
Ci‘
l..J
0
iii

T Ind. Cl. Com. 768 791

The parties hereto having submitted no evidence as to the consideration paid to the Snohomish Indians under the provisions of the
Treaty of January 22, 1855, the case will now proceed to a determination
of the consideration so paid, if an’; whether the consideration that may
be shown was unconscionable; the interest retained by the Snohomish

Indians in the Tulalip Reservation located within the tract; and, if

I necessary, what offsets are properly chargeable against the Snohomish

Indians under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Wm. F. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

I concur:

Edgar E. Witt C

Chief—Commissioner

