8 Ind. C1. Com. L0 60

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

THE conrnnnmrnn s.n.LIsH nrza KOOTEPIAI )
TRIBES or THE FL3‘..THEAD F?..ES?*:"RVATIO1-I, )
MONT mg, -- )
)

Petitioner, )

)

v. ) Docket No. 61

)

)

)

)

Defendant.

"Decided: August 3, 1959
G Appearances:

iRobert'H. Barker. with whom were
Donald C. Gormley and Frances L.
Horn, Attorneys for Petitioner.
John D. Sullivan, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General.
Perry EL Norton.

Attorneys for Defendant.

o1=nn:01~3 on THE connlssiorxt

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case was filed by the Confederated Salish and
Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Montana. Petitionengan
identifiable group of'american Indians duly organized under the Act of‘
dune 18, l93h, H8 Stat. 98h, includes descendants of the Flathead, Upper Pend d’0reille and Kootenai tribes parties to a treaty with the
United States on Julr“l6, 1855, 12 Stat. 975, II Kapp. 722, at Hell Gate,
Montana (see Def. Req. Fdg. 1) whereby these Indians ceded, relinguished,

and conveyed to the United States all their right, title and interest in

8 Indo Cle Com. L0

and to the country occupied or claimed by there The area ceded is described
in Finding 3 as is the area reserved for the Indianso The gross area of
the cession was estimated to be some l6,bO0,000 acres and the area of the
reserve, cnown as the Jocko Reservation, was estimated to be 1,256,000 I
acres. By stipulation of the parties the hearing in this case was limited
to the question of petitionerts right to the lands claimed, the identifie
ability of petitioner and as to whether there was presented a common or
group claim. I
The case was ordered consolidated for the purpose of trial with

Docket N0. 15L on April 2, l9§3. in which case the petitioner. the Kootenai
Tribe or Band of Indians of the State of Idaho claimed to be joint owners
of the lands ceded by the Treaty of July 16, 1853, to which they had not
been a party; Upon completion of'the proof in Docket 61. the counsel for
the petitioner therein entered into a stipulation with the counsel in Docket Ne. 1sz,.ee4en it as agreed that petitioner in Becket Ne. 15!; eyes

a separate and independent band or tribe of Koctenai Indians known as the

I Bonners Ferny Tribe, which exnlusively'used and occupied certain lands int

61

the northwestern part of the ceded area and that said tribe was not a party.

to, nor represented at, the Treaty of July 16, l8SS. During-the hearings ,
or the evidence in Docket N . 151;, upon the request of counsel, Doeket

No. 61 was separated therefrom, there being no objection from the other
Parties. (?r. 576) This Cbmmission has determined in 5 Indo Cl. Comma
LS6 that the Bonners Ferry Kootenai Band, petitioner in Docket N00 153,

did ex¢1u5iV€1Y'use and occupy certain lands (Finding lb herein) in the

8 Ind. C1. Com. to 5?
northwestern portion of the cession of 1855, and that said band was not
a party to, nor represented at, the Treaty'0f Ju1Y'15, 1855. Petitioner
herein filed with this Cbmmission a disclaimer to the lands in the axe
treme-northwestern portion of the ceded area claimed by the Bonner‘s
Ferry'Kootenai. The area so disclaimed is estimated to contain
1,396,000 acres. A disclaimer'sas also filed to certain lands in the
west central part of the ceded area claimed by the Lower Pend d‘Oreille,
or halispel Tribe, before this Commission in Docket No. 9h, estimated
to contain 787,hlO acres. Eliminating the disolaimed areas and the
reservation area petitioner now contends the total area of land allegedly
"owned by petitioner under original Indian title” and ceded to defendant

by the 1855 treaty amounted to 12,806,000 acres of land.

In the petition filed in this action before the Commission it is

fit alleged that "From.time immemorial %-% *, petitioner and the members

 

of petitioner tribe held, occupied, possessed and oened the land and
territory'%-%-%" coded by the Treaty of‘July'16, 1855. The petition
‘was amended following the hearing to eliminate from the claimed area,
as described in the treaty, the areas disclaimed by petitioner. As

previously'pointed out petitioner herein is the organization known as

d., the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, ,

which was duly organized under the'wheeler—Howard Act of June l8, l93h.
Defendant admits that petitioner is at the present time an identifiable
group of Indians organized under the Indian Reorganization Act of June
18, 193k and has among its membership descendants-of the three tribes,

Flathead, Upper Pend d'Oreille and Upper Kootenai. Defendant contends,

8 Ind. C1. Com. E0 63

however, that the only claim asserted in the petition ista claim by the
named petitioner; that there are no separate claims asserted on behalf oft
the Flathead, Upper Pond dioreille or Upper Kootenai tribes of Indians;
and that petitioner has suenitted no evidence in support of a joint
claim by these three groups. Eefendant farther contends that petitioner
is not the snccessor to any separate claims of the Flathead, Upper Kootenai
or Upper Pend d'Oreille tribes. Defendant admits that petitioner is recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having authority to represent the
Indian tribes located on the Flathead Reservation in Montana.

Petitioner. contends that it has authority to present the claim; thet‘

joint use by the three tribes and their confederation.makes this a joint

claim; that defendant by the Hell Gate Treaty of 1855 and ratification t

thereof by Congress created a Confederation asia legal entity; that petitioner, in any event, is entitled to recover on behalf of its constit-.,
uent tribese and that defendant recognized petitioner's Indian title.
Ehahdll first consider defendantis contention that the only claim.‘
asserted is a claim'by the named petitioner.’ It is deiendantis position
that, although ‘petitioner being a present1y"id'enti.:‘.‘iable group" has the
right to present a claim, petitioner did not have aboriginal title and
therefore does not have a valid claim. ilefendantis stand on this point.
is bottomed on the grounds that (a) petitioner as such never held Indian
title £0 ah? lands, Cb) petitioner is not the snccessor in interest to

the three tribes parties to the 1855 treaty and (c) petitioner did not

make any claim of ownership by any of the three individual tribes. A

8 End. Cl. Com. to 2 EL

presently'eXisting identifiable group of American Indians has the right
to present a claim before this Cdmmission on behali'oi'its constituent
tribes bands or "reuse. Clrde F. Thom son et al. v. United States

5 b . 3 . p 3 3 9

122 C. Cls. 3h8; Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation V.

   

United States, b Ind. Cl. Comm. 151; Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma v. United

tates, h Ind. C1. Comm. 223; The Northern Paiute Hation, et al., v.

   

United States, ? Ind. Cl. Comm. 381. For jurisdictional purposes only it
is immaterial to this Commission whether the identifiable group presenting
the claim was the landausing entity or whether the landeusing entities were
the constituent tribes, bands or groups thereof. The Commission, however,
has been careful to point out that the presently'eXisting identifiable
group does not necessarily become the successor in interest to its constit~
uent units and that proof is necessary to show the existence of descendants

},of‘the tribe, band or group for which claim is made. Peoria case and Col 

 

ville case, supra. A present day identifiable group, such as petitioner,

 

:may be the successor:in interest.to the claims of its constitutent tribes.
This may be possible where there was a merger or consolidation of certain
tribes, bands or identifiable groups into a single landausing entity prior
to a deprivation or cession of the lands aboriginallyiusedand occupied by“
them. Of course it follows that the present day identifiable group must
be traceable to the landausing entity. ‘The present day identifiable group
may also be the successor in interest if'it can trace itself back to a

‘an

merger or consolidation of tribes, bands or identifiable groups which

0

took place by treaty at the time of the cession of the lands and it is

8 Ind. Cl. he _ 65

clear by the terms of the treaty that the intent and purpose was to create
a new entity which thereby in law and fact became the successor in interest
to the formerly separate tribes, bands or groups.

Petitioner herin is the successor in interest to the claims of the'e
Flathead, Upper Pend_d'Oreille and Kootenai Indians parties to the 1855 i.
treaty, Prior to the 1855 treaty the Flathead and Pend d'Oreille Tribes ,7
were separate tribal entities and the Agiyinik, or Libby-Jennings Band of
Kootenai Indians was an independent band (Finding 6 and-7). By the terms
and provisions of said treaty these three, closely allied tribal entities
agreed to consolidate on the lands reserved from the ceded area under the
common designation of the Flathead Ration with Victor, the head chief of*~»
the Flathead tribe, to be head chief of said nation (Finding 3), By the
terms of the Treaty the United States agreed to pay to the newly created
entity $120,000.00 to be eipended under the direction of the President over
a number of years,_to provide certain facilities such as blacksmith and;
carpenter shops and to furnish the services of certain employees to the consolidated tribes fer a given number of'years. Fblloeing the treaty the

three separate tribes all eventuallr, for the most part, went upon the,

reservation and it is admitted that their descendants today'are upon saidjpi

reserration and that petitioner is recognized as having the authority:to*i-,
represent them..

As previously stated petitioner contends strongly that there was
joint use by the three tribes of the claimed area and that their con‘‘-n -‘ '9 O o q. .
iederation makes this a goint claim. Defendant urges that the evidence

3h0WS the three tribes had separate areas and that no claims have been

1-weefiled on behalf of the separate tribes. The evidence, as set forth in

— detail in the findings of fact herein made and as will be discussed hereinafter, clearly shows that up to the time of the treaty of 1855 there
existed separate tribes exclusively using and occ:,ying their own respective areas. plhe fact that the petition sets fort’ 5 claim to the ceded
area in which it is alleged (Par. b) that ”petiti*rC? and the members of
petitioner tribe held, occupied, possessed and creed" the lands and thus

, implies joint ownership is not sufficient reason for holding petitioner is

lnot entitled to recover where petitionerts predecessors in interest held

the lands separately. Cf. Kootenai Tribe or Band Cf‘Indians V3 Unitg§_

   

States, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. héh, héé-h6?. Although the petition herein would
seem to infer joint use there are certain allegations which point to lands

separately used and occupied by the respective tribes (Petition, par. 7).

  

The findings in this case completely cover the historical, ethnological and documentary material dealing with the Flathead, Upper Pend d‘Oreille
and Kootenai tribes which ceded the lands to the Government by the 1855
‘treaty. These tribes have resided in western'Montana, west of the Rocky
' Mountains from an. immeznorial. L   _ 0

.'Linguistica11y, the Flathead and the Upper Pend d'Oreil1e are of

Salish stock while the Kootenai form a "linguistic island“ speaking a
language which has not been related to any other stock. Culturally, these,
Indians belong to the Plateau culture area but being the nearest tribes

to the Plains area they acquired nany plains characteristics after the
acquisition of the horse and the resulting dependence on the-buffalo hunt

on the plains, which placed them in direct contact with the plains tribes

8 Ind. Cl. Como L0 57

such as the B1aokfoot,h‘Cro~;.{and Ascinibcicc.‘ (Fcg."5') ‘ '
The Fletheao Tfihe in historic, pre~trea£y times hed beeh a single’;

political entihy. The Upoer Pehd d*Orei1ie, or ?end d‘Ofeiiie; as die;
tingmished from the LowerFen6 dtoreille; of Kalispelg heé aieo been 2“ rmjf
separatécend distinct poliiioeihenhity durihg {he period in quee£{on:‘
The Kootenai'Trihe,Tso—oa11ed;‘on the other hahd,'nevef; in ihe hfe¥ '
tofio period, exieied/issinglé hfihewith the capaoity to rohresont aiiT7
Kcctcnaillndiéns cc?‘ to hold Alriciiajd £it1c'{-.c lcnccgs ciich‘. ' Thc”I';'cc*cé.=;»r§:;:‘5.” ’ A
oohsisted-oulhuraily of two divisions; the Ufper Kootenei in £hé:Uniteé
Steteé and Canade and the Lower Kooteani aieo looateo Tn the Uhihea S£e{es¥ahd Cenadaé ‘The oulfhrai dietihction'ié made oh the hasié of £he'Upoer'TH'

Koofenai being hore influenoe”hy'h1aine traits ahdhhofe aepehoéht oh the”k"

- buffalo huht‘whi1e‘£he Loeer—Koo£enai were in Tees oohteotTé{{h”theToiains

'Thdiehe and depended more on fishing than hhey éid on £heThT§ohHh§nt;. if»?

It‘ :

C1auoe‘Schaeffer‘1iSts‘se§eh bands of Upper Koofenei and ihfee of ioeer

.Kccj:"cna‘i. ‘According cc 'I‘11r-he.3r—High,T' ah cnchrucpclcgict x:zh‘c':}§aa§=§ ‘an ear:Ly""'T"'

stndy°of the Kootenai, the bands were indepenoen€§ 'The Jenhihéé"behog:eo;T:
cording to Soheeffer, or the "LihbyLJenhinge" hand, aocording £o Tofneyh
High (Def. Bk: H2), is‘the Kootehei band'ehioh held lanes ahofe Fia£hoeo'T'

1yake:.:-and 5.£"::js‘ from this ‘band fchct 'c1{c,_c_Kcc*ccna:='1L xnaicansecncm TEic£h'cca"" ‘

Afeservafion deécended. (Fee. 6).

The hulk of peti£ioner's documentaff ahé historical material was ins
troduced in the form of writien reports by two witnessee, Ir. Paui C. Phillips
(Pet'T1):_hiStorian§ who was a professor of history'ot%Kontana S€eteTUhi—'

Versitya and Mr. E. 0. Fbller, (Pet. Ex. 7), an investigahor of Indian

 

8 Ind. Cl. Com. he 68

affairs. The depositions of these witnesses were introduced into evidence
as petitioner's Exhibit A-1. nri Phillips in his ieport and in his testi—
mony reviews the history of the Flathead, Upper Pend d‘Oreille and Kootenai
Tribes, their contacts with the fur traders, explorers, missionaries and
government agents and other tribes, and was of the opinion that diey had
used and occupied the whole of the area claimed by petitioner in the half
centnry'before 1855. (Pet. Ex. A—l, pp 83-85). Dr. Phillips, however,
was of the opinion that the Kootenai was but one tribe. iHe testified that
the Kootenai and Flatbows (Lower Kootenai) were the same tribe (Phillips
- Deposition, Pet. Ex. A-1, pp. Sh and 6h). In this respect he disagrees with
the other authorities of record in this case such as Turney—High and Schae£fer, anthropologists who studied the Kootenai, and gith defendant's et’—
nologist Chalfant whoser report and testimony in this case revealed the
facts pertaining to the ethnological separation of the Kootenai into
independent bands. Not only do these authorities recognise such a
, political independence but so did petitioner's counsel and defendant's

counsel'sho both agreed in the record that the Bonner's Ferry Kootenai
Tribe or Band was an independent and autonomous group of Keotenai Indians.,
The historical and ethnological material gathered by Dr. Phillips and Mr.
Fuller has been extremely useful and much of it has been the source of the
findings made herein.

Petitioner also introduced in evidence the deposition of Professor
Carling I. Malouf (Pet. Ex. A-1, p . l26—2lh) and a written report (Pet.
Ex. 5) by this anthropologist who was assistant professor of anthropology at Nontana State University. In determinir; the lands used

8 .T.nd. Cl. COT?‘-. 1:0 69

and occnnied’by the Indians, Kr. Valouf states he used informants, historical
data and some arehaelogical data, and on the basis of the movements of the
Indians to certain areas for particular purposes he was able to determine

not only the lands the? tccupied but how they used the lands. In his report (Pet. Ex. 9) the witness has plotted on Naps V and VI, pages El and .,
52, the main and temporary camps of the tribes, and on Map IV, page 23,.

the favorite hunting and gathering places of the tribes as found by'him.,

iOnfMaps I and II of the same exhibit at pages 9 and 10, he has mapped what

he considers to be the domains of the separate tribes.
-:>

In his report (pp. 5 and 6), the witness locates the three tribes

\

as follow :

The central region of the Flathead Indians was the Bitterroot Yalley. This area e's a sort of headquarters for their
economic and religious activities, but they'by no means cone
fined themselves to this valley in their search for food and
materials for the necessities of life. From the Bitterroot
they'regularly moved in groups to many other localities, sometimes going as far east as the Bighorn river, in eastern - '
Montana and to Yellowstone Park. On other occasions they
50UTD9Yed up to Flathead Lake, or they even went westward,
over Lolo Pass, into Nez Perce country where they soughti
salmon. Others went south into Shoshoni territory. Their
relationship with Indians to the nest, south, and north was p _ ,
usually friendly, and there was even some intermarriage . ' ~
pbetz-ieen these people.   e — 

The Pend d'Oreille were centered in the panhandle region off;
northenz Idaho, but they"extended their hunting and gathering
activities up the Clark Fork river to approximately Plains,c
Montana, and northeastward to Flathead Lake. The extremely
T0u8h mountain region to the east, as far as the continental
divide, was hunting territory frequented by'the Kutenai,‘Pend
'd'0reille, Flathead and sometimes the Blackfoot. The latter
tribe, h never, sent in only their men and rarely were women
and children included annng their numbers because they'were
coming in as intruders. The pend d'Orille (sic) were bounded

8 End. C1. cord. to 70

on the north by the Kutenai, and on the south by their linguis—
tical brothers, the Flathead, The Upper Fend d*Oreillc used
the vicinity of Plains, Nonta1a, as a subcenter of their culture.
It was a center from where they traveled to the east, northeast,
and north in their quest for food, the necessities, and the

. niceties of'life. Other Upper Pend d'Oreille lived near the
Montana border, on Lake Pond d'Oreille, and commonly traveled
up the Clark Fork river for the purpose of making their living.

The original center of Kutenai activity was Tobacco Plains,
along the Kootenay river, in northwest Montana. Prior to
1850 they hunted seasonally at Flathead Lake, competing with
Pend d'Oreille, but after that time, under Nicholle, one of

the signers of the Stevens Treaty, they resided there permanently,
replacing or intermixing with the original population.

Mr. Malouf was of the opinion that these Indians had occupied the region
for several centuries and that their territories were essentially that
‘outlined it the 1855 treatyu (Deposition, Pet. er. A-l, pp. 170-172).
The witness further testified that he had never found any instance

where any tribe other than "the three petitioners" has occupied the

__.-o-,..¢__ .

f_,} territory claimed in_any'nay that would even approach permanent settlement. (Pet. Ex. Ari, pp. 166-l67). Malouf testified that the Flathead,
had a "strong chieftainship system" and a "national structure"; that

,the‘Upper Pend d'0reille tribal structure was weaker but that they had

a “strong chief that they recognized as a chief"; and as to the Kootenai,.

* he testified they"hlso had some recognition of chiefs, though they
were a little bit more scattered and broken down still more." (Pet

I Ex. Ari, pp. 189-190). In neither his testimony nor in his repor
does Witness Halouf speak of a breakdown of the Kootenai into independent
and autonomous bands, and it must be assumed that he considered the
Kootenai as forming but a single entity. In this respect he, as does

Er. Phillips, differs with those authorities, such as Schaeffer and

._ T:,_.___._.._...__..,__..______.....?—...—_j

8 Ind. Cl. Com. b0 i 71

Turney+High, who conducted field investigations with the_Kootenai and.
fwith defendant‘s ethnologist Chalfant.

Defendant does not dispute the fact that the Flathead, Upper Pend
d'Oreille and Kootenai Indians have lived in western Montana durins the
historic period. Iefendant attempts to limit the area of use and occupancy of these Indians to a smaller area than that ceded by the Treaty
of July'l6, l8S§.

Appearing for defendant was Stuart A.Chalfant,ethnologist, who,
prepared a written report (Def. Ex{ 2b) and who testified at length
before the Commission (Tr. l7—l92). Mr. Chalfant testified (Tfo 90)
he depended heavily on the field notes of Er. Claude Schaeffer, anthropologist, who conducted intense field work among the tribes on the

Flathead reservation and among the Kootenai tribes of Canada in 193b,

-'l935, and 1937. (Extracts of Schaeffer's field notes appear as Def.

Ekhibits 3h and 37—h1 inclusive). Defendant's witness testified that
his_primary interest in his research was "the aboriginal distribution .
of’the land-holding groups and their subsistence economy prior to the
Treaty of 1855. I attempted to trace out the basic subsistence patterns,
the annual rounds of the several groups involved, determine the locations
of their more or less pernanent sites,usually'their winter vi1lages,.
their major or temporarp camp sites . . ."

Witness Chalfant prepared two maps. lhe first, defendant's Exhibit,
93, attempts togihrtwhat Chalfant designates as the "nuclear areas of
habitation within which you find their more or less permanent settle:

ments where they winter in large groups, where they-made their winter

8 Ind. Cl. Com. MO 72

camps and at times where they spent the summer, too." (TT- 35)» These
inuclear areas on the map, he testified, show the areas that “through
ihistorical research are claimed to have been their honeland.”, (Tr. 51}
These areas confine the Flathead to the Bitterroot Val1€F: the Pen3
d'Oreille to the Lower Flathead valley and the Kootenai to a small
area about Flathead lake. Hap — Def. Ex. 23).

In addition, Mr. Chalfant prepared a map (Def. Ex. 22, 22—A) to
Show what he considered to be the "primary subsistence areas" of the
Flathead, Upper Pend d'Oreille and Kootenai Indians parties to the
1855 treaty. On this map he located the villages and camp sites of
the tribes, their gathering and hunting grounds and the use made of
the cession area by other tribes. He assigns to the tribes only those

areas which they'used to the greater exclusion of “alien groups” - or

 tribes not a party to this action. Chalfant testified: (Tr. L1)

v

These lines are drawn to indicate not the lines that
these groups solely occupied prior to 1855; they are
drawn.merely to indicate those lands that they used in
their aboriginal subsistence economy to the greater exclusion of other groups.

Now, I say to the greater exclusion, because we do have
recorded instances of“use within these what I call primary
subsistence areas by alien groups, bv the Kalispel, the

3?

’Coeur d‘Alene, the Nez Perce, by other Kootenai Bands not
represented in the Flathead Reservation Group, and also,
use through taking, or war, as in the case of the Piegans
and some of their raids against some of the Kootenai groups

in the north, and Blackfoot, also.

‘we know, for instance, that there nas some Blackfoot
hunting in the region of the main ridges of the Rocky
Mountains east of the area I have designated.

As an instance of his application of his greater exclusion theory, he

testified (tr. b3) that the Kalispel‘s as a separate grove did occupy,

6

iompseh Fells, one inst eget ox that noint on

.19
2
CL‘
( Z.‘
%
rm

}...J
‘L11
('1)

'1
r 1.
J1
F.)
(.‘+‘
re

the C1erk,Fbrk River, and another at Fleins. He includes the Plains
village area within the Urge: ?end d‘Orei11e primary ssbsistence area
seosuse he believed the Plains site was primari1?'e ?end é‘0rei1le
amp site even though Kelispel winfered thereb in the north, he

testiiied, (Tr. h3 and EL) independent and new exiisot Kootensi grouse
were known to have their permanent camp sites in eress that “lie ime

neoiately adjacent to, if not immediete1y'with3n the area doSign3i€§

fer the Jennings Band of the Kootenei" (in green on map — Bef. Ex. 2?).

J

The Kootenei, Chelfent testified, were a grotp of loosely orgenisee

bands which were nevercmmmaetelyunder a single tribal authority but

 J\3'$j L.QvQ¢.q Agni.-nun-u.§.L, an--4---J oIn..a--....sn.-r‘ -n,n--—.o.au--u-a- ‘on-In ‘ --"' '- . ’m'' "H

...;...~.......... ..;a.~.s.;.-.4. vs; L4s..a.v\.,, \.J\..u'ut.«.L...LL.-H.;\.A :.'.z‘x.-v\'..4.c1.1. .mc.a.‘;u4. ucuicz 5.-'>.*.'L:I.,;'._'[.;'.1'_3'.'f.-!_:s‘.':¢ {J--I-0 C-,."_o_
??}. The Banners Ferry bend of Lower Kootonei was not a party to the

treaty of 1855 although lends ceded by said treaty included lands on

which they resided, according to the witness, (Tr. 28) end the Comrission has so fbuné in Iboket N’;iEh. ehelfant relies on anthropologists
*erney+High (Def. Ex. L2) ene Schaeffer (Def. EL. 37—h1) to show the -'

,o1itice1 organization of the Kootenei Indians into separate and indeyeniert tribes or bands such as the Bonners Ferry Band of L ser Eootenais,
.a..1_,., ~

ohe"“ooaceo Plains band, the Tweed-Eerlend bend and the Lihhy>Jennines

L

herd of Upper Kooten '3. The true ancestors of the Flathead reservatics

. 4' 4- r“‘-u. -r-P - -\ — ..
uanel, eoeoroing n0 .er:sx-High, was the group thxt lives 9; Li.hy" * . .. - . .. .5. *. '7?-' ""~ _-.
- 43331-1-"i§“.5, xiozlterza, {Q19}: IQOVGJ of} the S0}‘P.e1‘S~.-‘..-i?*.i)—:_J,_!_;:;'"I_,.g';*: g;-.1‘-33 gig,

.. 5' ' C t ‘W'?“" ‘\r"3  ‘¢:"“I:I- ,.r.‘ cr "(EN F3: 5-‘... ' 2 1.. A v- --‘x - .. J ‘ "3 __*
"" O C-(_-A. \..-\..pO Ki \:-L O -\..lJ'L..f L,'.\..., I 9-JG I I I -.. ‘:4 ‘C... 13 .4.1...' L.‘.J' E. E_ i,):;___l"r’_} ex." 

 

 

8 Indo Clo   H 711

to dispute defcndant‘e position with respect to the political organi«
zation of the Kootenai Indians. The evidence substantially supports a
finding that other groups of Kootenai Indians used and occupied certain
ares of the lands ceded by the 1855 treaty to which they were not a
party. (Fdgs. lb and 15}.

As pointed out in the findings (Fdg. 12), the three tribes for a
long period up until the time of the treaty and even thereafter were
subject to frequent attacks in their home territories by the Blackfoot
tribes which caused them to be closely allied for defensive purposes.
These attacks reduced the tribes and hindered their activities but the
Blackfoot did not attempt to occupy or_make permanent use of the lands
west of the Rockies. ~Both Chalfant and'Malouf recognized that the main
ranges of the Rockies within the cession lands were sometimes hunted
upon by the raiding Blaclarfoot (Pet.  ‘.5’, ‘pp. _t-:'.. (3; Tr. 111). V Such
raids and hunting did not terminate Inci n title in the three_tribes.i

Red Lake Chippewa V. United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Conn. §h7, 320.

 

p The evidence shows that while each of the tribes held separate
territories there was some sharing oI'the economic uses aith each
other by these closely allied landeholding entities on a permissive
basis as sell asjaith £riendly'tribes.t A etude of the eridence shows a
definite pattern of exclusite use and occupancy of the areas surrounding
the fixed seat of each of the three tribes. Ehile it is true that the
tribes ranged at times far from the claimed area they did make exe
tensive use of large areas between the Rockyixountains and the Bitterroot Mountains. The Commission concludes that the Flathead, Upper

8 Ind. Cl. Com. hO

tend d'0reille and Kootenai (Libby-Jennings Band) Tribes; parties to.

the Treaty of July 16, 1855, for a long period prior to, and at the I
time of; said treaty exclusively used and occupied the separate tracts
described for the respective tribes in Finding 19, and that the United

States acquired the Indian’ title‘ to said Iandson March 8, 1859, the

_effective date of the treaty.

Petitioner contends that defendant recognized petitionerts Indian.

‘_title. Petitioner's position is that Governor Isaac Stevens who ne~

gotiated the 1855 treaty had knowledge prior to and at the time of the Q

treaty of the extent of petitioner's use and occupancy of the area in '

e that he had prepared a map prior to the treaty locating tribes in the

ih69§“h8h, affld 123, 0. G15. H53 FelixHMcCaule§# ex rel., v..United States;

area and a map at the Hell Gate treaty grounds shoeing the cededarea
which he forwarded to the Commissioner oi Indian Affairs with the treaty
and T9P0Tt§. Petitioner urges that since these documents were sent to '
the Senate which ratified the treaty the action of the Senate in ratifying the treaty thus recognized and confirned petitioner's Indian titles
to the area ceded. Petitioner's counsel agrees that, under the decisionsfl

of this Commission in Quapaw Tribe v. United States,_l:Ind.Cl._Gomm., M

   

—:   

   

1 Ind. Cl. Ccm., 61?, 623; and Red Lake Band of Indians V; United Statee.

1 Ind-‘C1-’C0mm§ 575,'60h-605} the language of the Hell Gate Treaty and

the statements made by Governor Stevens in the course of the negotiations;

standing_alone is insufficient to establish recognition of Indian title.
Petitioner's counsel contends, however, that under the Commission's

decision in Red Lake Indians, et al., v. United States, 6 111:3, ca... Com .

   

8 Ind. Cl. Com. £0 76

n-2&7, 316, "that such evidence coupled with prior actions of defendant

.-uu.,..__

-3
".

indicating its kn niedge of the area claimed, does constitute such
“recognition.” The exact langtage used in this Red lake decisions is
as follows:

, All of this evidence causes the Commission to conclude
ithat all government officials during a period of at least
some twelve years prior to the l863 cession repeatedly

recognized petitioner bands as the owners of Indian title
to tEE'lEEds in the Red River Valley'area. (Underscoring
supplied.) ”"W_"—

   

   

The decision in the Red Lake case, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 2h?, is based upon a

 

finding of exclusive use and occupancy and not upon recognised title.
The above statement upon which petitioneris contention is based merely
means that the statements of government officials over a period of

0 " Q
. -.
". t

time are important items of evidence in estahlieainv Indian title. In

L)

 

Awwh the Red Lake case, as in this instant proceeding, the Connissicn.found
i_J3 that petitioners therein did not have exclusive use and occupancy to all
the ceded area. There is nothing in the treaty, nor in evidence, that
Congress intended to recognize Indian title in petitioner, or petitioner's
predecessors-in-interest, to the ceded area.
Petitioner further contends that as a matter of law the Treaty of
JU1Y'16, 1855, containing a cession of a definitely described area,

constitutes prima facie evidence of petitioner's title and that the

 

burden of going forward with the evidence to overcome petitioner's prime

 

 

facie case is upon defendant. This Cbnnission considered such a con«
0

tention in Klamath and Rodeo Tribe v. United States, 2 End. C1. Comm. 53%

       

8 Ind. cl. Com. ho ' 77

The case will now proceed to a determination of the valuation and
acreage of the lands described in Finding 19, as of March 8, 1859, less
the°area reserved by the 1855 treaty; the consideration paid under the
provisions of said treaty and whether the said sum was unconscionable;

leaving to a later roceedin the uestion of offsets if any.
_ P E q 5 %

/s/ WM. ‘I~I. HOLT
. - " --'-*-2-':"*"-.'-='===':‘ . . -"""""':"'
~ Associate Commissioner

 

I concur:

/s/ EDGAR E. WITT ’
Chief 5ommissioner .

