BEFORE THE INDIAN CLADIS COIQVESSION

THE SHOSHONE TRIBE OF INDIANS )
OF THE MND RIVER RESERVATION, )
wror-IIRG, )
)
Petitioner, %
v. ; Docket No. 63

IRE: UNITED STATES ' or AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )

Decided: August 20, 1958

Appearances:

Glen A. Willdnson, with whom

was Marvin J. Sonosky,

Attorneys for Petitioner

Donald R. I~1arsha]J., with whom

was Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry I-I. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant _

OPINION _c_>_}: _n;R_ comnsslou

O‘I~1arr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

We have before us a petition, filed by the attorneys for petitioner,
for the allowance of attorneys’ fees for legal services rendered in the
prosecution of the Shoshone claim against defendant and for the allowance for services of two expert ‘witnesses who testified in the above
case. This petition was filed on April 16, 1958.

On April 214, 1958, the petitioner, the Shoshone Tribe, filed its
response to the attorneys‘ petition in which they assert that from

whatever allowance is rnade for the services of George M. Tunison

6636i

rendered during his lifetime in the prosecution of the case there be
deducted the sum of $35,095.19.

The defendant on June 13, 1958, filed itsanswer to the petition
in which it did not object to the allo *ance of the attorneys‘ fees
claimed but did object to an allowance of the amounts claimed by the

two expert witnesses who testified in the case.

Allowance for Legal Services'

 

The Shoshone claim was presented and prosecuted by George M.
Tunison under a contract dated July 10, 19m, which contained this
provision: .

 3 In consideration of the services to be performed by

the attorney [Tuniso_r_17, he shall receive a fee of ten

per cent of any judgment or amount recovered.

This contract was extended to February 17, 1953, by the Parties theretoOn August 20, 1951;, this Commission entered an order awarding the
Shoshone Tribe the sum of $533,013.60, less offsets later to be determined. And on September 16, 19514, the Shoshom filed a motion for rehearing which was overruled on June 10, 1955.

Mr. Tunison died on December 3, 19511.

It will be seen from the above that Mr. Tuxrison performd important
and valuable legal services for the petitioner during his lifetime in
the mosecution of the case.

After the death of George M. Tunison andon January 26, 1955, the
Shoshore ‘Iribe employed the law firm of ‘u-Ij_‘Lkinson, Boyden, Cragun and
Barker to complete the case.

The Shoshom contract with this firm,

unlike their contract with Tunison, provided that the fi_rm‘s fee shall

not exceed ten percent of all sums recovered for the tribe. The name

of that firm is now Willcinson, Cragun and Barker.

At the time the law firm took over the case under its contract of
January 26, 1955, there was pending in the case the motion for rehearing
mentioned above, and a similar motion filed by defendant on September 20,
1951;. Both of these motions were argued by the law firm on June 7, 1955,
and on June 10, 1955, both motions were overruled.

On January ll, 1956, the defendant filed as an amendment to its
former answer claiming offsets in the sum of $157,886.73. A hearing was
had on these offsets on May 10, l956, at Billings, Montana, and on June 15,
1956, the parties to the suit stipulated as to part of the claimed offsets.

On September 1;, 1956, the defendant amended its original offset
claim and increased the amount thereof to 1$l,9h9,6l3.28, and a rather
extended hearing was had on this increased claim on September 5, 1956,
and numerous" documents relating thereto were admitted in evidence".

After extended neogtiations between representatives of the law
firm, referred to above, and the attorneys for the defendant, an agreement was reached as to allowable offsets which was in the sum of
$100,000. This settlement was approved by the Commission and on April 22,
1957, the Commission entered its final order awarding petitioner the sum
of $153,013.60.

We have setforth in some detail the legal services rendered the
Shoshom Tribe in this case in bringing it to a fi@ determination by

the law fhm of V‘-rrilion, Cragun and Barker for the reason that the

record is plain that that firm also rendered important and valuable

U.)

0'.)

legal service in the case and we see no basis for allowing less than

.1e full ten percent for the services of all the attorneys representing

the tr ib-e .

While we encounter no difficulty in making an allowance of
$113,301.36 for legal services rendered by all the attorneys who represented the tribe in this litigation, the petitioning attorneys ask
us to divide the attorneys’ fees between them on the basis of $2,165.07
for the Chas; J. Kappler Estate, $9,959.31 for the firm of Wilkinson,
Cragun and Barker, and $31,176.98 for the Georgeuli. Tunison Estate.

As to the Tunis on share the Shoshone Tribe calls our attention
to paragraph 10 of their contract with Mr. Tunison dated July 10,

19117, as extended, which reads:

10. This contract is supplemental to the existing
contract [for general legal service§7 between the tribe
and the attorney. Any amounts which the tribe may pay
the attorney under the existing contract and extensions
thereof, from the time of the approval of this supplemental contract, shall be deducted from any amount which
may become payable to the attorney under the ten per cent
contingent compensation provided in this contract. m

At the time of this contract there existed a contract between Tunison
and the tribe for general counsel services for which the tribe paid
Tunison after the date of the July 10, 1911?, contract and until his
death the aggregate sum of $36,095.19. The general counsel services
contract does not cover legal service rendered by Tunison in the prosecution of the Shoshone claim disposed of by us but because of the
provisions of the 1914'? contract, quoted above, the tribe claims a credit

on any amount awarded Tunison for his services in the case before us.

u-...-.......-.-—a-... -u-..—_.._.-.. ...... .. ...... -.

-...o-.-p......-an-n-.—.—.-._..... ......-we-u --- ---I

The desire of the petitioning attorneys to have us make a division
or the fees between themselves, the George H. Tunison Estate and the
Charles J. Kappler Estate and a disposition of the credit claime.d by
the tribe on the’ share of the attorneys‘ fee going to Tunison is quite
understandable in the circumstances, however,'we find no authority
granted us by the Iadian_c1aims Commission Act to make a.division of
fees bet:-teen attorneys representing the tribe or to resolve issues
between the tribe and an attorney concerning the amount payable for
legal services.

in the case, Chickasaw Nation 12'. United States, Docket No. 23 ,
"we were ‘asked by the heirs at law of a deceased attormy to allow them
a share of the fees that we might allow the attorneys who prosecuted
the ‘case, although the ancestor of the applicants had died before the
case had been filed, but in the prosecution of the case before us much
evidence assembled by the ancestor in other litigation by the same tribe _
had ‘been ‘used in "the case before us. We denied the application on the‘
ground that=ue had-no jurisdiction to determine the rights, if‘any, of
the applicants to -fees awarded the attorneys of record.

the aapiicshts appealed to the Court of‘Claims and that court
(3-.21 to also i.1:L.)., iin a_i‘firming the action of the Indian Claims Commission,
stated ‘the '-1awire'1a‘tiag to the jurisdiction of the Commission as follovrs,
atipages ab and LB:

‘Ne-ither the Indian Claims Commission nor this court

-has ju‘r7isdiction to apportion fees among disputing

attorneys or "to make allowance for fees for anyone ex-- .

Qtept the attorneys of record. Robertson v. Gordon et al.,

3é26'U.s..311;;wi1iiaa Beddo v. Uhited“§tatesj"é8 6. C15.
759;_§reek ration v. United States, 79 C. Cls. 778.

 

6 ohou

The paragraph in appellees' contract undertalcmg to
authorize the Commission to determine the amount, if any,
due to appellants for services rendered is ineffective in
the instant proceeding since jurisdiction not otherwise
had cannot be conferred by consent of the parties. Elgin v.
Iarshall, 106 U.S. 578.

Any dispute or cl aim by attorneys other than attorneys
of record for services rendered whether by private contract
or other obligation must be settled between the parties
themselves or in another forum.

It will be seen from the above, that we cannot make a division
between attorneys of the amount due them for legal services rendered.
Nor can we include as entitled to fees the estate of Charles J. Kappler
(who died on January 20, l9h6) and was neyer an attorney of record in
the Shoshone case.

The reasons for not dividing fees between attorneys apply with equal
force to the dispute between the tribe and their counsel as to balance i
of fees due and payable.

We are, therefore, constrained to hold that we can make an award
to the Estate of ‘George M. Tunison, deceased, and the firm of Wilkinson,
Cragunand Barker, the applicants herein, for the sum of $143,301.36,
such sum to be apportioned between said estate and said attorneys; as
they may agree or as may be determined by any court to which the matter
may be submitted, and those credits on a part of such fees, claimed by
the tribe, shall likewise be left to the agreement of the parties or

submitted to a court for determination.

6 an ,

Compensation for Services

of Expert "L-J'itne sses

 

E. 0. Fuller

E. O. Fuller has presented a claim in the sum of $17,200.00 which
he had divided into the sum of $15,000.00 for what he designates as
“active services and results achieved from October 31, 19147, to
December 3, 1951;." These services are those usually performed by
appraisers in examining the property involved, assembling facts pertinent to the inquiry, testifying before the Commission on’ the question
of value, etc. While the charge is for services rendered beginning
long before February 16, 1951', when the suit was instituted, such services were necessary and proper for the preparation of the claim and
according to his contract with Mr. Tunison, the attorney for the tribe,
the work of Mr. Fuller began on October 31, 191:7.

The record shows that Fuller prepared a voluminous report of his
work, which was admitted in evidence, and also testified as a witness.
The record also shows that the tribe obtained an interlocutory award
011 its claim on Augustilo, 1951;, however, the evidence in the case on
the merits was closed and all parties rested on February 20, 1953, so
there was little or no needufor the Fuller services after the case was
closed, if he performed any, and after the award on August 10, 1951;,
the 01113’ matters to be determimd concerned offsets about which Fuller
performed no services.

Moreover, a comparison of the report received in the instant case

with that prepared by Mr. Fuller in a former case of the tribe involving

adjoiniflg lands, we find that much of the material he assembled and

6 6112

used in the former case was used in this case, a fact we consider as
bearing upon the amo*et of time needed in preparing the report in evidence here. ‘we find no justification for including in our allowance
for services the period between.August 10, l9Sh, and December 3,-195b,
when.Mr. Tunison died.

From an examination of the Fuller claim, his report admitted in
evidence and.his testimony at the trial, and taking into account the
fact that payment for his services was contingent upon.recovery.and
that he had been reimbursed by the trite for all erpenses incurred in
the work, we believe an allowance'in the sum of $6500.00 amply come
pensates him.of his soacalled "active services“ in the case.

As to the "standby services," claimed in the sum.of’$2200.00,'we
understand from his statement that under his employment contract Mr.
Fuller had to keep himself available for services until the case was
concluded and judgmenttrendered. The contract provides: “You are to
80 ahead and prepare evidence to prove the allegations of the Petition
and testify thereons" and “In the event of a recovery ycu.are to apply
to the Court for an allowance of a.fee for vour services.” Neither
this language nor any other contained in the contract contemplates otter
than the ordinary services rendered by an appraiser. It is reasonable
to assume, we believes that if the witness and the attorney Tunison
had in mind payments of.’ $50.00 per month in addition to the usual compensation for appraisers‘ services the contract would have made Such
an intent clear.

‘we conclude, there£cre3 that the claim for "standby services" must

be denied.

5 shat‘

 

Thomas S, Z-‘Ea:-rison
Hr. ‘E.-‘homes 5. Her:-rison testified as a "~:-"tness in the case and prepared a .;.-aengthy report on the presence and development of oil in the
lands in'z=2::ILved in the case. He had teen employed by the then attorney
in the case, George M, 'E‘uz1ison,. as an expert on mineral valves and
worked under the direction of M1’-, Tunison and performed valuable services for "-the Indians. H He “suggests" a fee of $12,500.00 for the
services 4::-:£‘ h:‘i_mse'.3.f and his son, John Harrison, now deceased, who was
associateei with him in the work. No Shawillg has been made 85 150 the
time consrmed in assembling the data necessary in the preparation of
the mineral features of the case but from his report and testimony
recieved in evidence at the trial it is plain that much time was exu
pended in reseach and travel and in the preparation of his lengthy
and comprézzensive report and in testifying in the case.
Ta.ki_r~.g into consideration all such matters and the fact that payu

ment for his services we" contingent upon recovery and the further fact

that he has been paid by the tribe for all expenses incurred by him in

connection: with his work in the case, we believe the sum of $5,500.00
will fairly compensate Ear. Thomas 5. Harrison for his services in the
case, 1-rhic‘-.?.1 sum includes she services of John Harrison, now deceased.
We, a2«:2cordingly, conclude the attorneys for the Shoshone Tribe
are entitled to a fee of $33,301.00; that the witness, E. 0. Fuller,
is entitle-;:?. to a fee of $6,500.00, and that the witness, _Thomas S.
Harrison, ‘is entitled to a fee of $3,500.00, to be divided between
hmeli‘ as": the estate of John Harrison, deceased, as may be agreed

upon,

J11;

-—f—'f

Proof of Claims for I-fitness Fees

The v:i.tnesses, Fuller and Harrison, submitted their claims in the
form of affidavits in T*3i':..iCh they setforth in considerable detail the
work they performed and the time consuIr.ed'in preparing their repcrts
and in preparation for testifying at the trial.

At the hearing before the Comm_i_ssion on the application for the
allowance of attorneys‘ fees and fees for the expert witnesses, the
government objected to our consideration of the affidavits of the witnesses on the general ground that in the absence of an agreement or
consent of the government such evidence is inadmissible, primarily because the government would be deprived of the right of cross-examination.

Applications for the allowance of attorneys‘ fees, vitness fees
and other reimbursable expenses of Indian cases do not affect the natter
in controversy, but are collateral thereto. Hence, the rule contended
for by the government does not apply to such application.

The Indian Claims Commission Act does not prescribe the procedure
for applying for and proving such fees and reimbursable expenses, so
the Commission can, as it has frequently done in the past, consider
affidavits submitted by the interested parties in support of their
claims for fees and e@enses. This does not r,r'1ean,t however, that the
Commission may not in its discretion require ‘testimony relating to such
claims, but for the purposes of the instant application the affidavits
objected to are admitted in evidence and considered by the Commission.

Louis J . O'I*iarr

We concur: Associate Commissioner

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Wm. M . Holt

Associate Comnjs si oner

6 6145 : in ;

