THE DELAWARE TRIRR or IEDIAHS,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 150

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIES COHMISSION

)
)
Petitioner, )
, )
vs. )
)
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )
ABSENTEE DELAWARE TRIBE or OKLAHOMA, )
DELAWARE NATIOR, EX REIu, w. E. )
EXENDINE ARR MYRTLE HOLDER, )
)
Petitioners, )
)
vs. )
)
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )
Decided: December h, 1959
Appearances:

Wesley E. Disney, Attorney of Record
for Petitioners in Docket No. 27~A.

Stanford Clinton, Attorney of Record
for Petitioners in Docket No. Zhl.

W} Braxton Miller, with whom was
associated Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry'W. Morton, Attorneys
for the Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMEISSPQE

Docket No.

I 1.7 U

27—A

Docket No. Zhl

WITT, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The land involved in this case is 960,000 acres located in what is

now the State of Kansas, and known as the Delaware Outlet.

It is a lO mile

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lSO

wide strip extending for lSO miles across northeastern Kansas 30 miles
below the Kansas—Nebraska state line, and embraces land in present
Jackson, Pottauatomie, Riley, Cloud, Clay, Mitchell and Osborne Counties.

We have for consideration the value of said Outlet as of May 6, l8Sh.
The defendant has questioned the clarity of the opinion of the Court of
Claims rendered upon an appeal in this case on February 8, IOSS (130 C. Cls.
782) concerning the interest which that Court determined the Delaware
Indians acquired in the Outlet under their treaty of October 3, 1818 (7 Stat.
188) and has presented opinion evidence as to the value of a full title on
May 5, 155b, and the value of the tract if held for certain restricted purposes. It is the opinion of the Commission that there exists no ambiguity
in the Court's language and that the Delaware Indians were found to have
acquired a full title to this land. The Commission has, therefore, pro»
ceeded to a consideration of the evidence and to an evaluation of the tract
upon the basis of a complete title in the petitioner Indians.

The petitioner has submitted alternate theories for the measurement
of any recovery to which it may be entitled. One is that the recovery should
be the minimum realised or which might have been realized by the government
in the disposition of the land, less selling and surveying costs of approximately 6¢ per acre. The second is for the fair market value of the land as
of the date of its acquisition by the defendant. In view of the numerous
former decisions by this Commission to the effect that when Indian land has
been acquired outright by the Government and it is claimed the consideration
was less than fair and just, that the fair market value of the land becomes
the yardstick by which the transaction is measured, we feel a further

discussion of these theories would only be redundant.

.:.-,«.'m-.~z8 Ind. Cl. Com; 150 ' 18

The petitioner requests a valuation of $1,2S per acre, and in support
thereof it has placed in evidence the record of the defendant‘s disposition
of the Outlet from its acquisition in l8Sh to as late as 1909; sales of
three tracts known as the Delaware trust land, the Iowa trust land, and the
Peoria trust land; railroad sales and a few other transactions. It called
as a witness one John Francis'Wilson, a cartograiher with 18 years’ ex—
perience in map making, who testified to the acreages within the various
soil classifications referred to in our Finding of Fact Ho. 33, according
to planimeter readings and approximations on a percentage basis as necessitated by the acceptable margin of error for such readings. It did not offer
the testimony or opinion of an appraiser and neither party presented evidence touching second party transfers within the Outlet other than with
respect to certain railroad sales which we shall disc as later. The den
fendant relies primarily upon the testimony of two appraisers and their
accumulated data which it maintains establishes a value on Kay 6, 185k,
on the basis of a full fee title of not in excess of $126,000.00, or
slightly more than 13¢ per acre.

Since, in the accepted sense of the word 'market‘, we cannot say that

a market existed for the Outlet land in l8§h Qgtoe and Hissou£ig_Trihe v.

   

United States, 131 C. Cls. 593), we must look to those factors such as the

  

type of soil and the natural resources of the land, their present and pogtential economic values, ready'and potential markets, general economic

would consider in determining what he could afford to pay for this land

as of its valuation date. Sales occurring within a reasonable radius of

O

the Outlet land and not too remote in time to the valuation date may prom
perly be considered. The weight which may be accorded such sales in arriving
at a value for the Outlet is dependent upon a careful analysis of their comparability and a careful consideration of all circumstances surrounding those
sales which would have had a bearing upon the prices realized. The opinion
ccvidence of the expert witnesses is for consideration in the light of the
circumstances shown to exist on the valuation date and the factors shown
to have been given consideration by those witnesses, as well as their personal qualifications, experience and procedural methods. From a careful
consideration of all evidence properly before us, and a careful weighing
of all factors involved, the Commission must reach its ultimate determination
of value.

The elongated narrow strip we must value had no white inhabitants on
the valuation date. A few whites were employed at various Indian missions
and at trading posts in Kansas, the nearest being St. Mary's on the Kansas
river. Troops were quartered at Fort Leavenworth, 35 miles to the east,

at Fort Riley, about 25 miles to the south, and at Walnut Creek Post Office

on the Santa Fe trail and Arkansas river. A few settlers were living along
the Santa Fe trail and along the Blue river south of the Outlet, as well as
in northeastern and southeastern Kansas. Westport (Kansas City) and St.
Joseph on the Missouri river, each over 35 miles to the east, were important
outfitting posts on the principal trails to the west. At about a fourth of
its length westward the Outlet was bisected by the Oregon Trail from Kansas
City, the only road servicing the Outlet. The construction of railroads

into St. Joseph and Kansas City was anticipated and it was thought that



ithe Outlet.

1...!
CT)
I\)

one line would thereafter be extended into Kansas following up the Kansas
river l6 to 25 miles south of the Outlet or along the Santa Fe Trail.
Both proposed routes were too far removed from the Outlet to affect its
market value when once constructed. The Blue river, the Vermillion and
the Republican each flowed across the Outlet. River transportation to a
limited extent reached to Fort Riley on the Kansas river, but not up to
The forks of the Solomon converged just inside its western
limits and flowed southeastward through the southern half of the western
quarter of the Outlet. The soil in the eastern part of the Outlet was
preferable to that in the central and western sections. About l7,hOO acres
lying in two tracts along each side of the Blue river valley and approximately
103 of an adjaceht 96,38h acre tract to the west are classed as grazing land.
The balance is classed as agricultural. The eastern end of the Outlet and
the bottoms of the Blue river and Fancy creek were sell timbered with considerable hardwood but as one moved westward cottonwoods predominated and
timber was found in diminishing quantities only along the stream beds.
Considerable limestone was available but neither limestone nor timber

There

possessed a present or potential commercial value apart from the land.

were no known minerals. The land was best suited for subsistence farming and

As early as l8hO Congress expressed concern at the slow rate of disP03iti0n.of the public domain. It had reduced the price per acre of the

Public land to a minimum of $1.25 per acre and permitted whole sections
0 ' ‘V1 r -‘ «-1; r r less to be purchased at that price at private sale after the land had

been offered at public sale It had adopted the Pre-—c*:1ption Act of Sep-  

......-o

tember 5: 1351, permitting any person to enter upon

tr;
0
i":
l-Jo
F?‘
U!
U)
A
('3
‘<1
to

before SUTVGY: register a claim within three month.

/

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1:0 183'
purchase up to 160 acres for $1.25 per acre upon shoring actual residence‘
and erection of a dwelling of specified dimensions. When the Outlet land
under valuation was ceded May 6, l8Sh, it had pending before it the

Graduation Act (adopted August b, l8Sh) which reduced the price of public

land from $1.23 per acre to as little as l2—lf2e per acre, depending upon

the number of years such land had remained upon the public market.

The annexation of Texas in l8hS and the Mexican cession of lEh8 had
stimulated overland traffic with the southwest. The discovery of gold in
California during l8h3 had also given added impetus to western migration,
and these emigrant and merchant trails led through the Indian country west
of Iowa and Missouri. It was thought that contact with the traffic along
those trails, with whites about the military posts to guard the routes,
and settlers along them, was detrimental to the welfare of the Indians,
and their removal from Kansas was advocated by the Indian Department.
Frontier settlements had also reached the western limits of Iowa and Missouri
and there was a growing demand for opening the adjacent Indian territory to
settlement. There were in May, l8Sh, from 18 to bh persons per square mile
residing in Missouri in an area extending from a point slightly north of
Fort Leavenworth southward to a point south of'Kansas City, although the
balance of the state was much more sparsely settled. Under these circumstances
Congress had authorized the extinguishment of Indian title in Kansas and
Nebraska and on May 6, 185b, there was pending before it the Kansas—Nebraska
Territorial Bill which was adopted August b, l8Sh. The imminent passage of
this pending legislation and that the government intended negotiatine a

series of treaties (of which the Delaware cession of May 6, l8Sh, was the

first) for the extinguishnent of Indian title within the country adjacent

_._j_..___, ._._ ...—_-—--u———

we shall first consider the evidence of subsequent sales both within
and near the Outlet which petitioner relies upon to establish an l8Sh value
for the Outlet land. The first of these are a series of “trust land”
sales. They involve three tracts, all lying east of the Outlet, each
ceded to the United States in trust for survey and sale at tribal erpense
and for tribal benefit in like manner as sales of the public domain were
held. Included is the tract ceded by the Delaware Indians for that purpose
in theiriiay 6, l8Sh treaty, the Iowa cession of May 17, l8Sh, and the
Kaskaskia, Peoria, Pianaeshaw and'Nea cession of May 30, l8Sh, the latter
being referred to as the Peoria cession. The Delaware tract was divided

Mainto eastern and western divisions. The East Delaware tract and the Iowa
“Ttract bordered on the Missouri river; the Delaware river_bisected the Iowa
tract. The Peoria tract was on the Osage river, which was navigable part
of the year. All three were adjacent to the states of Iowa or Hissouri.
All four tracts had better rainfall, timber coverage and on the whole better
soil than the Outlet according to the Kansas State Board of Agriculture (Pet.
Ex. V-6). The Peoria and Eastern.Delauare tracts each had an important
settlement which were points of origin for the overland routes west and
where there were ready markets for farm produce. All four tracts were
appraised in l8S6 and offered for sale in 1355 or 1337. Appraisal values
for the Eastern Delaware Tract averaged $180 per acre and sales averaged
$2'O9 per acre. Appraisal values of the Kestern Delaware tract averaged

(1: - "J ‘H; 1 0 v .’ s
W1-69 P94 acre and the averaee sale Price was $l.t; oer acre. The I ma

C)

V "1 r- \--F’
8 Ina. OJ... Cora. 15o 189

tract appraised for an average $1.89 per acre and sold for an average $lt?°
per acre. The Peoria tract was appraised for $1.66 per acre and sold for
an average $1.67 per acre.
Generally the references found to these several “trust land” sales

are misleading in that they suggest the appraisal or sale of substantial
acreages whereas the land was both appraised and sold in units of l6O

acres or less, and as such the sales are unrelated in size and shape

to the elongated l0 mile wide Outlet strip-which began at their western

limits and extended for 150 miles westward out into Indian country. ‘He

 

said in Pottawatomie Tribe v; United States, 3 Ind. Clms. Comm. hO, 60:

It is well established that a sale of a large tract

of land as a unit brings far less than when sold in small
tracts.

Furthermore, as quickly as these lands were ceded in trust, settlers who

_were without legal right to do so, who were known as “squatters” and who

included both persons seeking a permanent residence and speculators
interested only in acquiring some apparent right to the land which they

might later transfer at a profit, rushed into the trust areas, so that bye

the time of their sale most of these tracts were claimed by and some were
occupied by such persons. So even the brief time between the valuation

date: {BY 6; 185b, and the dates of these appraisals and sales is of grave
importance. It is true that these bona fide settlers and speculators conspired together and formed associations to hold down the price when the

sales were held, and that letting squatters acquire the land at the appraised
value served to prevent the land selling for what could have been realized

at open competitive sales. Still the very presence of these squatters gave

8 Ind. Cl. Corn. 150 '1

CU

t‘,an air of permancy, of the arrival of settlements, law-and order, which

would in itself contribute to a demand for land in those vicinities.

While it was realized in l8§h that there was a demand for land in
Kansas, the actual size of the influx of uhites in eastern Kansas far
exceeded all anticipation. and a hypothetical purchaser of the Outlet
on May 6, l8Sh, would not have anticipated any such demand for land as
was in existence at the time of these trust land sales. The prices at which
these small units sold must be heavily adjusted to allow for these

conditions. Also the location of the trust tracts were in each instance
preferable to that of the Outlet. _a11 were adjacent to the Missouri, the
main artery of transportation, except the western Delaware tract, and it

was between that river and the Outlet. They'were nearer settled communities

of Iowa and.Missouri and outside the reach of hostile Indian raids. Their

.‘l;_
3* ‘

-__-1.

Qimber coverage was better and their soils were on the whole more productive

.  ‘
"--u'u.‘.‘(..'

than those of the Outlet (Pet. EX. V-6). Again, the small tracts formed
Compact units, vastly different than the elongated 10 mile wide Outlet strip
reaching out into country frequented by hostile Indian tribes.

It aP§ears to the Commission that there is little comparison between
the Outlet sale and the sales of other Indian lands which the petitioner
offers for comparative pziposes. The Christian Indian tract of 2,571 acres

in 3 Compact unit adjacent to the State of Missouri bordered on the Missouri

riv -. v - - H . .3 - .
er, has heavily timbeled, and has within two miles of Fort Leavenworth

I‘

T“}‘:“I:*_ _'_,
* L C a ready market €AlSt€d for farm produce. On 0;

(D

the most important
cm'c~ . , , , .

loiant rOadS to the vest ran thzough it. Its second sale occurred over
Five 39335 after the appraised date, during which time a rapid settlement

-hihansas had taken place,

O-'\

5 lnd. Cl. Com. 150 lb?

Both the lh€ separate Indian allotment sales and the Kansas half-breed
sales were actually separate sales of 160 acres each. They were each of
allotments, and in the absence of any evidence to the contrary, it may be
presumed that as allotments they had been improved to some extent. Unquestionably they were select tracts strategically located and in a settled
community, ehereas in l8§h the Outlet had no settlements upon it and none
near that portion west of the Blue river. The lh8 Indian allotments sold
between 1859 and 1861. This period of time after l8§h encompasses one of
heavy settlement within eastern Kansas, and of an improvement in economic

C0§diti0n3 n0t yet disturbed by the Civil'Uar and the strife between pro

‘and anti-slavery factions in Kansas had been settled. So we find little

comparison between these sales and the Outlet sale of 1834 either in
relation to size, location or time. we have, however, given due consideration to them as well as to the "trust land" sales in arriving at a determination of the May 6, l8Sh value of the Outlet land.

Petitioner also relies upon a showing of sales by the Kansas Pacific
Railway Company and the Central Branch of the Union Pacific Railway Company.
Other than that the sales occurred prior to 1880 and conveyed at least some
land within the Outlet there is no information concerning these_Union Pacific
sales. The'Kansas Pacific tract ran from'Habaumsee, fansas, up the valleys
of the Kansas and Smoky'Hill rivers. The company offered l,OOO,COO acres

lying east of Ellsworth,'Kansas, in 1869 and sold 38h,l8S acres that year.

‘These were sales of valley land made 15 years after the appraisal date and

8 Fears after Kansas became a part of the Union, when there existed the
added advantages of established government, educational facilities, and
settled communities with roads, schools, churches. law and order. Ev the

f 9

Very nature of the railroad grants every acre was within 20 miles of the

track of an operating railroad with settlements at reasonably clese distances

"5

along its route. Only a fourth were cash sales and the average price was
but $2.62. ‘Whether the sales included tounsites, the acreages involved in
the separate sales, the terms and conditions of the credit sales, the
percentages of defaults, if "55, and whether there were other considerations
entering into the transactions, such as free transportation to the site of
the purchased tract, as was frequently offered during their construction
period by railroad companies eager to increase their traffic load by
populating the country along their routes, are all proper elements for
consideration in assessing the comparative value of these railroad sales

and these are matters on which the record is not enlightening. However,

the element of time alone covering that strategic period when eastern.Kansas

was converted from an Indian country to a settled civilised state, is such

"rjihat these sales must be heavily adjusted in their relation to the l8Sh

fair market value of the Outlet tract.

Petitioner has presented quite detailed information respecting the
manner and rate of disposition by the government of the Outlet land“ It
has extracted from the original plat book the acreages and rate of disposal
by homestead, timber culture and pre—emption claims, grants to the state for
internal improvements, to railroads in aid of constructing transportation
1in93: and of sales occurring up to and including l909 within all of the
whole Townships 6 South within the Outleto The Commission has found such
data of material assistance in assessing the strength of the demand for land
in and about the Outlet as of the valuation date, and in determining the

ittractiveness of that land to the early iansas settlersc Sales occurring

H ' R -v I
20 t0 D0 and more years af*er tne valuation date are, however, of little

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 150

use-for comparative purposes, particularly where there has been such an
advance in settlement as is reflected here.

All of the Outlet tract was open to pre-emption after July 22, l85b.
Entry could be made before or after survey and payment of the price was
not required until such time as the land entered upon was offered for
public sale. Nevertheless at no time were there any pre~emption claims
within Ranges 1 to 10 West, inclusive. with the exception of one such
claim filed in Range 13 East during 1855 and one in Range lb East during '
1857, there were no pre-emptionb predating 1858, or for four years after
the land became available for acquisition in this manner. In Ranges 5,

7, 11 and 12, the first such filings occurred during 1858, and the first
filings in Ranges 1, 2, 6, 8, 9 and 10 were made during 1859. Range 3
East had no pre-emption filing until 1872.

Within the first five years after the Homestead Act made this_1and
available for mere filing fees and a 5-year residence period, and between
8 and 13 years after the valuation date, only 11,768.91 acres in the whole
Townships 6 South within the Outlet were filed upon. On the basis of the
Townships 6 South representing 60% of the Outlet it appears that the demand
for free homesteads within the Outlet absorbed only l/5th of the tract, even
as much as 13 years after the valuation date. An examination of the sales record discloses that the first sale within
whole Townships 6 South in the Outlet occurred in Range lh East during 1857.
First sales occurred in four other East ranges during 1858 and in eight
others during 1859. There were no sales in the west ranges until 1857, and

only 3.68 acres were sold that year. One 160 acre sale occurred in each

:ii._'- _«_I._’: 't‘,r,'+_!bl';“

:: " 3 5rd E ’ in J‘5~ and an 8.5? ,-*t Sui cc. _ncd in dru"e 3 r at
':Ji‘ In iii‘. 15 5: “s :31’: th: ral.atioh cute‘ ire first 5 ‘C
o:~.Cu_.:*3‘-.'-"7 in ‘t.h"‘ o'=L.‘r:<r;r' ve:':i= rs r2;v'e=~, I'*:‘> (,1 ‘Hr :1 ‘rm: r s: ,3" ~‘u,ur-, em

' * r ‘L: "> “ ' " " '. " " ‘ —“ '“--*
.:3c~ in sizt. t. -n.e:n rears .;ter ab- ta3.:t:oL éax- in lE?3 Ranc=s

to the recited :on»

O ‘ I -u ;
wrio account that vari

....4. J L‘

may iave been paid for
with scrip obtainable at less than its iaee val.e.
Even the most casual examination oi the record discloses that pe im
tioner's requested 185$ value of $1.25 per acre for land selling for
$1.25 per acre as much as l? years later is not justified. We think the
pre—emption, homestead and sales data cleariy 'ndicate that the 1854 de~
mand for land in Kansas was not sufficiently strong to reach 35 miles into
the interior to the Outlet land. An intelligent prospective purchaser would
certainly have investigated the extent of that demand. He would have
acquainted himself with the fact that a belt of land some 35 miles in width
extended north and south along the eastern border of Kansas between the
Outlet tract and the settled states of Iowa and Missouri, and that the
government's announced policy of extinguishing Indian title and opening
Kansas land to settlement could be expected to bring this strip into the
market in the immediate future in competiton to the Outlet land. He

would have considered, we think, that land lying nearer to established

states and developed areas, river transportation and overland routes.

would prove more attractive than a narrow strip extending out into undeveloped

country. The evidence discloses that Indian raids occurred in l86h and as
late as l8?O in Clay, Cloud, Mitchell and Osbourne counties, and any informed
prospective purchaser in lBSh would surely have considered that settlement
within or even surveying the Outlet land west of the Republican river was
fraught with peril, and would probably have concluded that the hostility

of the Indians effectively precluded for many years to come the successful

resale of that portion of the Outlet tract;

A prospective and informed person contemplating the purchase of the
Outlet strip would have been aware that the pending Graduation Act would
affect thousands of acres of the public domain which, although not attractive
at $1.25 per acre, would become highly competitive with the Outlet land
at the proposed reduced prices going as low as 12% cents per acre. He
would have ascertained upon making an investigation of this matter that
over 13,850,000 acres of public land subject to reduction laid within the
adjacent state of Missouri. we think in considering the competitive value
of the public domain he would also have taken into consideration the fact
that military-bounty warrants were obtainable upon the eastern markets
for less than face value, and by using such rarrants or scrip the statutory"
price of the public domain would be accordingly reduced. A

To advantageously resell the Outlet land it was clearly necessary
that it be surveyed and platted.’ To make the whole tract accessible at
least one lSO-mile road needed to be constructed within it with bridging

across three rivers. It was apparent from federal experience that a land

donation would probably be necessary to attract railroads to service the

3 Ind. Cl. Con. 15? 192

.tract, that otner land contributions world be necessary for schools, churches
and other civic purposes; that a promotional and sales program must be set

up and sales facilities maintained until the tract was disposed of. A
prospective developer of the tract would have also taken into consideration
the item of taxes which became assessible against the land upon it passing
into private ownership and that by raaso; of its l§O mile length the land
could be expected to fall within 5 counties, with the attendant expense

of contributing to the organiza ional expense and maintenance of 5 separate
°0uRtY Systems.i An examination into the economic conditions prevailing in
l8§h would have sh an the country in a general recession, and that interest

at from 8% to lO% could be anticiprted upon any financing necessary, partiu

cularly since the elongated shape of the Outlet placed much of the land far

out in unsettled territory, and its width made the development of its
“E =g
egwestern portion particularly dependent upon the development of the land

adjoining it, over which a prospective purchaser of the Outlet would have

no control. Taking all the elements peculiar to this tract into consideration,
we think it is apparent its development was attendant with more than the

usual risk and that a prospective purchaser in 1552 uould never have con»
sidered willingly paying the $1.25 per acre for this tract which petitioner
contends was its fair market value, "We think, however, that he could have,

and would have concluded that he could, aiford to pay more than the values
Placed upon this land by the defendant's appraisers, and still realize the
fair amount of profit to which he was €4El§19Qa

‘IT 1» '1' 1 f 1 -. . . .
«G haae studies hr. hali‘s report and the i€SElEOBv_g1V€n by him and

Dr‘ iurral. Much of the factual information reflected in our Findings of

8 Ind. Cl. Com. l50. 193

Fact this day entered of record was resented by them. In arriving at an
overall valuation each considered the Outlet as falling within three
classifications. ‘We are of the opinion that it more readily falls into
three slightly different groupings, that is, approximately S99,0h0 acres
of agricultural land west of the Republican river, two tracts_of grazing

land, one on each side of the Blue river valley, and containing in all‘

‘about 170,000 acres, and the remainder of about 190,960 acres of agricultural land east of the Republican river. Taking into consideration

all of the elements referred to hereinabove and the facts found to exist
as reflected in our Findings, together with the entire record before us,
we believe that the fair market value of the Outlet tract on May 6, l8§h,
is more accurately expressed by assigning to the approximate §99,0h0 acres
lyingywest of the Republican river the value of 50 cents per acre, the
V§}u€ Of 75 cents per acre to the two tracts of grazing land lying on

each side of the valley of the Blue river and containing approximately

,l70,000 acres, and the value of $1.00 per acre to the remaining approximate 190,960 acres comprising the Outlet tract, this making a total value

as of‘May 6, 185b, of $617,980, or an average of slightly in excess of

‘6h cents per acre.

Having determined the fair market value of the Outlet tract as of
May'6, 185b, it remins'to-be determined whe*her the consideration
passing to petitioner was adequate in the light of Section 2 of the Indian
Claims Commission Act of l9h6 (60 Stat. l0h9). Article 3 of the treaty

of May 6, 185k, (10 Stat. l0hB) reads in part:

,.u.- v..

The United States eon”? *: 2 V to the 3:1" "re tribe of
Indians the son of ten thonsari dollars; no in con-:o;ra—
tion thereof, the Delaware tr’te of Indiars hsrehr ceoe,
release, and quit-clair to the Cnztci States, to“ said
tract of country hereinhefore described as the ‘Cutleto’

. . - . -.,_ --v’r ‘
Actually, this was the Ely tract purchased o -ne United States
J 9- ‘I _ r‘ "'- ‘__ . _ ~ w E -7 .--3 ‘J '_ C‘ q
under this treatye the ?€KilRQCT of tee lens co1»~ Ge 10 lv P15~1n8 in

;*nense and for tribal

*, lo

0'

50

E ‘I
'\

trust for the purpose of survev and sale at trbenefit. So the Consideration for the On let tract was (10,003, aCCOTd1n8
to the treaty.

The payment of but tlO,CO3 for a tract worth 35175980 was 50 grossly

inadequate, in the Opinion of this Commission, as :5 constitute an un—

conscionable consideration wiohin the aeaning 07 the l9h5 Acts (SEPF3):
and the petitioner is entitled to recover the difference between that Sum
and the fair market value less such offsets and credits as the defendant
Léay hereafter show itself entitled to have applied thereto. The Commission has so found, and this docket will now be advanced for the determination of such offsets and credits as may be properly allowed the

defendant.

 
 

 

 

arthrr V; hatkins
s

 

'*Q1.4.fj—‘ . ~-:¢-jg-_

-‘..:... ." -...—..-‘3 ‘‘
As o lace donnlssioner

