BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE SNOHOMISH TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Petitioner,

V0 Docket Noe 125

THE UNITED STAEES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.
Decided: November 21, 1956

FINDINGS 95 EACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

10 The Snohomish Tribe of Indians, petitioner herein, is an
identifiable group of American Indians within the meaning of the Indian
Claims Commission Act of August 13, l9h6 (60 Stat. lOh9; 25 U. S. Code
Sec. ?O(a§), and as such is entitled to maintain this cause of actione

2; Petitioner claims that it had exclusive aboriginal use and
cccupancy of the following described territory within the area ceded to
the United States in.the Point Elliott Treaty of January 22, 185$, 12

tat. 927, 11 Kepp. 669; (Pet. Reg. Fdg. h);

Commencing at the Town of Richmond Beach; thence north»
eastward to Crescent Lake; thence eastward to High Rock
Mountain; thence due north to Lake Champlain; thence north»
eastward_to Echo Lake; thence southeastward to Public Camp;
thence northeastward to»Gilbert Creek; thence ndrthwestward
to Pilchuck Mountain; thence to Granite Falls; thence along
the Granite Falls-Arlington Highway to its intersection with
the Seattle Skagit Power Line; thence west to Lakewood; thence

_ northwestnard to the shore of Puget Sound one mile north of
Birmingham; thence nor'thn'es’t*;«:ard to Point Demock; theme dorm

. - a-.u;: 1;

the center of Saratoga Passage to Greenbank Experimental

Farm; thence south along the west shore of'Whidby Island

to Richmond Beach, the place of beginning. (See Pet.

Exhibits 7 and 8).

3. The Indians who lived along the Snohomish River in the State
of Washington and on southern'Whidby Island opposite the mouth of the
Snohomish River have long been called Snohomish Indians. Perhaps the
first account of the natives in this area came from the Vancouver
explorations in 1792. In June of that year, Whidby, one of Vancouver's
officers, was sent to chart the region of Possession Sound and Saratoga
Passage. He mentioned Indian settlements on the southeastern side of
I-Ihidby Island and on the mainland opposite the island. At the latter
place,'Whidby'counted a hundred natives with some ho wool—bearing dogs.
A little further to the north, in Possession Sound or at the mouth of
Port Susan, he encountered a hundred more Indians in canoes, carrying
‘most of their belongings, including mats for the construction of
temporary houses. According to defendant’s expert witness, Carroll 8.
Riley,'Whidby was probably contacting Snohcnish or Stillaguamish
Indians who were moving from winter settlements to berrying, fishing,
or clamming grounds as part of a seasonal round. (Def. Ex. 1, page
II-1).

h. In l8hl, a.missionary, Blanchet, mentioned a Snohomish chief,
witskalatche. According to Riley, the group with this chief “either

lived at, or were camped near enough to, Penn Cove (?) [Whidby Islan§7

to attend Blanchet's missionary services on rather short notice."

h 550

..  .._.,'
>.'.:*¢f‘r..“:. ‘

Duflot de Mofras (Travels, Vol. 2, page ITS), 18hO»l8h2, wrote that the

Sinahoumez (Snohomish) consisted of "12 tribes" with territory extending
from Frazier River to Puget Sound with a population of 2500. Harley
(Statistics of Oregon) wrote in l8h9 that the Snohomish lived "on the
Sinahemish River (falling into Possession Sound) and.the southern
extremity of‘Whidby's Island. Males, 95; females, 98; children under

12 years, 110; slaves, 30; total 333." In l8h9, Superintendent of Indian
Affairs for Oregon Territory reported the Snohomish Indians as "living

on.a.river of that name, and southern extremity of'Whidby‘s Island; total

number about 330; friendly and well disposed; live by labor and fishing." S

(Def. Ex. 1, pp, :n:t»2, 11-3). Indian Agent Starling for the district of
Puget Sound in l8§2 reported the "Sah-ma-mish" to be located in the
country bordering on a lake between the “Neeuwam-ish” and Snohomish
rivers; that the Snohomish tribe was on the south end of "Whitney”s“
Island, Snohonish.river, bay and vicinity and numbered about 250; that
the “Skea~na~mish" tribe was on the north fork of the Snchonish.river
called the "Skea-ea-mish" river; that the "Skuckastanua-jumps" tribe
was on a river of that name, a branch of the "Skeaawa~mish” river and
the supposed population was 100; that the “Snoegual=asmuke" tribe was
on.the south fbrktof the Snohomish river called “Sno-gualua-muke” river
and number about 225 and that the Ska-git tribe was located on the north
end of ”Whitney”s Island, Skagit river and vicinity."

5. Governor Isaac I. Stevens of the Territory of Washington, relgm

ing upon a report by George Gibbs (Def. Ex. 8) who has since become noted ‘

U‘!

' Sound:

for his Indian writings, reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairss

in 185k that:

The southern end of Whitby’s island and the country on
and near the mouth of the Sin-a—ho-mish.river belong to the
Sin-a-ho-mish tribe. These number, including the bands
connected'wiU1tdnnn a little over three hundred. Their
qhief is S'Hoot-soot, an old.man who resides chiefly at

Skagitshead.

Above them, and.upon the main branch of the river, is
another band, not under the same rule, the Sno—qual-moos,
amounting to about two hundred souls. Their chief Patmka-nam,

\I ‘I

has rather an evil celebrity among the whites, w w

'33‘.

-’.(--’.£-2The tribes living upon the eastern shore possess also
territory upon the islands, and their usual custom is to
resort to them at the end of the salmon season; that is,
about the end of November. It is there that they find the
greatest supply of shell-fish, which form a large part of
their water stock, and which they dry both for their own
use and for sale to those of the interior. The summer andp

fall they spend on the main, where they get fish and put in
their potatoes. (Pet. Ex. l0, pp. l3~lh).

In 1853, Governor Stevens urged upon the Government the necessity of
pmaking treaties with the Indian'tribes west of the Cascade Mountains.
These tribes, he estimated, as some forty in number and stated that
they lived on the different water courses or bays and inlets of the
He further reported "They have all . . . . a few spots . . .
which . . . . are not only permanent places of residence, but, are

hereditary. Near them are the graves of their relatives and friends

'X--’.{..‘!.
A

. Those are their homes, and from them they roam about the
Sound in every direction, going where the fish roots and berries
abound most at the different seasons of the year." Stevens recommended

that thorough consideration should be given to establishing reservations

h 5"

)1’

for the different tribes in their own territory and joining as many of
the tribes as possible under one head. Governor Stevens, in March
l8Sh, informed Agent Simmons of his appointment as special Indian Agent
for the District of Puget Sound. The Governor instructed Simmons to
visit the various tribes in his district to prepare them for future
negotiations. Simmons was told to organize "the small bands, not at
present united, by gathering them into tribes, and by procuring the
selection of head.chiefs and of assistant or lesser tyees.“ (Pet. Ex.
10, pp. 27-28) .

6. Congress by Act of June 5, l85O (9 Stat. H37) had authorized
the negotiation of treaties with the Indian tribes in the Territory of
Oregon (of'nhich Washington Territory was then a part thereof) for the
extinguishment of their claims to lands lying west of the Cascade Mounu
tains. On August 30, l8Sh, the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs
instructed Governor Stevens who was also Superintendent of Indian
Affairs for‘Washington Territory, that funds had been appropriated by
Congress for the expenses of negotiating treaties with Indian tribes in
that territory. Stevens was directed to attempt to unite the numerous
bands, and fragments of tribes into tribes and to provide for the conn
centration of one or more of such tribes upon the reservations which
might be set apart for their future homes. Governor Stevens commenced
negotiating treaties within the territory. In December l8Sh, he reported
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that the next treaty he intended
to hold.would'be at the mouth of the Sno-ho-mish river where he would

bring together the Indians of the islands and the eastern.shore of

Puget Sound. "These tribes," Stevens Said, "have a population of 2223,

own h2S canoes and.raise 6,h00 bushels of potatoes." Stevens said he
would attempt to establish these Indians on a single reservation near
the mouth of the Snohomish river. (Def. Ex. No. 127).

7. On January 22, 1853, Governor Stevens entered into a treaty
with the chiefs, head-men and delegates of the Dwamish, Suquamish,
Sk-tahl~mish, Sam-ahmish, Smalkakamish, Skope-ahmish, St-kah-mish,
Snoqualmoo, Skaiawha-mish,&h'Quentl-ma-mieh, Sk+tah—le-jum, Stolucka
wha-mish, Sno-ho-mish, Skagit, Kik-i-allus, Swin-a-mish,‘ Squin-ah-mish,
Sah-ku-mehu, Noo-wha—ha, Nook+wa—clah-mish, Moe-see-qua-guilch, Cho-bahah—bish, and other allied and subordinate tribes and bands of Indians.

By Article 1 of the treaty, these Indians ceded certain described lands

within the Territory of Washington within which larger area were con-tained the lands now claimed to have been within the exclusive use and

occupancy of petitioner. Certain reservations were provided for in the

treaty including the following:

Article 3. There is also reserved % % * thirty-six
sections, or one township of land, on the northeastern shore
of Port Gardner, and north of the mouth of Snohomish River,
including Tulalip Bay and the before—mentioned Kwilt-seh-da
Creek, for the purpose of establishing thereon an agricultural
and industrial school, as hereinafter mentioned and agreed,
and with a view of ultimately drawing thereto and settling
thereon all the Indians living west of the Cascade Mountains
in said Territory;

By Article 6 of said treaty, the United States agreed in consideration _
of the cession to pay to the tribes and bands the sum of $150,000 which
sum.was to be expended over a twenty-year period under the direction

of the President of the United States who was given the discretion to

11 5'53:

 

determine for what beneficial objects to expend the samea The United
States further agreed to spend $15,000 for the removal and settlement
of the Indians upon the reservations (Article 13) and to establish and
support for 20 years an agricultural and industrial school, to provide
instructors and to furnish other aid, such as physician, carpenter,
farmer, and.blacksmith (Article 1h). The treaty, according to Article

l5, was to be obligatory on the contracting parties “as soon as the

same shall be ratified by the President and Senate of the United States."

The treaty'was ratified March 8, 1859, which is therefore the effective
date of the treaty (Bush V. United States, 29 C. Clsa lhh), and proe
claimed on April ll, l859l(l2 State 927, ll Kapp. 669)o The treaty
(Def. EKG st) is commonly known as the Point Elliott Treatyo The area
ceded by said tribes and bands is shown as Tract 3h? and the reserved
areas as Tract Nos. 3h8, 3&9, 350 and 351 on.Royce“s Map of the State
lof'Washington. The Skai-whammish named as parties to the treaty are

the Skykomish; the N'Quentl»ma—mish are the Knehtlmmammish or Pilchnck
River Indians; the Sketah-leujum are the Stkatamledmjedc or Sultan Creek
Indians and the Stoluckywha-mish are the Stillaquamish Indians.

8. At some tim following the execution and ratification of the

Point Elliott treaty of 1855, the Tulalip aeeervatioa—tae established

as required under the provisions of said treaty. In 1876, the Tulalip

Agency'reported.900 Snohomish Indians under its juriediotiono Edmond

Mallet, agent at the Tulalip agency reported to the Commissioner of

0 Indian_Affars in l877, as follows:

The S'do-ho-bish (Snohomish) tribe with its subordinate
tribes, viz. Sto-lo—qua—busk, Nugh—kwetle-babish, Sdo-doho-bish, and.Stak-ta-le-jabsh; the Sdo-qual-bush with its
subordinate tribes, viz. Sulet—damsh and.Stak-tabsh were
assigned to the Tulalip Reservation.
The Annual Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the year
1877 reports fbr the Tulalip Agency "Snohomish, Snoqualmoo, Skaiwhamish
. . . . . 2,900." The 1890 report lists the "Tulalip (Snohomish)" as
hh3 persons. Hodge in "Handbook of American Indians," B.A.E. 30, part 2,
p. 606 (1910) states the remnant of the Snohomish tribe was on the

Tulalip Reservation, mixed with other broken trites. (Pet. Ex. 10).‘

9. Ethnological sources are important in locating the Snohomish.
Upchurch, in his "Swinomish People" published in the Pacific Northwest
Quarterly, states that the Skagit Indians occupied Ehidby Island from
Dugula Bay south to Holmes Harbor where they met the Snohomish. The
Kikiallis, he wrote, occupied the northern end of Camano Island to the
village of Camano where they met the énohomish (Def. Ex. 6 a).
Marian‘W. Smith, in "The Coast Salish of Puget Sound" (19L1) has a
section devoted to Tribal and Village Distribution. Under the heading

the author states that "for the sake of convenience I have described

extended villages as single territorial units; in these cases it must
be understood that each of the villages listed had its own section of

territory. The position of the village indicates the section of the

drainage system of which it made particular use, this section being
regularly upriver from the village site and on the neighboring banks

of bays, lakes, etc." The following location for the Snohomish extended

up 555

villages are listed by Miss Smith: (A) Skwilsidabo: from.Preston Point,

above Everett, to southern tip of Camano Island with village sites at
Marysville at the mouth of Kwilcedar Creek and opposite Tulalip on Tulalip Bay; (B) Snohomish or Sadahobc: Port Gardner Bay and Snohomish

River as far up as Snohomish with village sites at Everett on the south

side of the mouth of the Snohomish River and on the north side of the

mouth of the same river; (C) sdugwadsxabo: on the southern portion of

'Whidhy Island with villages opposite Mukilteo on Whidhg Island and at
Nowell on Useless Bay; (D) tgwettbabc: Snohomish.Rirer from Snohomish
to Monroe with village sites at Snohomish at the mouth of Pilchuck Creek

and another below Monroe two miles from the confluence of the Skykomish

and the Snoqualmie (Def. Ex. 12). Miss Smith, in her work "The Puyallupu

Nisqually” (l9hO) gives four villages for the Snohomish: (1) sadahoho H
at Everett at the mouth of the Snohomish River; (2) skwilsidiabc u at
Marysvilleg (3) tgwetlbabc - at Snohomish City; and (h) staktaledjabo m
a village above Monroe (Def. Ex. 1 a).

10, In “The Indians of Puget Sound" (1030) by Haeberlin and Gunther

it is stated.that the Snohomish had tour principal villages: one on the

shore of the Sound, four miles south of Tulalipg another, the largest,
at Priest Point; a third on the southern point of'Whidby Island; and one
at Sandy Point, opposite Tulalip. These ethnologists also found that for

hunting and fishing they roamed through the territory to the east of

these villages and that “tangible evidence of their occupation of the

Snohomish River valley exists at Ebey‘s Slough on the westernmost branch .

of the Snohomish River about two miles from Maryville.“ The authors

h

U1

stated that the Snohomish did not hunt deer and elk but bought the
dressed skins from the Snoqualmie as they did mountain goat wool.
"In summer,“ Haeberlin and.Gunther wrote, "the Snohomish left their
large winter houses to go hunting and fishing. They did not leave their
own lands, unless they had friends or relatives elsewhere. Although
there were no sharp dividing lines between the territory of neighboring
tribes, it was taken for granted that a person straying too far into the
country of another tribe was looking for trouble." (Def. Ex. 96).
11. A paper (Def. Ex. 21) published by M. Bells, who had lived
among the Indians of the Sound, in Vol. IX, “The American Antiquarian"
(1887) locates the Snohomish “south of the Stillaguamish river to the
Snohomish river and on both sides of it and its branches." Eells reported
that the Indians spoke of four bands, one lived on the southern part of
'Whidby Island; another on the Snohomish proper whose home was near the
mouth of the river; the “Ske-hwa-mish“ on the north fork of the Snohomish
river (Skykomish river); and the Snoqualmie, who lived on the southern
branch of the Snohomish river (the Snoqualmie river). George Gibbs, who
exp1ored.the Sound.country and became intimate with the composition and
characteristics of the Sound Indians wrote in 1856 (not published until
1377 in "Contributions to North American Ethnology," Vol. I, Department
of the Interior) that the Snohomish, with whom he included the Snokwahlmu,
Slclx-zhaxnish [sky1<om5.s_r_17 Sktah-le-jum, Kwehtl-ma-mish, and Stolutswhamish
[§ti11agua.mis1_17, lived on the Snohomish and Stolutswhamish Rivers. "The

Snohomish tribe itself,“ Gibbs said, "occupies only the country at its

1; 558

mouth and.the lower end of'Whidbey Island; the upper part of the river
belonging to the Snokwalmu, etc. They number hhl souls, and the other

bands, collectively, 556. At the time of the treaty they were all placed

under Patkanam, the chief of the latter." (Def. Ex. h a).

12. Edward S. Curtis in "The North American Indian," Vol. 9, (1913)

wrote as follows: (Def. Ex. h2)

Sdohobsh (Snohomish), the valley of Snohomish river, the
mainland coast between a point a little north of Edmonds,
‘Washington, and the northern line of Tulalip Reservation,
and the south half of Camano island and of Whidbey island,
extending up the west coast of the latter as far as Mutiny
bay. In the winter the Snohomish assembled in three prinu
cipal villages: Hibolub, near the site of Everett,'Washing«
ton; Chtalaks, "Rocky Point," on Priest Point opposite the
site of Everett; and Digwadsh, on the sandpit at the southm
ern end of'Whidbey island extending into Cultus bay.

Dr. Leslie Spier in his "Tribal Distribution in Washington“ (1936) based
upon a.consideration of all available historical and ethnological data

pertaining to the Snohomish, states: (Def. Ex. 3 a)

While Gibbs, and Eells in palpable imitation; include
Snuqualmi and Skykomish, together with some less wellmknown
groups, with the Snohomish, there is good reason for separating
at least these three. % % % Zspier then.quotes from Gibbs u

"see Finding 1;]. Elsewhere Gibbs writes that the Snuqualmi
are quite separate.t

-Ia." 7.
:1:

% % % On the mainland this [territory of Snohomish defined,
by Curtis - see abov§7 overlaps with the territory of the
Suquamish as defined by Haeberlin and Gunther. Curtis releu
gates the Suquamish wholly to the islands and western shore
of the sound.

“The Duwgwads-habsh, who lived on the southern.part of

‘Whidbey‘s,“ are named by Eells as a band coordinate with‘the
Snohomish proper, whose home was near the mouth of that name.”

An unidentifiable group of Gibbs‘ mentioned above, Kwehtlm
maemish, appears in Mallet's roster of “subordinate” tribes of
the Snohomish in the form Nugh-kwetleubabish.

h S60

Spier's map of'washington tribes locates the Snohomish on the Snohomish
river to the junction with the Snoqualmie and.Skykomish rivers, and on
the southern.part of both'Whidby and Camano Islands. Of the southern
boundary of the Snohomish, Spier wrote as follows:

The Suquamish occupation of the east side of the sound
appars only in the statement of Haeberlin and Gunther:
"The Suquamish (Sukiwa-bc), according to one informant.
lived south of Everett, about Mukilteo, and on the islands
opposite; another claims that they lived only on the islands,
west of Seattle and not around.Mukilteo." I have modified
Gunther’s map in the direction of Mukilteo to suit the
description. Their territory is made to take in part of

‘Whidby Island in a statement Zharley, in Schoolcraft, Information, V, TQQ7: "They occupy the country about Port Orchard

and neighborhood, and the west side of Whitby's Island."
The Kwehtlmanish, mentioned in Spier‘s pamphlet, were, according to Hodge
(Handbook of American Indians, 3.3.3. 38, Part II, p. Th?) a S'1ish division
on the upper branches of the Snohomish River “now officially included under
the Snohomish on Tulalip reservation" and numbered 66 in l870.

13. The Snohomish, according to Hodge (B.A.E. 30, Part II, p. 606),
‘was a Salish tribe ibrmerly on the south end of'Whidby Island and on the

mainland opposite said island at the mouth of the Snohomish river. "The

remnant," Hodge reported, "is now in Tulalip res., Wash., mixed with

- other broken tribes." John R. Swanton, "The Indian Tribes'of North

America," (B.A.E. 1L5), published in 1952, locates the Snohomish on the
lower course of the Snohomish river and on the southern end of Whidby
Island. This ethnologist lists four subdivisions for the Snohomish:
(1) on the south portion of'Ehidby island with two villages; (2) from
Preston Point above Everett, to the southern tip of Camano Island with

a village at harysvillc and at Tulalip Pay; (3) a subdivision at Port

Gardner Bay and on the Snohomish river as far up as Snohomish, inn
cluding two villages at the mouth of the river; and (h) a subdivision
on the Snohomish river from_Snohomish to Monroe, including villages
at Snohomish at the mouth of Pilchuck Creek and below Monroe two miles
from the confluence of the Skykomish and the Snoqualmie. Swanton ihw
cludes the Skykomish Indians as a subdivision of the Snoqualmie and also
the Staktaledjabsh, who resided on the Skykomish river as far up as
Sultan, including Sultan Creek, as a subdivision of the Snoqualmieo

11;.

appear to have been largely autonomous in a political sense, which was the

In 1855; and in aboriginal times, each of the Snohomish villages

type of political organization then found among the Indians throughout
the Puget Sound area. Each village was made up of a number of families
and had a chief or leader called a Tyee, Seab, or Seam, but there was
no strong central organization or chief with complete authority in a
political sense over all the Snohomish villages. Between the villages
there were, however, ties of kinship, their village areas were more or
less contiguous, and.they shared a common culture and dialect of the
Salish language different from that of adjacent village groups and con»
sidered.themselves a distinct group and were so considered by defendant
and the neighboring groups. It was also largely on account of their
characteristics, as well as the Government‘s policy in effect in l8Sh
of regarding and designating such village groups as the Snohomish as

tribes, that subsequent to 1855 the Indians living in villages on the

southern end of Whidby Island.and on and near the mouth of the Snohomish

u 56:

)4 562

River were known and designated by Government officials, and others, as

 

the Snohomish Tribe (Pet. Req. Fds. 9; see The Nooksack Tribe v. The

United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. L79, h83; The Muckleshoot Tribe V. The

     

United States, 3 Ind. C1. Comm. 658, 662, 672—67h).

15. This Commission has previously found that throughout the whole
of the Puget Sound area, including the area claimed.herein, the economy
of the aboriginal occupants was centered on the bays and rivers; that
such use as was made of the area away from the immediate vicinity of the
village was seasonal and the seasonal uses were confined as far as
possible to the closest area; that hunting excursions were infrequent;
that there was customary non—exclusive use pattern of lands away from
the villages and the streams adjacent thereto; that the Indians of the
Sound area had no conception of land boundaries as such but did have a
well defined sense of “use area" with reference to the fishing and berrying places and the area in the immediate vicinity of their villages and
that this feeling of exclusive “use area" did not extend beyond the
immediate area of the village; and finally, that non—village areas were
open to all who cared to use them. (The Euckleshoot Tribe of Indians V.

1uh;u— Zj

E§§_United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 658, 663-666, Fdgs. 12-21, incl.).

16. The Commission finds that petitioner is the successor in interest
to the extended village groups which used and occupied contiguous territory
on and near the Snohomish River in the State of'Washington and that these
village groups which have become amalgamated since the Point Elliott treaty
were the Sdohobc (Snohonish proper) on and near the mouth of the Snohomish_

River and on the southern end of Whidb Island° the Sdocohotc (from
Y 9

Snohomish City to Monroe); and the N'Qentl-maamish (Knehtl-maumish on
the Pilchuck River) .

.l?o The Commission, based on all the evidence of record and.the
above findings of fact, finds that petitioner has substantially proven

aboriginl Indian title to the lands on that part of the southern end

\ of'Whidby Island lying south of a line drawn between Sandy Point on the

east side and Bush Point on the west side of said island; also, to the
lands on that part of Camano Island lying south of a due east line from
Camano City (see Map, Claimant’s Ex. 7); also, to the lands on Gedney
(Hat) Igland; and to those lands on the mainland commencing at Mukilteo;
thence north along the coast line to‘Warm Beach, thence east to the City
of Granite Falls, thene in a southwesterly direction to the mouth of the
Pilchuck:River where it empties into the Snohomish River, thence in a
southeasterly direction up the Snohomish River to Monroe and thence in
a northwestwardly direction to the place of beginning at Mukilteoo

18¢ Any rights which the petitioner or their ancestors may have
retained or acquired.to any lands within the boundaries as set forth in
Finding l7, may be made the subject of inquiry at the further hearing
respecting the consideration paid to petitioner or petitioner's pres
deoessors in interest and the value of said lands as of the effective date of

the treaty, March 8, l8S9.

Edgar Eo‘Witt
§hiefi5ommissioner

Louis J. O’Marr
Associate Corm3 sioner

 

Rm 0 M O Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

