8 Ind. Cl. Comm.6h8

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

PAWNEE INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA,
consisting of the four confederated bands of Pawnee Indians,
namely: Chauior Grand Pawnee,
Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee,

Pitahauerat or Tappage Pawnee,
and Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pawnee,

Claimant,

v. Docket No. 10

UNITED STATES ,

\-d'\—/\—/\uW\u-/N-/\-/\-J\—/‘\-/K./\-/\../\-/\_l

Defendant.

Decided: June 14, 1960

Appearances:

John.W. Wheeler, John Wheeler, Jr.,
and Robert L. Wheeler,
Attorneys for Claimant.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
NI. .ASSiSt_§1'1t _{*.ttorney.gene1-31,
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION QE Egg COHHISSION
Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
This case is now before the Commission for a determination of:
(1) The acreage of the tract of land referred to as the Claims I
and 11 area, the value thereof as of October 9, 1833, the value of the

consideration for the cession to the United States, and the amount constituting the United States’ payment on the claim.

718

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6l;$- 719

(2) The value of the tract referred to as the Claim III area as
of August 6, l848, and the amount of the consideration paid.

(3) The acreage of the tract described as the Claim IV area, the
value thereof as of September 24, 1857, the value of the consideration
for the cession to the United States, and the amount constituting the
United States’ payment on the claim.

(4) The value of the 4800 acres included in the Claim V area as

-of 1875.

Claims I and II Area

,The Commission has hereinbefore determined that petitioner held
the area referred to as the Claims I and II area (as described in Finding
of Fact No. 30) under original Indian title and that this tract was ceded
by the petitioner tribe to the United States by the Treaty of October 9,
1833. By a stipulation, filed with this Commission on October 20, 1958,
the parties have agreed that the Claims I and II area contains 13,074,000
acres, which area is to be valued as of October 9, 1833.

Based upon all the evidence of record, as well as an examination
of other pertinent documents, the Commission has entered detailed findings
of fact concerning the various’ factors considered in arriving at an
ultimate determination of value. As detailed in those findings of fact

the Commission has found that the Claims I and II area was located in

‘:south-central Nebraska and north-central Kansas with the Platte River
in Nebraska forming the northern boundary and the east boundary located

about 50 miles west of the Missouri River. The tract is roughly rectangular

extending about 200 miles from east to west and about 90 miles from north

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 6&8 720

to south. A total of 8,568,400 acres comes within the present State
of Nebraska while the remaining 4,505,600 acres are in the present
State of Kansas.

The eastern section of the tract is composed of undulating to
gently rolling upland. The central area is generally a level plains
region while the western portion is characterized by rough, broken lands.
The area is watered by the Platte, the Republican, the Solomon, Big

,Blue, and Little Blue rivers. The average rainfall within the area is
generally favorable for crop production except that the area, especially
the western portion, is subject to periods of drought with hot, dry winds
causing serious and extensive damage to crops. The temperature during
,the growing season is very favorable to crop growth.

There was no timber of any commercial value within the tract although there were scattered locations of timber along the rivers,creeks

'and other water courses: There was an adequate supply of water in most
of the Kansas portion of the tract with poor water supply in the central
.and western portions of the Nebraska area. There was some limestone,
-mostly in the Kansas portion of the area, which was useful for building
purposes. There were some salt s;prings within the tract, and while
there was evidence of some minerals, none had any commercial value.

The area contained good bottom land along the river courses. There
was first rate upland soil in the eastern and central parts of the area
with the western portion consisting of poor, third-rate soil. The Com'mission has found that the eastern two-thirds of the subject tract had

a highest and best use for cultivation while the western one-third had

8. Ind. Cl. Comm.6hE p 721
a highest and best use for grazing. As detailed in our Finding of Fact
No. 64, the conclusions of petitioner's experts to the effect that 75
percent of the area would have been suitable for cultivation are not
supported by the descriptions of the area as contained in the original
surveyers' notes. While the Commission has considered the evidence urged
by the petitioners concerning the opinions of various government officials and explorers who had viewed portions of the area in l833, and
prior thereto, we find such evidence to be ofpa very general nature. We
feel that the detailed reports of the original surveyors on the section
by section surveys of each township in the tract are the best evidence
upon which to base our conclusions as to the various types of land involved and their adaptability to the uses referred to above.
.The portion suitable for cultivation would have been used for

subsistence farming. In 1833 there were no markets to which agricultural

products could have been profitably shipped from the Claims I and II area.

There is no evidence of any demand for the grazing lands for extensive ranch operations. Further, during this period in the United

.States the practice of the "free range" was recognized. The Supreme

Court said in Buford v. Houtz (1890) 133 U. S. 320, 326, "We are of

opinion that there is an implied license, growing out of the custom.of
nearly a hundred years, that the public lands of the United States,

especially those in which the native grasses are adapted to the growth
and fattening of domestic animals, shall be free to the people who seek

to use them, where they are left open and uninclosed, and no act of

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 6&8 722

government forbids this use.”

The Court went on to point out that a
large portion of the beef which had been consumed in this country was

the meat of cattle thus raised, it being the custom for ranchers to

raise and fatten their herds upon the uninclosed lands of the government.
The Court went on to say on page 327, "Of course the instances became

numerous in which persons purchasing land from the United States put
only a small part of it in cultivation, and permitted the balance to
remain uninclosed and in no way separated from.the lands owned by the
United States. All:the neighbors who had settled near one of these
prairies or on it, and all the people who had cattle that they wished to
graze upon the public lands, permitted them to run at large over the whole
region, fattening upon the public lands of the United -States and upon the
uninclosed lands of the private individual without let or hindrance."

The only means of transportation within the subject area in 1833
was by means of overland trails. As described in our Finding of Fact
No. 61, the Oregon Trail had two branches which passed through the tract
from the southeast extending northwest to Ft. Kearney on the Platte

.River. TThere were no navigable rivers within the area and railroads,

in.l833, were in their infancy on the east coast and would have had

no effect on the value of the subject area on the date in question.
In 1833 the Claims I and II area was far removed from the populated sections of the United States. On the valuation date the tract

had been a part of the United States for only 30 years, having been

acquired from France in 1803. Iowa did not exist at that time as a

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 5E3 723

territory or a state, and the only states west of the Mississippi River
were Louisiana and Missouri. In 1830 the population of the State of
llligois was only 157,000 while Missouri had 140,000 persons and
Arkansas only had 30,000 people. The year 1833 was one of prosperity
until the fall when there was a recession. The United States population_
continued its steady increase during that year, commodity prices were
generally stable, farm prices were good, and the cost of living was
slightly less than in the preceding years. Government finances were
unusually favorable for debt retirement, and the Commission has found
that a reasonable interest rate to attract the capital required for the
purchase of the Claims I and II area in 1833 would have been about 8

percent.

As detailed in our Finding of Fact No. 70, substantial areas of
I

land had been placed on the market in northwest Missouri prior to 1833.

Public land had sold at a very slow rate at the $1.25 per acre price

pwith only 34.7 percent of the area north of the Missouri River having

been sold in a 13-year period prior to 1833 and only 20 percent of an

'= area south of the Missouri River having been sold during a 6-year period

prior to 1833. As of September 30, 1833, only 10.8 percent of the public
lands exposed for sale in the states of.Missouri, Arkansas and Illinois

had been disposed of leaving a total on that date of 41,978,537 acres
of public land in those three states available for purchase.

For some time prior to 1833 there had been agitation to reduce the

statutory price of public lands and in 1828 the states of Missouri,

I

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 6 ‘-3 721:

I

Arkansas and Illinois had reported to the Commissioner of the General

Land Office that their states contained public lands ranging in value
from 3.5¢ an acre to $1.00 per acre.

The 1833 treaty of cession was not made for-the purpose of acquiring
additional public lands to supply the needs of settlers but rather was
for the purpose of acquiring lands west of the Mississippi River upon
which to relocate emigrant Indian tribes east of the Mississippi River.
As specifically provided in the 1833 treaty the petitioneritribe was

permitted to use the area as a common hunting ground together with any

"other friendly Indians which might be permitted by the President to hunt

cthereon. Accordingly, the tract was not available for purchase by white

settlers immediately following its cession by the Pawnee. For this_
reason there is no evidence concerning the disposition of the public
lands within the Claims I and II area or of any other adjoining lands

during the period immediately following the 1833 cession. I In this

respect this case differs from most other claims involving the valuation
of Indian lands. Generally the taking of Indian lands, whether by treaty
of cession or otherwise, was occasioned by a growing demand for white
settlement, and, upon the extinguishment of Indian title, there was nod
impediment to the development of the area. In such cases the evidence

of the public land dispositions and the settlement and uses for the

land was indicative of the intensity of the demand for the land about

the valuation date and had an important bearing on the resultant market

value.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6118 725

In the instant case the absence of white settlement for about 25
years after the cession does not, in itself, indicate a lack of demand
for the lands. In arriving at a market value for the Claims I and II

area the Commission is forced to consider a situation in which it is

assumed that the lands were available for settlement in 1833, disregarding the fact that the 1833 treaty provided for a continued use

of the area by the Indians.

Accordingly, the Commission has set forth in detail its findings
of fact concerning the subsequent settlement of the area and land dispositions, referred to by petitioner as "comparable sales." While we

«.

realize that none of this evidence relates to factors that could have

.been known and considered by a prospective buyer and seller on the

valuation date, we find such evidence to be useful, in a confirmatory
sense, in valuing this tract. In situations of this type, in particular,
where there is such absence of evidence of comparable sales and no
actual market for lands in the vicinity of the area to be valued, some
weight must, of necessity, be given to evidence of the earliest sales

of the lands involved and of other comparable lands.

Our findings of fact concerning these "comparable sales" have been
set forth in greater detail than is perhaps warranted for purposes of
arriving at an ultimate conclusion of the value of the Claims I and II
area. But since such evidence has a more particular bearing on the

valuations to follow it has been detailed initially to avoid unnecessary duplication in later findings,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8 726

While in 1833 there was no actual market for lands west of the
Phssissippi River, the Commission believes that if the lands west of

the Mississippi River had been available for white settlement in 1833

there would have been a limited demand for such lands. Such demand
would have existed for land in those areas possessing good farming land,
with available water, some timber close to transportation facilities

and as near to populated sections as possible.

The Commission's conclusions as to the extent of any demand for
the Claims.I and II lands are supported, we believe, by the evidence
of the rate of increase of white population in the various sections of
the subject tract, by the evidence of the sales of land within the area
when it became available and by the evidence relating to land dispositions
of other areas in the general vicinity.

The first census was taken in Nebraska in 1854, at which time there
:were 2,832 persons. The population in 1855 was 4,494. The early settlement was generally restricted to the southeast corner of Nebraska and
for a short distance along the Platte River. By 1856 only the easternmost counties in Nebraska had been organized. The 1860 census figures

lby counties, as listed in Finding of Fact No. 65, indicate the limited

extent of white settlement in the Nebraska portion of the Claims I and 11
area. Likewise the population figures for the Kansas counties in the
subject tract reveal that the area was sparsely populated in 1860, and

the western Kansas Counties in the area were not significantly populated

until 1880.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8

727
Petitioner's evidence relating to "sales to emigrant Indian tribes”
cannot be considered as evidence of the market value of the lands involved in those transfers. As we have stated the transactions were not

in fact sales but rather represented reserves, west of the Mississippi,
granted to eastern Indian tribes in exchange for or in partial consideration for the cessions of their lands east of the Mississippi.

It is clear to the Commission that Henry R. Schoolcraft was making no
attempt to place a market value on those lands but was merely stating

a value which would be arrived at if the lands involved were assigned

the government's minimum statutory price for public lands.

J
0

_ There was on December 14, 1843, an agreement with the Delawares
and Wyandot Indians concerning what might be termed a sale by the

Delawares to the Wyandot Nation of some 24,960 acres for a consideration

amounting to $1.84 per acre. This transaction has no comparability to

"the subject tract for the reason that it occurred 10 years after the

valuation date for the Claims I and II area; it involved about 25,000

acres (approximately 0.2% of the sire of the subject area); the tract

‘was located 140 miles east of the southeast corner of the subject area

-at the confluence of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers, the present location

~of Kansas City, Kansas; it was on a navigable river close to an area

which was becoming populated; and finally, the consideration was not to
be paid in a lump sum but rather over a 10-year period with no provision for payment of interest thereon.

Petitioner's evidence relating to Indian trust land sales are

detailed in our Finding of Fact No. 72(b). Those trust land sales involved

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 6118 725

areas substantially smaller than the Claims I and 11 area and occurred
some 23 years after the 1833 valuation date involved in this case. The
areas involved were all to the east of the Claims I and II area and included lands bordering or close to a navigable river, providing far better

transportation, and were near areas which had already been populated

and for which there was an immediate and active demand. The tracts were

each sold in small tracts, generally in quarter sections (160 acres). The

.Delaware trust lands sold at an average price of $1.88 per acre, the

Iowa trust lands at an average of $2.35 per acre, and the Peoria trust
lands at an average of $1.67 per acre. While the Commission has considered the fact.that the sales may not have been entirely indicative

of the prices which some of the lands might have brought on a free and
open market; we do consider that these prices are some indication of the
value, 23 years after the instant valuation date, of lands sold in small
tracts which were among the most favorably located with respect to transportation and population.

.Evidence‘with respect to railroad sales is detailed in our Tinding
of Fact No. 72(c). .Those sales are even farther removed in point of
time from the Claims I and II tract. The evidence of railroad sales
covers a period extending from 36 to 46 years after the valuation date
for the subject tract. The evidence of sales indicates that buyers
during that period were very seletive buying only the choicest lands

in small lots and paying for them only at very attractive terms.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&5 729

The evidence of private sales as detailed in our Finding of Fact
No. 72(d) covers a period commencing in 1857, 24 years after the date
of valuation for the Claims I and II area and extending to 1884, fiftyone years after the valuation date. The sales include very small tracts,

some amounting to no more than land the size of town lots, and there are

no recorded sales of large acreages. The tabulationsincluded multiple
sales and sales of obviously improved land. The sales indicate that

even in the period 25 to 50 years after 1833 the settlers were interested
in the choicest land with virtually no demand existing for the vast areas

of so-called grazing land.

‘I

Petitioner has introduced evidence of census value lands in Nebraska
and Kansas and urged resort to a tabulation of various sets of census

figures to formulate a trend to be extended backward to the 1833 cession

date for the purpose of arriving at a "trend value of the lands within

II

Claims I and II at the cession date. This method is that employed by

petitioner's expert economist, Mr. John R. Houser, whose report was ex:
cluded from evidence in this case. What we said in our opinion of

June 26, 1959, concerning Mr. Houser's theory applies equally to the
method used by petitioner in arriving at this so-called "trend value."
This method is merely a series of mathematical and statistical computations which have no judicially accepted basis for valuing land. It
fails to take into consideration any of the recognized factors which bear

on market value. The use of census value figures has previously been

held to be an unsound basis for arriving at a determination of fair

market value. The Kiowa Comanche and Anache Tribes of Indians v. he

.-—n-—-an-——-ZIn.—--u-n- u-u —-I1: -_—--j—n---up -qua-.—.—|I-I--1--1-p Q-—.;....—

     

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6:18   730

_United States of America, 4 Ind. Cl. Comm. 95; Osage Nation of Indians V.

The United States of America, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 217.

 

In 1854 the first land offices were established in the territories

of Kansas and Nebraska. The first public sales of land in those territories resulted in a great number-of settlers filing their preemption

claims to 150 acres or less and acquiring their lands for $1.25. The

p and
.rate of land acquisition in Kansas/Nebraska is shown in Finding of

.Fact No. 76(c). Following the initial acquisitions the total acreages

fell off considerably until the increase in 1864 resulting from homestead entries. In an eighteen year period from fiscal year 1858 through
fiscal year 1875 the land offices in Nebraska recorded public land
acquisitions totaling 6,686,705.4 acres with a total of 7,250,623.8
acres recorded by the Kansas land offices. This total of l3,937,329.2
.acres included homestead entries after the year 1864. This is indicative of the slowness with which a tract such as the Claims I and II

area, of 13,074,000 acres, could have been disposed of even during a
period 25 to 43 years after the valuation date. Of course the almost

14 million acres of public land acquired in Kansas and Nebraska, whose
combined total acreage is over 100 million acres, represented the best
land available.i Only a fraction of the subject tract had land comparable
to that included in the,l4 million acres of public lands acquired through
figcal Year 1875. The average prices per acre were at or near the

statutory minimum of $1.25 per acre until 1864.

A great percentage of the public lands were purchased with land

warrants. In Nebraska only 12.6 percent of the total land entries up

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. gig

to July l, 1859, were paid for with cash. The remaining lands were
paid for with land warrants, which in 1852 had become assignable and
were listed on the stock markets at prices below $1.23 per acre. Therefore, in fact, the public lands were sold at a cost of less than $1.25
per acre to most purchasers. '

As the courts and this Commission have stated on numerous occasions,
the land's value in cases of this kind is determined by its fair market

value. Fair market value was defined in Sacramento v. Heilborn, l56

 

Cal. 408, as

".°. . the highest price estimated in terns of money which

‘the land will bring if exposed for sale in the open market

with a reasonable time allowed to find a purchaser buying

with knowledge of all uses and purposes.for which it is best

adapted and for which it is capable of being used."
When, as in this case, there is an absence of evidence of actual market
value, resort must be had to other data which would have been considered
by a prospective buyer and seller in dealing with the land in question

in 1833. Some of the principles and factors which are to be taken into.

consideration in such cases were summarized by the Court of Claims in

Otoe and Missouria Tribe v. The united States, 131 C. C13. 593, 633.

 

The court stated, at page 633 that, in the absence of a market at the

time in question and therefore the absence of evidence of "market value"
in the conventional sense, other factors to be considered in determining
the value of lands ceded by Indians included,

"* * * the natural resources of the land ceded, including
its climate, vegetation, including timber, game and wildlife, mineral resources and whether they are of economic
value at the time of cession or merely of potential value,
water power, its then or potential use, markets and transportation-—considering the ready markets at that time and
the potential market.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6L8 I 732

In this case the Commission cannot base its valuation on an

"actual fair market value” for the lands. But we can find what the

Court of Claims referred to in The Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, at al., v.

The United States, Appeal No. 2-58, July 13, 1959, C. Cls. as

 

M

"an estimated or imputed fair market value. The Commission has given

consideration to all the various factors which would have been taken
into consideration by a prospective buyer and seller in dealing with
the Claims I and II area. In addition we have, as previously stated,
considered certain evidence pertaining to events subsequent to the
valuation date for the purpose of confirming our findings and opinion?
as to desirability of the area for early settlement and the demand for
various types of land within the tract.

The Commission has rejected petitioner's argument that in the

absence of any_market value for the lands in 1833, the value of the

‘Claims I and II area was fixed at the government's minimum statutory

price of $1.25. To find the value of this area to have been $16,342,500
in 1833 would be completely unwarranted. This case is not like the case_
of the New York Indians v. The United States, 170 U. S. land 614, relied
upon by petitioner in support of its theory. In that case there was no
evidence upon which to base any estimate of the fair market value. In
this case there is evidence concerning all the factors which a prospective
buyer and seller would have considered in reaching a fair price for the
tract. The Commission has considered those factors and arrived at its
pltimate finding of the fair market value for the lands involved.

‘In

I The Commission has found from the evidence that any prospective

purchaser of the Claims I and 11 area in 1833 would have considered the

co
4

_nd. Cl. Comm. 6E5 733

tract‘s remoteness from the populated sections of the United States;

the poor means of transportation through the area; the immense size of
the tract; the fact that one—third of the area was only suitable for
grazing land, a use for which there was virtually no demand in 1833;

the fact that much of the remaining land, although suitable for farming
was inferior in quality and location to thousands of acres of other
available farming land; that the rate at which settlers would enter the‘
area would be slow; that it would take many years to sell any substantial
portion of the area; and that he would have large carrying costs to keep
his money tied up in such an investment over the long period necessary
to dispohe of the land.

The Commission has considered the fact that the area did have
‘choice locations on fine bottom lands, principally along the water courses,
with adequate timber, also generally along the water courses, to supply
the needs of the early settlers. Such areas, the Commission believes,
would have attracted settlers in 1833, or in the period immediately
following, and could have been sold in 1833 for good prices. However,
the"pattern and rate of population growth in the nest would have indicated to a prospective buyer that he could anticipate selling only a
small portion of his large holding within the immediate future, and he
would have to await a much greater population increase and disposition
of vast areas of other public lands before he could liquidate any sub»
stantial portion of his investment. t
In View of all these factors and considering the risks invclved

in such a large undertaking and the profit which would he expected with

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8 I 733

such risks, we have found that the l3,07h,O0O acres in the Claims I
and II area on October 8, l833, had a fair market value of $h,S?S,900.00
or an average per acre price of 35 cents.

Consideration for the Claims I and II Area.

 

As detailed in our Finding of Fact No. 82, Congress appropriated
various sums under the article: of the l833 Treaty which amounts totaled
$119,622.00. By stipulation the parties have agreed that the sums so
appropriated were disbursed to the Pawnee Indians for the purposes
itemized in the General Accounting Office report.

The Commission has found that the appropriation of $l,h22.00 under
Article 12 of the treaty did not constitute an item of consideration
for the cession of lands involved in that treaty but rather was made
as consideration for the separate agreement by the Pawnee to remain
at home during the year and give protection to the teachers, the farmers,
stock and mill. I

we have found that the remaining items, totaling $lh8,200.00 were
paid to the petitioner pursuant to the terms of the 1833 treaty as
consideration for the cession of the Claims I and II area to the United
States by the Pawnee Indians. I

Petitioner has argued that certain articles of the treaty gave the
President discretionary power concerning payments and that, therefore,

such provisions did not bind the United S

r+

ates to make such discretionary
P8Fments and any sums disbursed in excess of the stated obligations of

the United States should not be included as consideration for the cession.

8 T d. Cl. Comm. 6L8 735

hm do not agree with petitiOner’s position in this regard. As

consideration for the cession the United States agreed to provide the
Pawnees with various goods, implements, services, etc. To a certain
extent some of the articles of the treaty had conditional or restrictive
provisions. The President had discretionary power concerning the pay;
pments of certain sums and he had the power to continue certain payments
for longer than the stipulated period. wc do not believe that such
conditional provisions should remove payments made by the United States
acting in good faith from the categrry of consideration for the cession
or payments made on the claim. Si course the Congress had the power

to ahrogate any of the provisions of the 1833 treaty whether or not

the language had been placed in any of the articles concerning a discretionary power of the President to continue payments for a longer
period or to cease payments under certain provisions. As the Supreme

Court stated in Lcnciwcir v. Hitchcock, 187 U.S. 5;-<3,

%-% %- Until the year l87l the policy was pursued of
des7ing with the Indian tribes by means of treaties,
and, of course, a moral o ligation rested upon Congress
to act in good faith in performing the stipulations
entered into on its behalf. % s s

'35’ -3.‘ -§

The power exists to abrogate the provisions of an
Indian treaty, though presumably such power will be
exercised only when circumstances arise which will not
only‘justiiy the government in disregarding the stipulations of the treaty, but may demand, in theinterest
of the country and the Indians themselves, that it should
do so. when, therefore, treaties were entered into be»
tween the United States and a tribe of Indians it was
never doubted that the power to abrogate existed in Congress, and that in a contingency such power might be
availed of from consideration of governmental policy,

8 Ind. Cl. C@nm.5h5 73$

particularly if consistent with perfect good faith
toward the Indians.

Certainly those provisions in the treaty providing that the
President might continue payments for a longer period were an added
inducement for the Pawnee’s agreeing to the treaty of cession. They
could rely on the good faith of the President and the Congress to make
the discretionary payments if the President deemed it proper under all
the circumstances respecting the condition of the Indians. 'hhile the
obligations of the United States were greater ‘under certain articles of
the treaty, there were, nevertheless, obligations under the discretionary
authority of the President to make the payments if he found it proper
to do so. The United States acted in good faith and performed its
obligations arising fro commitments made underithe various provistons
of the 1833 Treaty. ‘we have found all such disbursements, as detailed
in Finding of Feet No. 8b, to have constituted payments in consideration
for the cession.

Petitioner has also argued that the value of the consideration
provided for under the 1833 Treaty should not exceed $9l,0O5.hO, which
represents the funded or capitalized value of all payments made by the
United States under the treaty. Only perpetual annuities are valued
dn a capitalized basis. None of the payments made under this treaty

were pursuant to any perpetual annuity provision. All payments made

' over a period of years were in the nature of installments of a stated

purchase price. The petitioners cannot give a capitalized or funded

value to such.payments. Crow Tribe v. The United States, 6 Ind. Cl.

 C- 

Comm. 98; Fiami Tribe of Oklahoma, et al., v. The United States, Appeal

 o 2"‘ S‘8 5-   3  9 C o  I 0

 

The total sum of $lh8,2C0.00 was the consideration for the cession
for the Claims I and II area, and that amount constituted the United
States‘ payment on the claim. The total consideration of $lh8,200.00
for the cession of the Claims I and II area to the United States by
the petitioner was so grossly inadequate an amount fdr lands having a
value of $h,S7S,900.00 as to make the consideration unconscionable.
Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the petitioner is entitled,
under the provisions of Clause 3, Article 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, to an award in the amount of $h,§7§,900.00, less the smm
of $lh8,200.00, constituting the United States‘ payment on the claim,

or a net amount of $h,h27,700.00.

Claim III Area

 

The Commission has hereinbefore determined that petitioner held
the area referred to as the Claim III area (as described in Finding sf
Fact No. 33) under original Indian title and that this tract was coded
by the petitioner tribe to the United States by the Ireaty'of Augustéi, C
l8h8. The Commission has found that the Claim III area contains
l10,hl9 acres, which area is to be valued as of August 6, l8h8.
The parties have disagreed as to the meaning of the Commission's
finding of acreage within the Claim III area. Petitioner has contended

--‘L ‘ ‘ 1 _, I o 1 o ~“__'__;__ - I.
that the acreage included only the land within the ttdvb while defendant

has maintained that the acreage included the river had of the Platte

8 Ind. Cl. Com.. 6&8 ' 738

River, which defendant has estimated to be 155 Of the total areas There
was submitted in evidence a planimeter computation of the area of the
islands in the Platte River within the Claim III area. That computation
found the area of the islands to be 76,ShO acres, which area defendant's
expert said was slightlv more in acreage than the land area north of the
Platte River within the Claim III area. If the llO,hl9 acres were to

be reduced by 15% to compensate for the area covered by the Platte
River, the resulting dry land acreage would be far from that indicated
by defendant's own expert witness. The Commission's original finding
with respect to acreage was:

. "The area ceded by the Pawnee Tribe in the treaty of

August 6, 18b8, comprised llO,hl9 acres of land, for which

‘they received goods of the value of $2,000." 5 Ind. Cl.

Comm. 22h, 256
By this the Commission.meant llO,hl9 acres of land area exclusive of the
Platte River bed.

The Claim III area is located in the Platte River valley and consists of a rectangular area 3 to h miles wide and about SQ miles long
from east to west. It extends from the present city of Kearney,
Nebraska, on the east, to a point about 120 miles west of theihissouri
River. The tract constitutes a desirable area of land with generally
level topography, adequate amounts of timber for use by the earsettlers, and an adequate supply of water._ The average rainfall and
growing season was favorable for crop production. The bottom lands and
terrace north of the Platte.River were mostly of excellent qualit and

U

well suited for cultivation. The island portions in the Platte River

8 Ind. 31. Comm. 6&8 739

contained first and second rate soils and were partly adapted to cultivation with the remainder best suited for grazing. The Platte River
was not navigable but its broad valley provided a good wagon route with
the Mormon Trail passing along its north bank. The Oregon Trail joined
the Platte River at Ft. Kearney on the west edge of the tract. Railroads were still too far removed from the west in l8h8 to have been
given much consideration by'a prospective buyer considering the probability of rail transportation within or near the Claim III area in the

forseeable future.

By 1838 the population of the United States had moved rapidly waste

ward with the population of the State of Iowa growing about 3h6% during

the 10 year period from l8h0-l8SG.e The population of Missouri increased
from 383,702 in l8hO to 682,0hh in 1850. The general route of population expansion from the east was across the Appalachian barrier down
the Ohio River, up the Mississippi River, and westward along the.disseuri
River. A.prospective buyer and seller in l8h8 would have foreseen that
the population expansion would likely extend along the Platte River into
the interior of Nebraska.i However, they'would have realized that it
would still be a number of years beIore,any substantial settlement could
be expected 1-Jithin the Claim III area, which lay some 120 to 170 miles

‘west of the Missouri Rive . is

In l8h8 the country experienced a mild recession and interest rates
were high.

any prospective buyer_considering purchase of the Claim III area
would have been aware of the large area of public land available in

other sections, particularl' in Illinois, Missouri, and Iowa. ‘On

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8 730

January 1, 18b9, there were lS,000,000 acres of public land remaining
unsold in the State of Illinois, there were 29.h mi lion acres in
Missouri, and there were 28.h million acres remaining unsold in Iowa.
There was in l0h8 continuing agitation to reduce the price of unsold
publicllands.

On December lb, 18b3, the Delaware and wyandot Indians had entered
into an agreement whereby the Delawares ceded, granted and quitclaimed
to the Wyandot Nation 2h,960 acres of land located at the confluence of
the Kansas and Missouri Rivers, the present location of Kansas City,
Kansas. iThe stated consideration was $h6,080.00, which was to be paid
at the rate of $6,080.00 in l8hh and $h,000.00 annually for the next
ten years. While this amount resulted in a per acre price of $l.8h,
it is obvious that a cash transaction would have brought substantially
less. Even at a 6% interest rate, interest on the unpaid balance over
the ten year period would have been $13,200.00. If this were deducted
from the $h6,080.00, the resulting $22,880.00 nas a per acre average
of $0.92. As we have previously mentioned the Delawareewyandot area

was more favorably located on a navigable river and close to an area
which has rapidly becoming populated.

at - . W
The Commission has considered the evidence of Indian trust land
Sales, as set forth in our Finding of Feet No. 72(b). As previously
nentioned in this opinion relating to the Claims I and II area, those
sales occurred in an area which nae close to or bordering a navigable
river, which was near populated areas and which included lands for which

there was an active demand. The sales, which occurred 8 to 9 years

after the valuation date, involved small tracts of 160 acres or less,

.I
a

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 555 7&1

which resulted in a higher per acre price than could have been realized
from a sale of the llO,Ll9 acre Claim III area as a unit. As this

Commission stated in Niavd Tribe of Oklahoma v. The United States

   

(Docket No. 251) 6 Ind. 01. Comm. 513, S73, 57h:

" % % % It is the 185k value of the entire Miami tract
that we must ascertain and not the total of the values of
the unnumerable smaller units into which it may be divided.
A 160—acre tract, as the trust lands were offered for sale,

is usually purchased for a home, but a 25h,OOO—acre purchase
becomes a speculation, with the purchaser confronted with the
expenses of financing, surveying, advertising, carrying expenses, the sure knowledge that the land will be picked over
and culled by the first of his purchasers, and that an ine
definite time will pass before he will realize a return or
profit from his investment, whereas a quicker and more certain
return and profit could be derived from negotiable paper or
other investments."

The trust lands referred to in that case included the same Peoria, Iona
and Delaware trust lands referred to in the instant case.

Fbr the reasons previously discussed, the average per acre price
paid for railroad land and private sales cannot be related to the fair
market value of the Claim III area. However, the evidence of those

sales, which occurred 18 to 27 years after the valuation date in this

tease, indicates_the high degree of selectivity exercised by the early

settlers in choosing lands in this area. Almost all the tabulated

,sales were concentrated about the most desirable locations. The period

covered by the sales, from 1866 to 1875, found this area of Nebraska
in a far different condition from that existing in l8h8. The Union
Pacific Railroad had been constructed along the Platte River. The
railroad, together with the Fort Kearney and Omaha Road and the telegraph line along the bank of the Platte River, greatly enhanced the

land values in the periodcovered by the tabulated sales,

5. Ind. Cl. Comm. 6148 "(L2

Defendant's expert, Dre Murray, concluded from all the evidence
outlined in his report that the Claim III area had a market value in
18h8 of $55,210.00, or an average of 50 cents per acre. In arriving
at this conclusion, Dr. Murray considered that 15% of the llO,hl9 acres
was riverbed. Since we have found that the acreage of the Claim III
area, llO,hl9 acres, was land area exclusive of the Platte River bed,
Dr. Murray's conclusion was based on misinterpretation. If the
l6,hl9 acres (15% of the total llO,hl9 acres) were eliminated, the resulting valuation figure would have brought his average per acre valuation
to 58.7 cents.

The Commission has found from the evidence that any prospective
purchaser of the Claim III area in l8h8 would have considered the size
of the tract which would have been more attractive as a large land
purchase than tracts of an immense size, such as the Claims I and II
area; the fact that financing a purchase of the tract_would have presented less of a problem; the desirability of the land; its location
on a traveled wagon route; the adequate cater and timber available; the
Prospect of continuing white settlement along the Platte River; and
the prospect that substantially all of the tract could be disposed oi
within a relatively short period. I

Taking into consideration all of the factors relating to the market
Value of the area the Commission has found that the fair market value

1 1' 9 a -vs . I9’ the 1l0,uli acres in the Claim Ill area as of August 6, 18nd, was

xo

;",<‘,.‘f .. ,,
' }>38O°0O: Or an average per acre price oz 0 ants:

(J

 

8 Ind. Cl. Oman 658 7&3

Consideration for the Claim III Area

T:-I .  u—-1-jjv 1-at--urw

 

Pursuant to the Treaty of Augist 6, l8h8, the defendant paid
$2,000.00 as consideration for the session of the Claim III area. The
consideration of $2,000.00 for the cession of the Claim III area to the
United States by the petiti ner was so grossly inadequate an amount for
lands having a raloe of $99,380.00 as to make the consideration one
oonscionable. Accordingly, the Commission concludes that the petitioner
-is entitled, under the provisions of Clause 3, Article 2 cf the Indian
Claims Commission Act, to an award in the amount of $99,380.00, less

the sum of.‘ $2,oco.o , constituting the United States‘ ipa*.;ent on the

claim, or a net amount of $9?,380.00.

Claim IV Area

 

The Comm‘ssion has hereinhefore determined that petitioner held
the area referred to as the Claim IV area (as described in Finding of
Fact No. £5) under original Indian title and that this tract was ceded
to the United States by the Treaty of September 2b, 185?. By stipulation
the parties have agreed that the Claim IV area ecntains 9,8?8,000 acres,
which area is to be valued as of September 2h, 1857.

The tract is located in central Nebraska north of the Platte River
and extends approximately 200 miles from east to west and about 1&0 miles
from north to south. The Slain I” area contains generally level land
along the Platte River's southern boondary'with rolling plains in the

eastern and northeastern portions. The oentr'l and eastern part of the

8 End. Cl. Comm. 6&8 Thh

by the Platte River and its tributaries with the Loup River system
draining the central portion. The northeastern portion of the tract
is watered by the Elkhorn River. The temperature and growing season is
favorable to crop production. The average rainfall is general r adequate with a greater amount falling on the eastern portion, but the
entire area is subject to periods of drought when hot, dry winds cause
serious and extensive damange to crops. Timber for use by the early
settlers was generally limited to areas along the water courses and on
the islands in the Platte River. water sufficient for settlement was
present in approximately tno—thirds of the tounships. The area contained relatively small amounts of first class bottom land found
principally along the Platte,Elkhorn and Loup Rivers and their tributaries. Approximately 25% of the area was made up of upland soils
of second rate quality with approrimately 60% of the area comprising
poor third rate soil including a vast region in the northwestern and
north central portions made up of sandhills.

The Commission has found that approximately one—half of the Claim IV
area had a highest and best use for cultivation with the remaining half
having a highest and best use for grazing. Based upon the comments of
the original surveyors the Commission has found that portions of the
iand classified as grazing land had practically no value even for that
use.  
~ There were no navigable rivers in the area and tnansportation in
1857 was limited to overland routesc As we have previously noted the

principal route through the State of Nebraska was along the Platte

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8 - 795

River, which formed the southern boundary of the Claim IV area. However,
by 1857 railroads were pushing westward, and a prospective purchaser of
the area in 1857 would have considered that the Platte River valley
would be an excellent rail route across the State. However, railroads
had not yet crossed the Missouri River, and a prospective buyer would
have realized that it would be a number of years before rail construction
could be expected along the southern boundary of the tract.

In 1857 settlement had begun in the southeast portion of Nebraska,
extending along the Missouri River and, for a short distance, along the
Platte River. The population of Nebraska had increased from 2,832
persons in l85h to h,h9h in 1855 and was to reach 28,8hl in 1863. In
1856 the eastern counties in Nebraska had been formed, and by l8€O four
counties along the Platte River, which included part of the Claim IVh
area, had been formed. .

The year 1856 had been one of general activity with revival of
railroad construction. However, 1857 brought a depression with tight
money and runs on banks. Interest rates rose sharply'in thevtall of
the year. A reasonable interest rate to attract the capital required
for a purchase of the Claim IV area in 1857 would have been about 8%.

In 1857 vast acreages of public land were available in both Kansas

and Nebraska. Just east of the Claim IV area ‘was the “Omaha tract"

i Of h,982,098 acres which had been ceded to the United States in l8SL.

By the close of 1858, 80% of the Omaha tract had been surveyed and
there were settlers within that area in 1857. In lESh there had also

been cessions of some eight other Indian tracts in Kansas and Nebraska

ranging in Size from 755990 to lyk O5O§G Tne Omaha tract and

many of the other lndian racte were more Eavcreblf lo :ted in Com‘TWT

parieon with the Claim iv area. Several of the tract: bordered the

navigable rivers, were eloeer to more peneleted areas and possessed
better land.

The Graduation not had been passed in 185h and pHb1iC 18355 were
available in the east at reduced prices. In the 12 months ending
June 30, 1857, graduated land sales in Mieeonri totaled 957,000 acres
at an average price of 51 cents per acre.

In 1857 the Indian trnet lands referred to in Finding of Fact No.
72(b) were being sold in small tracts in the general area southeast of
th?'.''. €135.31;  &l'<’.‘.c".-.». Tmuuots s‘:3ci:E..1::-.2':' wUu:LL§ 11-‘.-:.‘.’£3 {)t~'.F3I'> t'1OI15?'3_C?’3T_"E”3 D3,’ :9. 1330spective buyer as an indication of the price which could be attained
for sales of small acreagee located in an area which was close to good
transportation on the navigable rivers with rail connections to the
east and an area relatively high in population.

In 1857 the only lands which would have been in demand for settlement would have been in those areas with the best land for farming,

.with eome timber, water, and as close to cther pepn3ated sections as

P0SSible. ‘Within the Claim IV area such Rand was printipaliy along the

Platte River, along the eastern edge of the tract, and along Eikhorn
River on the nertha

The sales data introduced b3 petiticxer cleeriy

CJCJH 11!... ..L'.J

.‘ % ‘ ': '3 ‘ "‘ " '5 - ' P V -3 -1» u‘ ‘ - .‘» -.' A . ..'
1 iano in one area we: we}; reatritteee n: eetaiied in on?
‘ V 0-H 1- I
+ H7"! \ _l'L _L._ ‘IIIu___1__\ l__. ’.l_‘’'. ‘ _-._' -_._ _¢-‘_‘E11231-r‘rq Ci  5-’ -N39 J I: \b,! Lair’ K. ‘is. '. ._i.' 'v‘2:«'U .. i -3: .. 3. ‘-':,'.' 9.‘?  .' ~3-;'L C2.”.‘..5_5_ ‘x.°. -'.L '»'7...'-__I

ine cenmiesion e -mined in detail

the sales listed for molt Ccunty, which is located in the north~central
part of Nebraska with approximately half of the county within the Claim IV
area and the remaining half extending north to the Niobrara River. The
sales, which covered a period 17 to 23 years after the l8S7 Valuation
date, totaled about 5300908 acres in a county of 1,531,520 acres. Of the
sales tabulated only l,89h.b acres (38%) were within the Claim IV area.
The remaining sales were to the north of the area about the Niobrara
River. ‘As indicated in cur findings concerning the Holt County sales
within the subject tract, all were in the Elkhorn River area on the
choicest lands. There was a total lack of any sales data in the vast
regions away from the rivere This pattern of sales is repeated in all

of the counties listed. In Hall County , which is on the Platte River
and includes the present day city of Grand Island, 70% of all tabulated
sales occurred in one township, the township in which Grand Island is
located.

The railroad sales also indicated that demand for lands was rew
stricted to the best farming land areas. iThe Union Pacific‘s land
grants covered a strip 20 miles on each side of the Platte River. No
railroad grants extended into the central and northern portions of the
Claim lv area. The tabulation of sales to December 31, 1879, for the
Burlington and Missouri River Railroad showed that North Platte lands
within 20 miles of the Union Pacific Railroad sold for an average of
$7.15 per acre while lands 20 to 50 miles from the railroad sold for
only $l.1b per acre.

The subsequent development of this portion of Kebraska is revealed

in the census data coveringiimeperiod up to 1900, set forth in our

8 Ind. Cl. Comma 6&8 g 758

Findings of Feet No. 1220 The north cent el and northwestern portions

of the Claim IV area were very sparsely pooulatede The figures for land
area in farms and improved land in farms in 1900 reveals that the northwestern counties were far behind those in the east in percentage of total
area which was being farmed.

we have previously discussed our opinion as to the census value
approach of petitioner, the history of public land sales in Nebraska and
the use of land sales in small parcels to arrive at valuation of a large
tract as a unit. What we have already stated earlier in this opinionapplies equally well to our consideration of the evidence and the arguments of counsel in evaluating the Claim IV area.
The Commission has found from all the evidence that any well informed

prospective buyer would have considered the Claim IV area as one of vastly

dissimilar regions. Included within this immense area of just under

3

l0 million acres were some areas of choice fa-ming lend, well located as
to water, timber, fairly good transportation, and growing popalationo
There was a larger area of land classified as having a highest and'best
use for agricultare but which was, nevertheless, inferior in qualit7'
and location to other thousands of acres of available farming land.
Finally, there was about half of the tract suitable only for grazing,
a use for which there was little demand in 1857, and substantial
Portions of that land was more or less worthless sanfhill country.

The eastern and southern portion of the area did possess lead
for which there was a demand in l8S7 and which scald be resolr at

a’°’°r‘aC'«‘»i'v'e PT‘?-C“-es .o;r the 185? periods Oi‘ c-:>:;.1‘-use, 13.-o,.l;19 acres of

the better lands along the Platte River are out out of the Claim I?

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6&8

area and that tract has been valued as the Claim III area. any prospective purchaser could also have resold some of the less desirable
cultivable land at lower prices. However, he would have realized that
at least half the area had lands not in demand in 1857 and which he
could only hope to sell at very nominal prices even nany years after
1857.

In view of all these factors and considering the risks involved
in such a large undertaking and the profit which would be expected with
such risks, the Commission has found that1jua1and in the Claim IV
area had a fair market value on September 21;, 1857, of $h,939,ooo.oo,
or an average per acre value of fifty cents.

Consideration.for the Claim IV Area

 

As detailed in our Finding of Fact No. 135, Congress appropriated
various sums pursuant to the ‘l8S7 Treaty, which amounts totaled
3ia20h,131.68. By stipulation the parties have agreed that the sums
shown in the General Accounting Office report were disbursed to the
Pawnee Indians for the purposes itemized in said report up to and including fiscal year l928. It was further agreed that as to the lump
Sum appropriations for the fiscal years 1929 through 1935, the Com,
mission shall consider that the amounts appropriated for each of those
fiscal years in the sum of not to exceed $50,000.00 were disbursed to
the Pawnee Indians for the same purposes and in the same amounts as
itemized for fiscal year 1928 and further that any amdnnt appropriated
in excess of the $50,000.00 for any of those fiscal years shall be

considered administrative expense.

7&9

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 5:. 7

The Commission has found that the $1,000.00 appropriated under
Article l of the treaty, for surveying the exterior boundaries of the

reservation, was not part of the consideration for the cession. The

Commission has also found that a total amount of $68,200.00 was ape
propriated under Article h for "pay of shoemaker and carpenter" and
for “physician and medicine." Since there were no provisions in the
185? Treaty for providing any shoemakers, carpenters, physician or

9

medicine to the Paenees, we have found that those items were not part
of the consideration for the cession.

tions in a total amount

I
5?.)

Under Article 2 of the treat a pro ri
of $2,lh0,000.00 represented pernotual annnity payments of $30,000.00
.per year. The value of the provision in Article 2 creating a perpetual
annuity is its capitalized or funded value. Using an interest rate
Of 5%'per annum, the funded value of a $30,000.00 per year perpetual
annuity was $600,000.00. Therefore, this amount represents the value

of that portion of the consideration. }_ani Tribe of Oklahoma, et al.,

     

v. U. 5., Appeal Re. 2-58, July 13, 1959, C. Cls. . Since no

 

portion of the principal sum was ever paid to the Pawnee, no amount
will be deducted from the final judgment as payment on the claim under

the perpetual annuity provision of Article 2.

-.-g   _ -- __ '__ —' 3 __ - - . n _" c an
P¢”n995 3 325 3 “r?—. l 3_'no:-” rare 3:; exnsxoiitrcs r-cT nod for
"‘ .- A
. 4- '1“ -1- .. f'''''‘ _ __ I - 1 C J 5 Q15 the 9498*.» IETSG etc“: rare “a. oz’: "telnet: 5: Fa“. oi tn. con0

Cant. éhB

8 Ind: '10

av

In Finding of Fact N30 137(3) we have detailed the amounts of :43
lump sum apprcepriaticng szcvering the fi.SC£11 :,'ea1"s 3.929 ‘LhI"0‘-.Ij.’1 1935.
The payments on the perpetual annuity under Article 2 have been ex»
cluded for the reasons set forth above and the payments for physician
and medicine have likewise been exclnded.i

The resulting value of the consideration for the l8S7 Treaty of
cession is $2,lhh,609.9O and the amount constituting the United States‘
payment on the claim is $1,5’hh,eo9.9o.

Petitioner has argued, as in the case of the 1833 Treaty, that
certaih articles of the l8S? Treaty gave the President discretionary
power concerning certain payment: and that, therefore, sums disbursed
pursuant to such discretionary power should not be included as part
of the consideration. Our position in this respect is the same as that
previously set forth in our discussion of the 1833 Treaty. he have
found that all items set forth in Finding of :«*att"r3o. 3.38 constitute
the value of the consideration for the 1857 cession.

Petitioner has also argued—that all P3Vments made pursuant to the
1857 treaty should be given their capitalized or funded value for the

-2.7 "

‘purpose of determining the value of the consideration. we'have given

a funded or capitalized value to the perpetual annuity provision. All
other payments made over a period of years were in the nature of in»
stallments of a stated purchase price and have not been capitalized
or funded to arrive at the value of such paymentst
The total consideration of $2 7hL,6O9 00 for too

(‘.51

adequate an amount lo. land:

51

0 inc. 7-. Comp, 6;? 752

     

   

the consideratitt ;con;::t::bl:. 8:. Li. 1 Trike of Ciiahrva, et el.,
~- -:. , ~ - .- - 5 \ --: . —e s I

v. its LL ‘-3 otet—o uctiet .o. 2,1; 6 inc. C3. COLA. S_,, p?E, S73,

and cases cited therein. Accordingly, the Commiesicmxcone1odes'that the

petitioner is entitled under the prozizions of Clause 3, Ar icle 2
of the Indian Claims Commission Ac bu an award in the amount of
$h,93?,OO0.00, loss the sun of $l,§t§ ‘€9.90 oonstitutinr the United

tates‘ payment on the Claim, or a net amoant of $;,394,39O.l0.

Claim V. irea

   

The Claim V area is a rectangular tract one—half mile side, east
and west, and 15 miles leng, north and south, which was excluded from
the western boundary of the Faweee reservation in Eebraska by an error
in Uh? original servvy. The parties he? stipulated its acreage to be
L800 acres, and this Commission has previously determined that it is to

?he southern portion of the treat it level in the L03?
but bee-mes broken upland just north of the valley and undulat'ng,
Polling upland farther north.“ The southern area is drained by the Loup

River, and the south brandh of Timber Creek floss across the north

boundary of the tract. There was timber in the south one—third of the

 0 "

There was good bett m Land soil in a-ott 10% of the area, in the

Loup River vallev. ite reaaimieg 90%, to the earth, eas second and

I.  L '3 __u -n f"-_-. _ A - 9-: -3 ‘L1 ._ _.r_ I» _g 1-Jr’ ‘D
third -awe B2123; SCL1. Lea Coxxisszon has LGUBQ teat 53:35 5;; oi
 '3 2"  "" b. F‘ 1-.-*'-- up-Iv--h 3--,.—a--J. --—. J‘ '*“ ;—..-—-Io-L.ar-..- o-— a up Lk ""‘ —-la . 9.
L». \.l 9- »..».'.1 L J :1 .4.._;_’.__L......~./ -2'. .. ....._*.-L; ..__3 ..‘.C;- »._.,J,b-'3.\’:.. -1‘-....:'. r'.'..:.«... ‘-3 -‘3-s:".1.I‘-..I‘T.g

/.

gabout 20 miles to the seatheast, wnere

vided excellent rail e naeetiens bath ta the east

Settlements of the Claim V area begein in tee ea Ry 187035.

age 753
15% best suited fer grazing;

.’ ' -2 .-um-1-o an. .' '.-: I-1" " "-‘J I .'-I- “ ’-‘_|¢‘7° Y ."‘
‘While the chief Efiuc ;?3a3isJ ts aha Lrwm the eiaim 1 area

"0

wagon roads, the area was readily accessible from the Platte River valiey,
Ur°en Pacific Railroad proDuring the 1870‘s the population in N-braska
with settlers leaving the river areas an& entering the interior regions.
In 1873 the
United States suffered a depressive whidh e2ntia~ei thrcegh 1875.

The Commission has detailei in Findiag ef Fast Ne.lSO the evi=
dence of the appraisal.m*de in 1876 ef the Pawnee reservation lands
and in.Finding of Fact Ne.lSl the evidence of sales of that reservation.
This evidence we have found very helpful in determining the market value

ft

of the Claim'V area and great weight has been g ten to that etidence.
By the.Act of April 10, 1876, the Se:retary'of the Interier was
authorized to appraise and sell the Pawnee reservati n in.Nebraeka.
The appraisals of the land were to be made at their actual cash value,

excluding the value of any'imprevements, and they were valued is tracts

of 160 acres. The total acreage of the reservatien was 2?8,83?.20 acres

1-:
W
E,_.l
'3
I-Q‘
U.‘
S
[U
(:1

and the average of the appraisals fer the leaf $2.6898 per acre,

the area immeiietely

It is significant to mete that
subject tract t3 the east was appraised at the fellnwing aterage

’ ' F ?— '- C C 1 Q3 «"‘-"«- -We ‘J 3.'.L»..‘_'-.2‘./:.-.v.-1-*."-:v

an‘ -J'-- -1.-r0‘_J

tn 0 J-Jrx ‘ 8 z--rr-.   - -~
¢......_... 9 L. __._. 3 -'.-.. ... 5- ‘~~- «J ‘..» - _.-*- -I -'_ . ._-......_- -.-._.,. -' ,,_ :.-.- .. .. .- ‘“. "*- '*  T’ 
u-oi’:      J“ -C.‘ .'._‘.. —..LQ .ui._’..A.._‘...:...-. -.-5 t,-:g;;Pu On: Q.   3 1 I I  

were sold ia separafe t:a;i5 cf 360 a::es at eifner not less than their

appraised valve or fr: 1:53 than $2.30 an =:re° The lanés could be bought

JR * II-f~ -I-.. -5 -aqun. -Ll - . 4.. .u-... ‘nu 'v---u In-rv-- at .—.qlI~.- I 9-’. ' d
on terma, 1/3 Chan m;-n;H ,3; bm.rT,: 1; tnv AS821 1L:fallments drawlng 6p

- :".'-- -- .1-*- p o--.*— -I-e-—-ran-A---I  -- 9-I-D:-In. lb’ v-V. I‘ “Q . _ '
¢n€erest from u;: mgte Jf 53:50 L4;1.& uh: f1,:t 3 }:&Ia inere 135 only

G»

one sale 91 1

\.n J
l\.)
(:1
o. 3
a
C»
U!
{'2
$.19
\ §.
0
Iw
(_ "5'
>
m
‘U...
C")
L2‘
O\
(1,:
._ 2
H
If‘)
U!
W
(.1.
L)»
U
!. 59
L4"
0':
r?
W
(D
C"!
y.J
]‘I
L.
8
<1

tract an§ tha  @Li
(J!
Lu)
[:1
}.
(D
..1
qt
'- In
:1r_*i'
£3‘
«:0
CL
«.0
1,:
L: a
H
w
U
[.1
(Q
9 ~41
£24
'73
PO
I’-j‘
(F!
H
.4
‘-1
3
F:
0
‘?
£3:
3
0'43

. -M" L“ " "“"""'°""' '  ' -'1"  r -u -n..u.:-4... due as -nu.-L. -‘-.4; r-v-r - -u ‘-.. « .-Ir . 0tha fmraz u2Pu8 yc;,9 up; .4 21; “L-@¢C -.»: 6at£¥3 :3; sold while only
d _9 ' " I O O ( v'.." 1 0 __‘
1p E €39 i33Oh6 ac--3 gig: hang “W: S;a;m ¥ ‘tea ta the east was bold.

"L - r -I far. .‘ -— . as .'‘n.‘' - -n a ’_ nu _,. ;- , , . ..~._, 6. _‘ ' I ’__';_ _, ' .'_ - g-up ,
L‘ '5 l‘:.."“~...::=.L'..‘?§":‘ ’pp;'al'o .-.:'.'‘;:.:'‘.a l’- »*-L,-;.:.' '_.e',_  ;.__,  .1,8E*J_ ‘{,.‘.£.~‘:.':,« 31':..°‘}."8 ¥:.;*.‘.3 any subSn-‘ -.n.4-...~..»

A r ‘ .. - ., ..
area at @3050 an aria, s?aL H33: 53:: =*- S were an small l60«a:ra

-— I‘: 1:-— ';5._,-,,'-'- -4 g].,...¢. § 1.,

4.3’ F ' " * ’ ‘l%.'l 17' 9- I ."' - ” . G
tr Cu: and under pf” ' %=“L fer maK1““ paVr;n% over a fH*:& ymar period

' -~ 1-.-'' n-- -- --—--“K-..-. '“..r'..-. "......,-.'. .. 3.1,. ....;.-';,, _ " a.. ,, .t. -.
The p-;.¢¢s a-gt: a;:; lu;;-a15: and ac%_azs’ 1;; v~&u ;n landsL

¢P%IlI—0 Q , _ ‘ _
31938 339 Wéier courses un=*é *?v*e w=% v?=Fwwr%€red bu" ~ 7%“4 There

1 5-’ ‘V-‘ ‘ “oi--Io\Q o

<:- "i-34-'3-1  -3' 4* ." . .. :... . - 0 ~ * WE; .......s..'.n..v .. "'..:T;'I'5.:.".:.'..:. .LC‘I" ?......:-.:.E.-..r.:3 L232‘-:'-E'.:f" J. ’-'-*,’':7: 1-..i§'.3 £’:L‘-.-'c'E=I"’3 5.33:3. 5"Cvl'=£‘-E1T!'.‘.3.

‘U
(D
r-i~
Ha
41+
[Jo
f.
:11
Cu
m
9
.l
3
m:
{:3
U1
9)
F‘ 9;
[Jo
{ I
f .1)
a_..,
r
Li
13
* 1
H1
“J
3' '

_I
U-‘
(.4.

f I

o

'r' ‘
‘I3 the Burlingtcz Railroad

II A’ .3... .-,_ __ ‘_ ___ _ .. . ‘ .
sold as ligua fur &n :V6fage 61 $6.15 per acre 1n.the perzed 1870 ta

IL '~*.~ - . .. __
S-.1-.--. —..-«. ~’-—."i;- '- ~- -3 M‘ :3 _. ~.-.~~ --. .~ .;- --. r . r’. ~=.....
_ . .. I _ _ . - _ _ _

ow‘ an ‘-3 5-...-n-#u.—-5 1. _-..._"' _, ___,__. )/,_ 1 5 _ I . vs, -_- . *-- . up ‘*1, ,s‘i_
’ __; J I I "'- f -F 9- I: J: q. q. 4 In cm. DJ no u.._.— .,.____:..‘

1-H .
$"-‘C-91 pan -3-.» -— ‘ .-. _.., "’ _ ' -- _— _ ___. , ._ _
' .. I. .. °" '-~-----.-... 1 ....- _ ..... ,_ .-_.. ,_g In
U ‘ 3"’ ""-“' j‘-‘T’ C’ --I-' -..".t—-. V .4 .... Lu.‘-1.-‘pl vi '.’:3- ' ’- '- ‘I-" '- 1" I '3 ' I‘ 1-’.v — ' ‘V’ .‘.‘I ‘ll: ' a—!'..''—- -1". - 4-!‘___ . .....-. _u. .. _‘l:.... .. __.. . 5...- &l-..___ ____£ 5 .,_____I;-‘__I_3
I an ax
'} -. '.H- --'‘-v- —‘- - 4- a... . '. .." _ _._.__" -n -7, —... .
m.¢-- Suua. -3 3., ;«~.%hL--: — aw_u~ ue~»v:%»y-~? ~I 4.; V’i3“w~A«
It -- -v ....a.. J. r .... . - - ~ .,_ .. 3 .. ., ..-. .' :-_._ '_._._";-___.,_ ‘,1 K - __—  -_'-v __ .__1 .__ 1L.‘ :\
}'_‘I‘;‘Tt-—\-a---—-7 ‘I"D- I‘-{iv - . . -. _.E._ 1 -u

of the Uniiaa
j'~—§--CU "|Iv—f'I-cuV.Jl-—t. "lv'.n.§--' ' —". -i--.
contrary as Mr; H;n:hinc3‘ te;ii.n

Total sales to December 31, 18?9, were l,S7h,

.:;.!s

’...I
}.la
‘:1
It 1*"
Q:
rip
Ho
U
‘'3
C)
Q I

sideratian of $8;5S6,782.h2 or=$5oh3 per acre.

are the Salas for 1879 as fallcwas (Fate :0 19?, p,

Priae/acre

Til-u.Quv:--r 4 «ant ‘II -v-j

Acres

North Plaaie anéa lying

within 20 miles of raa7
North Platia lands ’

50 miles fram U.P.R.R.

.13 4.425

The Ccmmiasien has fauna thaf any

Claim V area in 1875 woali haae ;5nai&are

Q4
\_ 1*
fl”
(3
U
I
0;‘?
N
E1:
I I‘
(,4
u%
4’
U.‘

tract of only h8CO acres, which cauld easily have been sold in smaller

tracts.

1575.

There was saatlemant in the area and a demand fer the land in

It was near gosd

rail éranspartatian. East of the area was

suited for farming with iha southern.p¢rtian'wa1E

o -nus“ 5

auared and p:sse53*Wg

highly desirable battem lazé. The appraaaal

1-.‘ .s.C‘..\.LaJs J‘

land and aaidanca $5 sales of thr* ‘~~‘ v@*}‘~

Va1uatiGn date gi?e a gcaa indicaéian of t

Ir’

a--,*

land. ‘we considar*that defandam$’a expert ap_‘aiaa;

appraised the tracé :ith his canal

‘V-I’   1" if" ‘;'‘.'r- 3 0
3.5..-.'.. wt. .-;;;:1 -‘ -‘.;.-.1 .. c..._

. — . "'2 4.¢hI~o‘l -v E. 9 .. .. .. " " 9
I3 View of ail tae fa3&u:a aaazh ;L3'eeE3 _2i,?u:' U';5Pa:t;Te
- ""‘*-I ‘I "'-an ’ R . -~--- -. 5-; _ “ ' .' ' " '- " I‘ Q 4-...
buyer and aaiaas Wculd §d»€ .;;:;a;::a an :aaL;'g ¥-:; 33: C_a;m 5
' ""' ‘D ‘ " -‘A -r ‘- rain!" as aw ' " "' "' :area, he h&q8.uNHfithv lals maJKUw wait: 3. 3:2- :3-" ;_1JgQO°Gg Q“

When the art I an =arv=y was cZ5co*"rv£, 1&3 "*3-2+ 3;p::lL;:n§gng

vi
Kn

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 633

at Omaha, Nebraska, wrote the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that the
Indians already had an excess of land and that there appeared to be no
occasion for interfering with the white settlement on the strip of land.
He asked "on behalf of said Pawnee Indians, that proper steps . . . . be
taken to obtain from the United States Government a full and just consideration for the deficiency of land mentioned." (Letter of June 11,
1873; from Superintendent White to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
Edward P. Smith).

The Commission concludes that there was an implied agreement
between the United States and the Pawnees that the Claim V area should
be taken by the United States with payment of compensation to the
Pawnees for the area taken. By the act of March 3, 1857, the sum of
$6,000.00 was appropriated and that amount was paid to the Pawnees
as full compensation for the area taken.

The consideration paid by the defendant was exactly 502 of the

'1

lands valued on the date of taking. Considering the tircnmstances
surrounding the taking of this area from the reservation granted to
the Pawnees by the 1857 Treaty, with payment of compensation of but
half the value of the lnnds, we believe the United States took unfair
advantage of the petitioner Indians. We find the consideration paid
under these circumstances to be so grossly inadequate that it constituted an unconscionable consideration. Accordingly, the Commission
concludes that the petitioner is entitled, under the provisions of

Clause 3, Article 2, of the Indian Claims Commission Act to an award

in the amount of $6,000.00.

756
Retyped

sates under its emin=nt domain power Cempensstisn was ix fact prid

U]
E
I. I
k.l
:5
U’:
(J
F"
D
'j_‘\‘
£1
U‘
1-CD

in this case. Our finiing thas.the psymens made was
and that petitioner is entitled to rezsw r the difference between she
true value and the amount paid is based on %he pesitiener“s right of

recovezy under Clause 3, Ariele 2 of the Act. No interest is allowable

 

-nag-In-u.'~¢%..«.-1-... 9- ..----.n..- o—-I—v

for judgments under this Clause. _Q§ege Tribe ?. S, S. 119 C. Cls. 592.
Petitioner's claim for nserest will be disellewedo
By ineerlecutory eréer, dated July lh, 1950, this Cemmissien

found petitiener entitles to recess: on iis sixth sense of eztien

for interest on $110.55 at the rase of 5% per annem from March 3,

1893 to March 17, 1921, or an amsunt ef $155.00. Pesitiener'wes also
entitled under its seventh cause of action ts reeever she principal
sum of $31.90 with interest thereon at 5% per aenem fremlharel 3,
1893. These deteeminatiens of Claims 6 ans 7 have beee affirmed by

the Com~“c. of Claims. Pa‘:-mes Tribee cf‘ Okl‘-.':.’:l.cma ‘V. 'T.‘§l.:- U:i=.i"=:-e-i Siafaas,

—j'I.ZII“A.'i"IiTIf|lnj$"1'Ii|II'CQ.TilI?"\‘j"U ; If-TQZTIC’

 

12h c. Cls. 32h.

‘We have ‘eeerporated in our finiings of fast, entered t'is day;

0\
3
E
'1
""*-J
O

the original findings respect; Claims

:E

These finiings were
numbers 17, 18, and 19, entered Juxy lb, 1950, and are findings numbers
160, 161, and.l62 in the Finiiegs sf Face entered this day;

In summary petitioner is eutitlei so rssesers

at

Claims I and I: '$*;h2?37eo.eo
Claim III 97,386.08
Claim lv 3;3§h,390.1O
Claim V 63093.03

V 155.00

31.90 plus interest at 5% per annnm
from March 3, 1893

$7,925,657.00 plus interest on $31.90

 

This amount is subject, however, to deductions for such offsess as may

be allowable under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

s/ mi. M. HOLT
— Associaic Commissioner

 

ii

 

I concur:

s/ some E. *.»:3:'.:":.'

-u-u-2-an-Q.-o -—. q... ....__,

Chief Commissioner

   

-Qnn

Commissioner‘Watkins took no part in the consideration and decision
of this case.

