1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 L D 575

BEFORE  INDIAN CLAIMS COMHISSIOII

RED ME, PEIBIH5. AND WHITE EARTH
BANDS, AND MIIII~1'ESO'._IA CHIPPEWA TRIBE,
PETER GRAVES, JOSEH G-RAWS, AUGUST
KING-, KATEINE C.A.‘Ei.Ia B.A.RRETT, ROSEITI

VIILIIBWD, EIGENE ZBBEDOIS, AND HAROLD
E~%SON,

Plaintiffs,

1!’. Docket Ho. 18-A

UNITE STATES OF AMERICA,

;Defendant.

Appearances:

MI‘. Jay E. Hoag, with whom
were Messrs. Austin Lathers,
Clarence G. Lindquist, and
Ho Jo Grannig,

Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

C'Messrs. Sim T. Carmen and
Ralph A. Barney, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech,
Attorneys for Defendant.

FINDINGS _Q._1: FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
1. The Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians is a duly recognized
Band of Indians residing within the territorial limits of the United

States and, as such, is authorized to maintain this action under

. -V .. .1 . .-.4. u-=|.'.-.‘.-‘M.’ 4...\.a.' _--.. ':c..‘:: .:a..h-.1: til-'  J-'-I-I‘*-3|-M--'-5'3’

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 I I _
- 21.

Section 2 of the Indian Claims Gommission.Act (25 U.s.c. 70a).
The Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians was a duly recognized band
of Indians at the time the treaty of October 2, 1863 (13 stat. 667)

was negotiated with said band wherein it ceded to the United States
its interest in the lands for which the claim in this action is made.
.Although said Pembina Indians are not presently recognized as an
organized band of Indians, its members or their descendants are an.
identifiable group of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the'United States, having a common claim which they‘
are authorized to have heard and determined by the Commission‘under
Section 2 of the Indian Claims cennieaien.net. The plaintiffs, '
Rosetti Villebrun and Katherine Carl Barrett, are members of this
group of Pembina Indians who are descendants of the original members
of the Pembina Band and are entitled to maintain this action in a
representative capacity on behalf of themselves and all other members
of this claimant group of Pembina Indians.

2. The Chippewa was one of the larger tribes of Indians found
in the northern section of the United States.‘ This tribe in early

historic times was located along the shores of Lakes Enron and Superior, and during the 18th century had extended its range on westward across Minnesota and even into eastern North Dakota. The tribe '

or nation consisted of a large number of villages, bands or divisions

that were scattered over this large area from east to west. There

J. 4.1.-I.\J I

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 _ _ 577

-3...

were many of the bands or groups that were known by the name of the
village, lake or river near whioh they resided. There were two such
bands of Chippewa Indians called the Red Lake Band and the Pembina
Band.

The Red Lake Band inhabited the territory around Bed lake in
northern.Minnesota, where they were livingwat the time the Lewis and
Clark:ezpedition.visited that area in.18OH. The Penbina Band lived
along the Pembina River in the vicinity of the village of Penbina,
located just west of the Red River of the North in the extreme northsi
eastern corner of North Dakota. The two bands remained in approximately the same locations until the making of the treaty of cession
on October 2, 1863. 1

In 1851 the membership of the Red Lake Band of "all ages and
senesu was estimated at 1zoo, and the Pembina Band at 660, At the
council meeting, where the treaty of October 2, 1863 was negotiated,
an enumeration taken of the Red Lake.and Pembina Bands in attendance,
including nen, women and children, listed 352 Pembina Indians, 663
Pembina half-breeds‘, 579 Red lake Indians and 21+ Red Lake half-breeds,
orta total of 1618.

3. on August 19, 1825 a treaty (7 Stat. 272) was made by the
‘United States with the Chippewa, Sioux and other Indian tribes establishing boundaries of their respective territories. The line divids

ing the territories of the Chippewa and Sioux Tribes, as fixed by

__ ___‘____‘____I_____.__ _____4, __.,__-_,,.-,3.‘ -u._,.'..gs.':£l'!m1u-;i.'U.l.t1£ui.é<4.6:~lZ.JaL7u2Et51 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 ~ 578
.. 1; ..

.Artic1e 5 of said treaty, is as follows;

It is agreed between the Sioux and the Chippewas,

that the line dividing their respective countries shall
commence at the Chippewa River, half a day‘s march below
the falls; and from thence it shall run to Red Cedar River,
immediately below the Falls; from thence to the St. Croix
River, which it strikes at a place called the standing
cedar, about a day's paddle in a canoe, above the Lake at
the mouth of that river; thence passing between two lakes
called by the Chippewas ‘Green Lakes,‘ and by the Sioux
‘The lakes they bury the Eagles in,’ and from thence to
the standing cedar that ‘The Sioux Split;' thence to Rum
River, crossing it at the mouth of.a small creek.ca1led
choaking creek, a long day's march from the Mississippi;
thence to a point of woods that projects into the prairie,
half a day's march from the Mississippi; thence in a
straight line to the mouth of the first river which enteres
the Mississippi on its west side above the mouth of Sac
river; thence ascending the said river (above the mouth
of Sac river) to a small lake at its source; thence in a
direct line to a lake at the head of Prairie river, which
is supposed to enter the Crow'¥ing river on its South side;
thence to Ottermtail lake Portage; thence to said Otter»
tail lake, and down through the middle thereof, to its
outlet; thence in a direct line, so as to strike Buffalo
river, half way from its source to its mouth, and down the

. said river to Red.River; thence descending Red river to the
mouth of Outard or Goose creek: The eastern boundary of the
Sioux commences opposite the mouth of Ioway river, on the
Mississippi, runs back two or three miles to the bluffs,
follows the bluffs, crossing'Bad axe river, to the mouth _
of Black:river, and from Black river to half a dayis march
below the Falls of the Chippewa River.

This dividing line, as described in the treaty, extends across southern
Minnesota in a northuesterly direction.until it reaches the Buffalo
River, half way between its source and its mouth, and then down the
Buffalo River to where it enters the Red River; then it continues north

down the Red River to the mouth or the Goose River, which enters the

Red River from the west, where the line ends.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 — 1 579

-5‘...

U. After Minnesota was established as a Territory on March 3,
18149 the United States decided that a treaty should be negotiated
with the Indians and half-breeds claiming the territory along the Red
River of the North so that they could be permanently settled, and the
use of the area by other Indians and half-breeds from north of the
International border could be controlled. By an act of Congress dated
September 30, 1850 (9 Stat. 51114, 556) an appropriation of $10,000 was
made ‘for expenses of treating with the Indians and half-breeds for
the extinguishing.of their title to lands on the Red River of the North
in the Territory of Minnesota.“ Thereafter, on September 20, 1851,
Alemnder Ramsey, as treaty ‘commissioner, negotiated a treaty with
the Red lake and .Pembina Bands of Chippewa Indians by which they ceded
and relinquished to the United States an area of land along each side
of the Red River which is described as follows:
Beginning on the East bank of the Bedhiver of the

North, where it is intersected by the International Boundary line; thence East along said line thirty miles; thence

Southwardly in a direct line to strike Buffalo mver ‘half

way from its source to its mouth‘; thence along said river

to its mouth; thence Northwardly along the west bank of Red

River of the North to the mouth, of Goose River; up said river

to its most westerly source following the south branch thereof; thence Northwardly in a direct line to strike a point on

the International boundary line five miles west of the Grand

Cote; and thence east to the place of beginning.
The Senate of the United States on June 23, 1852 refused to ratify the
treaty of September 20. 1851.

5. An act of Congress on July 5, 1862 (12 Stat. 512, 529) appropriated $l5,000 “for the purpose of negotiating a treaty with the

. 1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 ' 580
_ H 6?‘

Chippewas of northern Minnesota and the extinguishing of their title

to the lands in that vicinity.“ Pursuant to the act of July 5, Alexa
ander Ramsey was commissioned to negotiate the treaty and was authorized
to secure a cession of all the land claimed by the Chippewas on eachi
side of the Red River of the North, On Cctober 2. 1863 a treaty (13
Stat. 667) was concluded with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewa
Indians whereby they ceded to the United States the lands which.are
described.in.Article 2 of said treaty, as follows:

Article 2. The said Red Lake and Pembina Bands of
Chippewa Indians do hereby cede, sell, and convey to the
‘United States all their right, title, and interest in and
to all the lands now owned.and claimed by them in the State
of Minnesota and in the Territory of Dakota within the following described boundaries, to wit: Beginning at the point where
the international boundary between the United States and the
British possessions intersects the shore of the Lake of the
Woods; thence in a direct line southwesterly to the head of
Thief River; thence down the main channel of said Thief.Biver
to its mouth on the.Red Lake River; thence in a southeasterly directiony in a direct line toward the head of Wild
.Eice River, to the point where such line would intersect
the northwestern boundary of a tract ceded to the United
States by a treaty concluded at Washington on the 22d day
of February, in the year eighteen hundred and fifty—fiye,'
with the Mississippi, Pillager, and Lake Winnebigoshish
bands of Chippewa Indians; thence along the said boundaryh
line of the said cession to the mouth of Wild Rice River;
thence up the main channel of the Red River to the mouth
of the Shayenne; thence up the main channel of the Shayenne
River to Poplar Grove; thence in a direct line to the Place
of Stumps, otherwise called Lake Chicot; thence in a direct
line to the head of the main branch of Salt River; thence
in.a direct line due north to the point where such line
would intersect the international boundary aforesaid;
thence eastwardly along said boundary to the place oft
beginning.

The area ceded contained approximately 9,793,?-$0 acres? and is

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 ,   . 581

-7marked on Maps 1 of both Minnesota and the Dakotas in Royce's Indian
Cessions of the United States (18th Annual Report of the Bureau of
American Ethnologr) as Parcel 1-.116.

The portion of the ahove described area lying between the Goose
and Cheyenne Rivers on the Dakota side of the Red River comprised
approximately 2.31.1, 660 acres of the 9,799,91L0 acres contained in
the cession. The plaintiffs, in their proposed findings of fact, concede this tract of 2,311,660 acres was used as a common hunting ground
with certain ‘bands of Sioux Indians and therefore claim one-I-half thereof, or 1,155,830 acres. This makes a total of s,61+1+,11o acres "of the
cession claimed by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands. 1

The treaty was ratified by the Senate of the United States on
March 1, 1861!.

6. on April.12, 18614 the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, acting
apparentlyiunder the authority of the appropriation act of Congress of
uIuly 5, made and concluded a supplemental treaty at Washington, D. G.
with the Chiefs and headmen of the Red Iaice and iPembina Bands thereby
the terms of the October 2, 1863 treaty were modified as to the consideration to be paid by the United States and made some other minor
changes, but reaffirming the 1863 treaty and making no additional
cession of land. This treaty teas ratified by the Senate on April 21,
1861+.

7. By the terms of the treaty of October 2, 1863 the United

States agreed to pay the Red Lake and Pembina Bends a total sum of

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 55.32

-8$510,000 as consideration for the  ceded by them in said treaty,
This was increased somewhat by the supplemental treaty of april 12,
1894. The record shows that between the years or‘ 1861# and 1878, inclusive, the defendant has paid the sum of $681!-,014-N-.514» for and on behalf of the Red. Lake and Pembina Bands in fulfilling its obligations

under the treaty of Octoher 2, 1863, as modified ‘by the supplemental

treaty of April 12, 1861!-.

8. At the time the treaty of October 2, 1863 was negotiated,
and for a number of years prior thereto, the Red Lake Band of Chippewa
Indians was occupy-lng and in possession of the territory around Red
Lake in northern Minnesota located Just east of the area ceded by
said treaty, and the Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians was occupying
an undefined area along the Pemhina River near the village of Pembina,
located on the west of the Red River in the northeast part of North
Dakota. While both of said hands are shown as having hunted and
roamed over much of the area ceded by the 1863 treaty, they did not
acimally occupy and exclusively possess and use any part of the area
ceded by the 1863 treaty, except the undefined and indefinite area
occupied by the Pembina Band along the Pembina River in the extreme
north of the 1863 cession. But there is no proof showing the part
of this area that was actually occupied by the Eeznhina band prior to l
and at the time of said 1863 treaty. '

9. That prior to and at the time of negotiating and concluding

the treaty of October 2, 1863 and the supplemental treaty of April 12,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 _ . . 583

....9...

1864 with the Red Lake and Pembina Indians, the defendant had not recognized and did not intend to recognize or acknowledge the exclusive use
and occupancy right or title of either the Red.Iake Band or Pembina
Band. in any definite portion of the area of land ceded ‘by the treaty

of 1863.

September 17, 1951

,._ _._ I _g\,:..'.. _..'..L'......u_«..‘...' oiui-CI-1

