‘nit;-9:4?

BEFORE THE ENDBLN C7 -’-‘-.I3"'.'S CC{"l-EISSION

THE UINTAH UTE INDIANS OF UTAH,
Plaintiffs,
v. Docket No. hS

THE UNITED sncnas or AMERICA,

\~_./'s.._/\o._../\.../\...../\.../\../‘-—.-/\../

Defendant.
Decided: February 21, 1957
Appearances:

Ernest L. Wilkinson, with whom
were Glen.A.'Wilkinson, John'W.

' Cragun,'Robert'E. Barker, Carl S.
Hawkins, and Donald C. Gormley,

ttorneys for Plaintw ‘a“f'.<=

Leland L. lost, with whom was
Mr. Assistant.Attorney General
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant

o1=n1:o1~1 pg  cozmIssroN

   

OVMarr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The claim.here asserted is for the value of an undivided interest
in lands of the Uintah and Ourcy Indian Reservation which plaintiffs
allege were taken from the occupants of said reservation, the Uintah
Ute Indians o£'Utah b defendant when it laced thereon a band of

3
Colorado Indians known as the hhite River Utes, in l88l, over the
objections of the plaintiffs and without the plaintiffs receiving ny

compensation for the lands so occa ied hv the

in _ Q;

\o

The contention of the plaintiffs is that by the Executive Order
of October 3, l86l (Find. 5) and the Act of May S, l861.'. (Find. 6),
the plaintiffs became the permanent and exclusive occupants of the
reservation and in placing the White River Utes thereon, Innithout their
consent and without payment for the lands occu_ ied by the latter, the
defendant deprived plaintiffs of part of their lands thereby making it
liable for the value thereof.

The defendant‘s main contentions are that the Uintah Reservation
was not created for the exclusive use of plaintiffs and that they
never acwired any vested rights therein, and that, therefore, the
defendant could place any Indians thereon it desired without incurring
liability therefor. The defendant also contends that in any event the
White River Utes were tah Utes within contemplation of the 1861: Act
and therefore were entitled to occupy the reservation with plaintiffs.
Another contention of defendant is that by a treaty tonsummated in l868
the Utah Utes relinquished their rights to the reservation lands.

The plaintiffs in this case, Docket No. 1:5, and those in Docket
No. U4 are the same. Since the claims in th two cases involve lands
situate in the State of Utah and it was contemplated that much evidence
to be offered would apply to both cases, the parties agreed at the outset of the trial to a consolidation of the cases for trial, and the
evidence adduced is made applicable to each in so far as relevant. But
the two cases have been briefed and subraitted separatpely and w'iJ_l be
disposed of separately on the limited issues of law and fact relating

to the plaintiffs‘ right to recover. (Rule 22(5)).

560

""r‘£:s°fI-.""'_'i

The plaintiffs here, accordin to the allegations of the petition
and the proof, are members of several groups of Utah Indians who mside
in the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation. These Indians and their
ancestors were Indians of the Territory of tah as it existed in l86l,
and they were from the several groups of so-called Ute Indians who then
inhabited Utah Territory. Defendant is critical of the use of the
name "Uintah Ute Indians of Utah“ as party plaintiff, but when that
designation is considered in connection with the proof and the allegations of the petition, it is plain that it is the Utah Indians of
the Uintah and Ouray Reservation who became and are generally known as
Uintah Indians. The defendant had no difficulty on the question of the
identity of the claimants, as its pleadings, proof and defense show.

Plaintiffs have offered proof of the organization of the reservation under the Indian Reorganization Act of June 1.8, 1931:, (Pltf.
Exs. l and 2) which includes members of the Uintah Utes. Since this
claim is not asserted by such entity, the purpose of such proof is not
apparent. Anyway, membership in such an organization cannot prejudice
this clai... (25 U.s.c. 1:75).

Two of the main contentions of the parties center upon the question
as to the rights acquired by the Indians in the Uintah Reservation and
what Indians the defendant could place thereon without interfering with
the possessory rights of other occupants. The‘plaintiffs contend that
the reservation was created for the exclusive use and settlement of tee

of the Territory of Utah, while defendant, as stated above, maintains

A‘.

that the act creating the Uintah Reservation did not vest in the claimants any exclusive property right in the reservation, so Congress could,
as it did, make it available for any Indians it desired to place thereon,
and in any event, that the White River Utes, which the defendant placed

thereon in l88l, were actually Utah Utes and entitled to live thereon

under the l86h Act.

The first step in the establishment of the Uintah Reservation was
an Executive Order of President Lincoln on October 3, 1861, who "set

apart and reserved for the use and occupancy of Indian tribes % % the
entire valley of the Uintah River within tah Territory, extending on

both sides of said river to the crest of the first range of contiguous

mountains on each

tn-Tb

side, to be reserved to the United.States and set
apart as an Indian reservation.“ (Find. 5).
The next and final step in the establishment of the Uintah Reser-_
vation was the.Act of‘May S, l86h, l3 Stat. 63, which the parties here,
and many Government officials, seem to agree was Congressional approval
and confirmation of the executive action of l86l. Apparently, no survey
‘marking the boundaries of the reservation was made, at least it is not
in evidence, but the boundaries shown on.plaintiffs‘ Exhibit 321 seen to
be accepted as correct by the parties and.also by Government officials,
and is accepted by us.
By Section 2 of the 1861; Act (Find. 6) the Uintab. valley of the

Territory of‘Utah was expressly "set apart for the permanent settlement
and exclusive occupation of such of the different tribes of Indians of

jO'§'U7

said territory as ma, be induced to inhabit the s“ne." Plainly, the

\J"l

(T\
I\)

1 - -in

.- .

't'I ‘ - .

-u : - '- "§A5A‘r-'-"'4

purpose of the section was to provide a permanent and exclusive habitation for only Indians residing in Utah Territory. No other Indians
were eligible for settlement in the reserve, and the fact that permanent
and exclusive settlement is provided for those Utah Indians who take
advantage of the act most certainly recognizes a vesting of all rights
necessary to such use. Had the Congress intended a revocable permit to
use the reservation one would.have expected language plainly indicating
such an intention in the act.

As the text of the Executive order shows, the reservation was
established for Indians generally, but the 186h.Act is more definitive
in that it restricts its use and occupancy to Indians of tah Territory
"as may be induced to inhabit the same” and until the'White River tes
‘were placed thereon no Indians except Utah-Indians occupied the reserve.
This legislative change would seem to justify'the conclusion that use of
the reserve was to be restricted to the Utah Indians. Moreover, the
Government's dealings subsequent to the l86h.Act was on the basis of the
Indians‘ exclusive possessory right to the reservation.

By the Act of May 2h, I888, 25 Stat. 157, a part of the reservation
was restored to the public domain and ordered sold for the benefit of the
Indians on the reservation, but such act required the ratification of the
Indians to become effective. In every instance where land of the reservation.was taken compensation therefor was paid by the defendant. See
.Act of'May 27, l902, 32 Stat. 2hS, 26h; Act of.April h, 1910, 36 Sta .
259, 255; and.Act of Feb. 13, l93l, hé St“t. lO92, for 9?3,777 acres of

reservation land included in the Uintah Rational Forest.

1)

J

The Executive and Congressional actions, and the entire course of
dealings by the administrative officers of the Government with the
Indians of the Uintah Reservation lead to the conclusion that from its
inception the reservation was established as a permanent and exclusive
home for the Utah Indians who occupied it after l86h. So, in placin
the white Rivers thereon, the defendant violated the rights of the plaintiffs, unless the white Rivers were actually Utah Utes and therefore
entitled to share the reservation with plaintiffs.

Whether the white River Utes were actually in Utah Territory at the
time of the creation of the reservation by the l86h.Act is complicated
by a large number of conflicting statements contained in the documentary
evidence. but out of the mass of material (over 500 documents} in this
record, it is fairly evident that it was only the Utes of Utah Territory
that actually and.permanently settled on the reservation after l86h. The
efforts of the agents were almost exclusively exerted to bring in Utah
Indians. No apparent effort was made to bring in the White River Utes
nor do we find that any of those Utes attempted to take advantage of the
reservation privileges between l86h and 1881. The Government quite

generally considered the Utah and Colorado Utes as separate divisions of
the same tribe and we learn from the evidence that there were three Ute
bands in Colorado known as the Grand River, Yampa and Uintah. These
bands were referred to as such in the Treaty of‘March 2, 1868, 15 Stat.

-9

619, by which they and other Colorado tes ceded all their lands except

certain reservations. One reservation "as provided for these three

0

bands on the Ehite River in Colorado, and an agency was established for

These three groups thereafter became known as

then on their reserve. v p
the White River Utes and were so described in the Agreement of June 15,
1880, 2l Stat. l99, the agreement under which the White Rivers were
placed on the Uintah Reservation.

Whether, as we have said, any of the white River groups originally
occupied.lands in Utah is much confused by the conflicting evidence and
the diametrically opposite positions of counsel with respect thereto.
If the part of the White Rivers the Government describes as YampahUintahs, at some time lived in Utah Territory, they voluntarily'moved

to Colorado after the establishment of the Uintah reserve and before

1868, and remained there until forcibly removed to the Uintah Resert no time after the final

\

vation pursuant to the l880.Agreement.
establishment of the Uintah reserve in l86h, or prior thereto, did th
Colorado Iampahs or Uintahs assert any rights to said reserve or to
occupy the same. In fact, it is undisputed that the White Rivers
strenuously opposed going to the reservation in 1881 and it took tw

or three years to complete the removal from Colorado.

The defendant asserts with much vigor that if the plaintiffs had
any aboriginal claim to the Uintah Valley (this is where the reser‘vation.was established), it was extinguished by the Treaty of'March 2,
619. While the contention is directed to the plain1868, lS Stat.

reserve, it would seem to extend
treaty was executed by seven bands of Colorado Utes. They‘

" 5 b0 V I I‘I_ ‘W O -u‘ I 9 ..|_\ I I 1 .;-.-I- Q ’-.
cede an delineo terrioory out relinquished their “rights in and

to any portion of the United States or territories." One of the parties

to this treat; was a “Uintah band," but this group was not a Utah band

at the time of th treaty; it was a Colorado band which, with the Yampa
and Grand River Utes, settled on the white River in Colorado and became

known as the White River Utes and were under an agency of the same name

established by the l868 treaty. .And even if they did cede Utah lands

in l868, as indicated by Royce (Utah l), which is doubtful, they did not
cede any part of the Uintah Reservation, as the cession shown by Royce
did not extend west of the Colorado or Green rivers.

But, the defendant also contends, the plaintiffs were parties to

the l868 treaty by virtue of the fact that a chief or sub-chief by name

/ _____ '_ __o_ 1 9 no - - .- I *- -_ '
yautcru) blgncu an inconsequential amendment {see rlti. ex.

.-..t‘ I ...-I—1.....
U4. -G-.|.4.vu.;. \.J

165) to that treaty. This Indian was a Uintah Ute from the Uintah Reser.-.-L“

vauion. He did.not sign the main treaty and there is no convincing

evidence that he represented the Uintah Utes of Utah, or that he had any

such authorit when he sivned.the amendment. ‘Hence the.Anthro sivna:: 3 :2

tnre in no way affected the Uintah Reservation lands.

1

Ponulation ratio as between Uintan and white

River Utes.

 

A question Easic to this litigation is the part of the Uintah Reservation that was lost to the Uintah tes as a result of placing the White

River Utes thereon by virtue of the Act of June l5, l880, 2l Stat. l99,

which ratified.the.Aareement of March 6, 1880, between the Confederated
Bands of Utes and defendant.

No proof has been offered as to the lands in the Uintah ReserQ

vation actually occupied oy the white River Utes when they were placed

thereon by the defendant, beginning ‘n l55l, so the plaintiffs would
have us detennine the part so t“ken on the basis of the respective
populations of tie two groups. The case Shoshoni v. United States,
299 U. 3. E76, $2 C. Cls. 23, seems to provide such a method and we
will be guided by it. But to apply it, the number of Uintahs and of
White River Utes at the time of th latter‘s settlement on the reservation must be determined.

The plaintiffs claim there were h7h Uintah and 555 V iie RiV8rS
"on the Uintah Reservation in l88l, after white Rivers were moved from
Colorado to that reservation, and would have us determine the part of
the reservation lands t*ken for the settlement of the White Rivers on
the basis of such population figures. rhe evidence does not support
those figures.

t is obvious that if we are to determine on a population tasis the
part of the reservation used forfthe settlement of the White Rivers, it
is only those Uintah and White Rivers who permanently occupied the same
at the time the Jhite Rivers were placed thereon that can be considered,
since, as we have said, no proof has been offered by either party as to
the reservation lands actually occupied by the white Rivers.

The white Rivers did not immediately r.nove to the Uintah Reservation after the conclusion of the Agreement oflharch 6, 1880. It was
not until about August l88l, that the main band of white Rivers reached
the reservation. The first authentic evidence of their numbers in the
Uintah Reservation is found in the report of.A. B. Meacham, a member of
the Ute Commission who had been assigned by that Commission to remove th

White River Utes from the Colorado to the Utah Rese_¢ation. (Flt

(D

Meacham reported to the Commission on November 21, 1881 (Pltf. BX.
280), that after the White Rivers were brought to the reservation he
enrolled them in accordance with the l88O agreement (Find. l0) and
entered 655 of them on the "census list." But he also stated in the
same report:

%-%-True, a majority of the White River Utes returned to

Colorado, with their families, because of the government‘s

failure to supply them with annuity goods and partly on

account of their attachment to their old homes. If they

are not molested and driven to war by misunderstanding

with white men, I feel safe in saying that all, or nearly

all, of them will within the next year locate permanently

at Uintah, the exceptions being Colorow and one or two

others.

The above report is the basis for the 655 population figure relied upon
by plaintiffs, but it will be seen from the above that more than 300 of
those enrolled 1ndians‘remrmnxito Colorado a-eer getting per capita payments in Utah of $19.00. Some later returned to the Uintah Reservation
but others did not. One 5. R. Martin was sent to Utah and Colorado by
the Attorney General and on May 23, 1882, he made his report (Pltf. Ex.
28h). He stated that the Agent of the Uintah.Agency said only 275 white
Rivers had come into his agency; Martin further repo-.ed that about

100 white River roaming" te had just been started back to their agency.
He, Martin, estimated that the white Rivers did not exceed over hOO and
this figure included the lOO being returned by Major Bryant of’Meeker,
Colorado, mentioned in the report. In this report, Martin.also estimated there were L60 Uintah at the Uintah.Agency.

Coming now to the Uintah Ute, we find.Agent Critchlow reporting on

August 18, 1851 (Fltf. Ex. 28:, p. 213), 57k Uintah shown by a "careful

census" made "last winter.“ This figure was used by the Commissioner of
Indian.Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior in ordering distribution of funds to the Uintah they considered payable under the Brunot

Agreement of 18?}, the Treaty of 1868 and the Agreement of June 15,

1880. (Pltf. E15. 288, 289). These letters were written in July 1882,

and based upon the census of 1880-1881 (winter) referred to in the

p. 213).

A

agent's report of.August 18, 1881 (?1tf. Ex. 281,

The Indian population of the Uintah Reservation undoubtedly became stabilized by 188k because of the efforts of the Government to get
the White Rivers on the reservation and the fact that families from
other portions of Utah Territory had settled in the reserve, as indicated by the agent‘s report of August 18, 1881 (Pltf. Ex. 281, p. 213).
So, the census taken in 1881 and later years becomes important.

In January 188b, according to the agent‘s report of August 21, 188h
(Pltf. BX. 292, p. 199), "a careful census“ of the Uintah Reservation
Indians was taken which showed that there were 531 white River Utes and
S28 Uintah Utes there at that time.

And again, the report of the Indian.Agent, dated.August 20, 1885

292-A) shows that as of June 30, 1885, there were

--, according

. ax.
to a "complete census,” Slh White River Utes and S08 Uintah Utes on the
reservation.

The above population figures are consistent with the "965 Uintah and
E‘iue River Utes -- nearly half and half“ reported by the Uintah Agent
an‘ lead to the conin his report of August 14, 1s83 (?1tf. Ex. 356),

clusion that the population of each of the two groups was about equal

from the time t.e Hhite Rivers were completely settled on the reservation, unless a change in the population of the Uintah is caused by

.the failure to include the Pahvant and Sampitch groups as reservation

Uintah in the census.

The Government contends in its brief (p. S2-3) that since the
Pahvants and Sampitches are plaintiffs their numbers of 13h and 75,
respectively, even though they uere not living on the reservation,
should be included in the Uintah population figure, thus increasing
the census figure of 528 shown by the census of January l88h (Pltf. Ex.
292, p. l99) to 737, the White River census figure of that date, S3l,i
remaining unchanged. .

The claim in this docket is by those Uintah permanently'settled
on the reservation at the time the White Rivers occupied a part of it.

. C3 
The act estaolisning the reservation (13 Stat. _oo ) expressly provides

is set apart for the permanent settlement and exclusive

occupation of such of the different tribes of Indians

of said territory [ftah7as may be induced to inhabit

the same.
There is nothing in the act vesting rights in Utah Indians who did not
permanently settle on the reservation, hence, those groups of Pah'ant
and Sampitch who did not take advantage of the act by settling on the
reservation are not entitled to share in the recovery herein. No doubt,
individual Pahvant and S“mpitch settled.oh the reserve andteere included
in the census lists but those who did not do so must be excluded and

must not be added to the l88h census figures, or anv others, in determining the Uintah population at the time the white River Utes were

5 7

2 ‘"i-\5.£'i-E:‘a‘ ‘'

settled thereon. Therefore, to the extent that the Pahvant and Sampitch

In

{U

y be considered as plaintiffs herein, representing the members of
those groups who did not pernanently settle on the Uintah Reservation,
they are dismissed as parties plairtiff.

we, accordingly, concluded that the effect of the settlement of

the White River Utes on the Uintah Reservation was'to deprive the Uintah

Utes of an undivided half of the lands of the Uintah Reservation.

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

We concur in the foregoing:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

i,._J

