BEFCRE ‘IKE INDIAN CLAITS CO1‘-L“~IISSIOI\?

TI-IE coma D=m;.2:~.~ ‘E TRIBE )
OF INDIANS,. )
)
Petitioner, 3
V9 ) Docket N00 
)
THE UNITED sums OF AI~1}1-'iICA, ;
. Defendant: )
Decided: December 3, 1957
Appearances:

Ralph G. I-Iiggenhorn, with whom

were J. M. Schjltz, Glen A. 1-Iilkinson
and Donald C. Gormley,

.‘§.E.’i.o;rz.'-.-;.ys for Fetiiaioner.

John D . Sullivan, with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys 1‘ or Defendant.

OPINION _g__13 _:m_1:_ comssiolxr

0'1~Iarr, Corrzmissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case is now before the Commission for the C1e‘beI'I!1iIlE;€."'i.i.Zi.(T>fIf?. of 

consideration the defendant paid the petitioner for its lands ’z:L:::1«:T::«:s:—r t}::.r—f+

Agreement of March 26, 1887, 26 Stat. 989, 1027, the effective date did’ such .

agreement, and the value of the lands ceded.
A hearing has heretofore been held upon the issue of petitior.»er’s

right to the lands claimed to have been used and occupied by the

Coeur d'A1ene Indian Tribe from time immemorial and rhich were ceded to
the United States by the agreement of March 26, 1887, ratified by the

Act of March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. 989, 1027. The Commission made findings

of fact upon said issue and rendered a decision thereon Ch Ind. C1. Comm. 1)
and concluded that the petitioner had proved that it held aboriginal
Indian title to the lands described.in Finding 11 therein at the time of
said 1887 Agreement and that the defendant had.recognized said Indian
title in petitioner. On the same day, August 26, 1955, the Commission
entered an interlocutory order containing said conclusions of‘lan'and
ordered left for final determination all other issues including the consideration paid for said cession and the value of the lands ceded at the
time of said cession. These and related issues are now before the Commission for its determination. The questions to be determined are (1) the
value of the lands at the date of acquisition, (2) the date of evaluation,
(3) whether the compensation paid under the Agreement of March 26, 1887,
‘was unconscionable and, (b) whether or not Indian title includes the
beneficial ownership of timber and subsurface rights.

The Coeur dialere Tract consisting of 2,389,92h acres is located in
the present states of Idaho and'Washington, with 33h,328 acres of said
total acreage being in the State of‘Nashington. The Tract occupies the
central portion of the Panhandle Section of the State of Idaho and extends
into Washington from ten to twelve miles. The northernmost part of the
ceded lands reaches the southern tip of Lake Pend Oreille and the eastern

boundary is the summit of the Bitterroot Mountain range. The Tract

extends southward to the spur ranges and hills dividing the drainage

basin of Coeur d'Alene Lake from the drainage of the Snake River. The
area is rugged and mountainous for the most part but is well watered by
streams such as the Coeur d'Alene and St. Joe rivers which flow into

Coeur d"Alene Lake and the St. Maries River. The Tract contains a small
amount  agricultural lands such as Rathdrum Prairie in the northwestern
part of the ceded area and part of these farm lands are located along the
western portion in the famous Palous wheat belt.

Except for a stampede of mining men into the area in 1865 in what

apparently was an unsuccessful venture there was little early settlement’
The advent of the Northern Pacific Railroad in the

within the ceded area.

ear'l.jr .'|.880‘!='. which. passed thrmagh the nort‘nwe:=:te~r-n corner of‘ ‘the. Cmzmr

d'Alene Tract resulted in the developmnt of the agricultural lands of the
area and by 1887 a fairly active market existed for these agricultural

lands. By 1887 there were telephone lines connecting the principal towns
in the area and these were flourishing towns, most of them mining settlements but others in the farming districts. There were post offices, flour

mills, banks, sawmills and nuzmrous schools. Patents had been issued in

a few instances to settlers in the area. Transportation into the ceded

area was accomplished by 1887 as a result of a branch railroad line from

Hauser Junction on the Northern Pacific extending southward to the northern

end of Lake Coeur dhilere. At least three steamers were operating on the

lale and on the Coeur d'Alene, St. Jw and St. Maries rivers. These steamQ

.-.'!.Q

+1" 8 \J.LLJ.

Q 1--v-s --u 1v
‘D ‘
vssu

J,,§.'_'. d.In,.l.V

boats navigated Coeur d’Ale er to th

‘M-2.
J.s_L

C‘)

6140

which point a narrow gauge railroad was built up the Coeur d‘Alene
River to the mining towns.

In the early 1880's a mining prospector, Prichard, discovered the
placer gold fields on what is now Prichard Creek, a tributary of the
North Fork of the Coeur d'Alene River within the Tract. The exact year
of his discovery is in dispute, but by 1881; the news of the discovery
became known to the general public and in that year thousands of miners
entered the area and thus began the mineral development of the Coeur
d'Alene mining region. In 1881;, the first lead-silver mines were discovered, such as the Tiger and Poorman mines, and in 1885 the famous
Bunker‘ Hill and Sullivan mines -were located and staked. By l88? a large
11'u:e.‘:.:er of lode claims in the si3.ver-lead district had been iileci.

The findings of fact herein made deal extensively with the topography of the area and its developnent, history, transportation facilities,
and other factors mrtinent to evaluation. It is not deemed necessary to
reiterate all of these facts in a discussion of the issues new to be considered.

Date of Evaluation

Defendant contends that the date of evaluation in this case should
be Eovember 8, 1873, that is, the date the Coeur d‘Alene reservation was
established by Executive order. Defendant's counsel argues that from and
after that date the Coeur d’Alene Indians accepted the reservation which

was set aside for them and abandoned the right of occupancy and use of all

other portions of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract and that from and after that

éhl

date the lands of the Coeur d'Alene Tract were administered as a part
of the Public Domain. The evidence shows that most of the Coeur d‘Alene
Indians were on the reservation by 1877 and that the lands of the Tract

were administered as a part of the Public Domain prior to 1887. The

evidence, however, also discloses the fact that the Indians continually

sought a council with representatives of the United States to discuss
their claim to compensation for their lands outside of the reservation
and that the officials of the United States realized that the Indian
title to said lands had never been extinguished. A study of the documents
leading up to the negotiation and execution of the Agreement of March 26,

l887, shows that it was the intent of the United States to obtain a cession

of izhcz. ]_:_:__nd.s: zmr-1

.,_.._._ _

‘§'.hc:'I~t:T1':r t="r+."H-101 -3:231 +.‘np
t—-a-'1 -4- Id I.-J aiiblh Y-btlf

1- °'fq§-¢¢U§5

Indian ‘t4 ‘'1: in 4-'|nr\ D.-..-...~. a-7131:-x---r~

s.n-.34. n‘-in I-I-J»--r "-' iv‘ v-I tutu. --p a-—-n-cur sand

Tribe to said lands. (See Pet. Exhibits 20, 22, 82, 81;, 101, 103, 101;, 106,
109, 111, 112, 113, 115 and Def. Exhibits 2, 7). If the United States
had considered the removal of the Coeur d'JLLene to the Executive order
reservation as a relinquishment of any tribal claimto lands outside of
the reservation, there certainly would have been no need of the Agreement
of March 26, 1887, by which a cession was obtained of said lands. F or
these reasons the present case is distinguished from United States v.
Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Comnany, 311; U.S. 339, cited by defendant.
Furthermore, the dominion the defendant exercised over the Indians‘

lands prior to 1887 did not constitute an extinguishrrent of Indian title.

A similar situation was considered by the Court of Claims in Beam v.

United Stases and Sioux: Indians, 13 C. ‘S15. 61. There, an agr'eement was

 

consummated with the Sioux on September 26, 1876, and ratified February 25,

61.32,

61;

K»)

1877, containing a clause making it binding only on ratification. Prior
to the agreement and its ratification, thousands of settlers had entered
the ceded territory and remained there under the protection of military
forces and it was mdntained by the ‘depredation claimant that the defendant
acquired title to the Sioux lands contemporaneously with the occupation

by the military forces and therefore the agreement should be considered

as effective from its date rather than its ratification. In overruling
this contention and holding that the agreement was not binding until

ratified the court said:

4% -3’: -3? Possession of the country by the military forces
pending the treaty no more transferred title to the land

than it did to divest the right of exclusive occupation by
the Sioux.

:30 it would appear that until the .Lnaian title passed under the _L66'(
agreement the prior exertion of Govermnt control of the lands does not
affect the Indians‘ right to additional compensation therefor  of the
date the Indian title was legally extinguished.
Petitioner’s counsel, on the other hand, urges that the date of
evaluation should be March 3 , 1891, the date of ratification, rather
than the date of the Agreement of March 26, 1887. During oral argument,
counsel f or petitioners stated that petitioner would accept whatever
evaluation date, that is l887 or 1891, was finally fixed by the Commission.
The Commission has consistently held that in treaties containing

Clauses postponing the obligations of a treaty until ratified they do

not become binding until ratified, relying upon Bush v. United States,

29 0. Cls. 11411. See Ifez Perce v. United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 571, S83;

Muckleshoot v. United States 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 658; Nooksack V. United

.____.____._:._J..

States, 3 Ind. C1. Comm. 1:79, 5011. But the Government now contends that
the Bush case, supra, does not support our holdings that such treaties

or agreements do not become effective until ratified because in the present
case (1) the claim is based upon unconscionable consideration and (2) in
the Bush case individual, as distinguished from national, rights were
involved.

Why the gross inadequacy of the consideration should change the

time for determining such inadequacy from that fixed by the agreement to

a prior time is not apparent. We have always held that it is the value
of the ceded lands at the time Indian title passed that must be compared
with the consideration paid for the lands ceded in order to determine
whether the consideration was unconscionable. Under the act (clause 3 of
section 2) there must be a treaty or agreement which passes title and
fixes the consideration, so we must be governed by the provisions of the
treaty or agreement as to the time title passed. we, therefore, see no
reason in this case for departing from the rule we have followed in
determining such questions.

As to thaother contention of defendant, both the Court of C'3l;:.;ha':;.:.:.:

and the 5upreme Qourt recognize the rule that as between the 'OZ.~?‘.."f."‘:.i."T tn
a treaty their respective rights attach as of the date of signing and not

“I

as of the date of ratification. (This principle, as will be seen. 7 

applies only when the treaty is silent as to the effective date). Also,

when a treaty operates on individual rights the principle of relation

 

does not apply and the treaty operates from the time of ratification.

Bush v. United States, 29 C. Cls. lhh; Beam v. United States, b3 C. Cls.

61, 66; Revnes v. United States, 9 How. 1L8; Haver v. United States,

9 Wall. 31;.

It is true, as the defendant states, that in the Bush case, supra,
onhv individual rights were affected by the treaty there involved, and
to the extent that only individual rights were actually determined the

decision is perhaps inapposite here. However, the Court of Claims in

that case also discussed the question of the time treaties become operative as between the parties thereto, which is the precise question now

before us, and plainly recognized the principle that as between the

parties to a compact it becomes ope.ativ; when ratified if +he cvreerert

Wnn-3 Elna: ‘ad &QI-it DC '#

so provides, as was the case of the 1887 agreement. This recognition is

shown by the following statement contained in the opinion at page lh7:

The Indians and the United States, like all other independent contractors, may agree by the terms of their

contract when it shall take effect, and courts will enforce
that provision in dealing with the rights and obligations

of the parties.

As between nations, treaties operating upon purely
national rights operate from.the date of signing, in the
absence of a provision to the contrary. (Underscoring ours)

And at page lh8 in referring to a Supreme Court case, the court said:

*-* % In the case of the United States v, Reynes, in 9
Howard, the Supreme Court clearly'indicate that, if there
had been a provision in the treaty under consideration that
it was to be suspended until its ratification, the law would
have been different in that case.

And in the case of Beam.v. United States et al., b3 C. Cls. 61, 66,

the Court of Claims again indicated that the parties to a treaty might

6145

agree to postpone its operation until it is ratified.nhen it said at
page 66:

"It is undoubtedly true, as a principle of international
law," said Enaeaton and the Supreme Court, "that, as respects
the rights of either government under it, a treaty is considered as conclusive and binding from the date of its
signature. In this regard the exchange of ratifications
has a retoractive effect, confirming the treaty from its
date." (Haver v. ‘faker, 9 Wall., 311,.) But a different
rule prevails where the treaty operates on individual rights.
The principle of relation does not apply to rights of this
character until there is an exchange of ratifications.
(Arrendondo‘s case, 6 Pet., 7h9.) If it were intended to give
retrospective operation to this agreement it must not be
supposed that words would have been used that expressed the

contrary intention.

   

 

In United Statesv. Reynes, 9 How. 127, 13 L. Ed. 71;, 82, the Supreme

Court said:
In the construction of treaties, the same rules which

govern other compacts properly apply. They must be considered as binding from the period of their execution;

their operation must be understood to take effect from

that period, unless it shall, by some condition or stipulation in the compact itself, be postponed.
This rule was followed by the Supreme Court in Davis v. Concordia, 9 How.
280, 287, l3 L. Ed. 138, lh2, and United States v. D'Auterive, 9 How. 607,
623)  L0 Ed; 560, 

The principle stated in these cases is that when a treaty or agreement between Indians and the United States is silent as to the time it

shall become operative the rights of the parties relate back to the date

of signing and not to the date of ratification. But when an agreement

provides that it shall not be binding on either party until ratified by
Congress, as was the case of the 1887 agreement , it becomes operative on

the rights of the parties only from the date of its ratification. Hence,

61;

in the instant case the Indian. title to the landsherep involved did not
pass until March 3, 1891, and the value of the ceded lands must be

determined as of that date.
Timber and Mineral Rights

It is defendant's contention that in cases involving Indian title,
as distinguished from recognized title, any evaluation of the lands found
to have been so used and occupied by the Indians should not include the
value of timber and minerals. Defendant‘s counsel urges that this case
is one of first impression with respect to this issue as the decisions

holding possessory rights of Indians compensable concerned reservation

8 lands.

T4.-.v

"5

C Utlié e.L

4-01:-uulu A ‘uncu-ha-I '

..1_,.D....... .1...._-.‘L  _..
uui..5\.4. HJ '\4.\La..L'\£.3.I.&\I.aO4J.U

0|“-It
(uh-L 03

that the.-re is a distinction, as
far as including timber and minerals are concerned, in evaluation of lands
acquired by the United States which were held by an Indian tribe as a
permanent reservation, :I_n.which counsel concedes the tribe has the full
beneficial property interest (Shoshone Tribe v. United States, 85 C. Cls.
331, 3611-3653 301: U. S. 113., 118; 82 L. ed.'l2l3 and Klamath and Modorc

Tribes v. United States, 301.1, U. S. 119, 82 L. ed. 1219), and in those where

   

aboriginal title is concerned and the Indians allegedly have no property

interest. In support of this contention defendant cites the holding in

United States V. Cook, 19 val. S91, 22 L. ed. 210. In that case the

   

United States in 1831 had purchased certain lands from the I~Ieno:ninee Indians

IN

G.

for home for emigrant New York Indians who were to hold said lands under

such tenure as the Menominee Indians held their lands. Later, certain of

the Net: York Indians who had been apportioned some of these lands ceded a

61;?

part of them to the United States reserving a tract to be held as other
Indian lands were held. A small number of the tribe cut timber from a
part of the reservation not occupied in severalty which was sold to the
defendantlin that case. The United States sued to recover possession of
the logs from a purchaser from the Indians. The question certified to

the United States Supreme Court was whether the action of replevin could be
brought and maintained.

The Supreme Court said:

The right of the Indians in the land from which the logs

were taken was that of occupancy alone. They had no power of
alienation except to the United States. The fee was in the
United States, subject only to this right of occupancy. This

is the title by which other Indians hold their lands. It was

so decided by this court as early as 1823, in Johnson v. McIntosh,
‘3 Wheat. 5714. . The authority of that case has never been
doubted. 1 Kent. 2573 Worcester 1'. §_a_., 6 Pet. 580. The

right of the Indians to their occupancy is as sacred as that of
the United States to the fee, but it is only a right of occupancy.
Cherokee Nation V. Ga., 5 Pet., b8. The possession, when
abandoned by the Indiarzs, attaches itself to the fee without
further grant. Cherokee Nation v. g_e_., 5 Pet., 17.

The timber, while standing, is a part of the realty, and it

can only be sold as the land could be- The land cannot be sold by
the Indians, and consequently the timber, until rightfully severed,
cannot be. It can be rightfully severed for the purpose of rim»
proving the land, or the better adapting it to convenient (.3Ci;ii"L1.'3_ff.7-zfis-*
tion, but for no other purpose. -3- -‘«‘<- -‘«<-I-?-3’:-3?

The Indians having only a right of occupancy in the lands,
the presumption is against their authority to cut and sell
the timber. ‘>9 94- 
This case, as will be seen later, had but limited application and .,:.;;IT'ords

no help to defendant's theory in this controversy.

6148

This right of occupancy, defendant's counsel contends, is ‘cut a
usuiructory right and sme-the fee title to lands occupied by Indians
is in the United States the value of this usufructory right must be

less than the fee simple value or the value of the full equitable title

as in reservation cases such as the Klamath or Shoshone cases, supra.

 

In support of the contention that the right of occupancy alone does
not carry with it the beneficial incidents including the value of timber
and minerals, defendant cites United States v. Paine Lumber Co. , 206 11.5.

1:57, 51 L. ed. ll39. The Paine case, defendant's counsel states, brings

 

out the ciistinction between the rights of Indians who have the full
equitable title and those who do not. In that case the Stockbridge and
Munsee lndians by the treaty of 155:6 ceded certain lands in 1-«Iisconsi.r1

to the United States reserving a tract which the treaty provided would be
allotted to members of the tribe. The treaty" further provided the
allottees could take possession and that the United States would hold the
lands in trust for the allottees until patents were issued to them and
that non-assignable certiificates were to be issued to the Indians “securing to the holders their possession and an ultimate title to the land."
Two members of the tribes sold timber from their allotments, not for tle
purpose of clearing the land 1‘ or cultivation, but for the purpose of

providing means for the support of their families.

The Supreme Court affirmed the lower court‘s holding that the Indian
allottees had the right to cut and sell the timber for the purpose for
In affirming, the Supreme Court

which the same was cut and sold.

distinguished the Cook case, supra, saying that in that case "The

   

61:9

ultimate conclusion of the court was determined by the limited right
which the Indians had in the lands from which the timber there in controversy was cut.“ The court further said:

* it it If such were the title in the case at bar, such

would be the conclusions. But such is not the title. We

need not, however, exactly define it. It is certainly more
than a right of mere occupation. The restraint upon alienation must not be exaggerated. It does not of itself.‘ debase
the right below a fee s imple. Libby v.,Clark, 1.1.8 U. S. 250,
30 L. ed. 133, 6 Sup. Ct. Rep. l0hS. The title is held by the
United States, it is true, but it is held “in trust for individuals and their heirs to whom the same were allotted." The
considerations, therefore, which determined the decision in
United States v. Cook, do not exist. The land is not the
land of the United States and the timber when out did not
become of the property of the United States. '5? -3’: -31- Urxierscoring supplied} .

Defendant's argument to make the distinction between the Cook case and

       
 

the Paine support its contention that aboriginal possession does not

include the beneficial incidents must fail for several reasons. In the

first place, the Supreme Court in the Cook case, supra, said that “But

 

a tenant for life has all the rights of occupancy in the lands of a

remainderman. The Indians have the same rights in the lands of their

 

reservations." (Underscoring supplied). It is only a right of occunancv
that the Indians have even in a reservation unless perhaps unrestricted
patents have been or are to be issued. The phrase “right of occupancy"
is used to distinguish the title by which Indians hold their lands as

against the United States. In Worcester v. State of Georgia, 6 Pet. S15,

8 L. ed. LL83, the Supreme Court said, "-::- -:.<-  Their right of occupancy has
never been questioned, but the fee in the soil has been considered in the
government. This may be called the right to the ultimate domain but the

Indians have a present right of possession.“ Secondly, the distinction

in the Cook and Paine cases is not that in the latter the tribes had

what might be termed reservation title while in the former the tribe

dddnot have such title. The distinction is that in the Cook case the

tribes had a right of occupancy with the "right of ultimate domain" in

the United States, while in the Paine case the United States did not own

the land but rather held the land in trust for the allottees. In the

Cook case it was not necessary for the Supreme Court to determine whether

the tribes held possession by Indian title or reservation title nor was
it necessary to determine whether the United States was entitled to the

ownership of the timber as against the tribe. In the Shoshone case, supra,

the Supreme Court said;

U.._'i.Led .-’3‘..a~i;-as '9. Cook, 19 "w'all_. 591, 22 L. ea. 21.0, 1-mpra,
gives no support to the contention that in ascertaining just
compensation for the Indian right taken, the value of mineral
and timber resources in the reservation shouldbe excluded.
That case did not involve adjudication of the scope of Indian
title to land... minerals or standing timber. but only the right
of the United States to replev-in logs cut and sold by a few
unauthorized members of the tribe. 1’-he held than 3-5 8?§85-USJG
the purchaser from the I-rrongzdoersz the United tates ras entitled to possession. It was not there decided that the tribe's
right of occupation in perpetuity did not include our.ership__;o_:§_
the land or mineral deposits or standing timber upon the reservation or that the tribe‘s right was the mere eouivalent of,

or like: the title of a life tenant. Underscoring supplied).

 

 

       

 

 

 

 

_ Fcr all the above reasons it is believed that the Cook case, supra, is not

controlling with respect to the question of whether the value of minerals

and timber should be included in an evaluation of lands which had been held

by aboriginal Indian title .

It has been held by the Supreme Court of the United States that the

right of occupancy of Indian title lands is not a property right and that

this right of occupancy may be terminated and such lands fully disposed
of by the United States without any legally enforceable obligation to

compensate the Indians. Tee-hit-ton Indians 1!. United States, 3&8 U. S.

272. Where, however, Congress by treaty or other agreement has declared

that thereafter Indians were to hold the lands permanently, compensation

must be paid for mbsequent taking. Tee-hit-ton case, suura. Recovery

 

has been permitted for Indian title lands based upon a statutory direction
to pay for the aboriginal title in the special jurisdictional mt allowing the Indians to sue the United States, but it was held that there had
been no compensable taking under the Fifth Amendment. United States v.

Tillamoom, 329 U. S. 140, and United States v. Tillamooks, 31:1 U. S. LL8.

 

p Q‘-1 9  ‘I-'11-  9- S  v-.. u... .. .p. c_-— up '-..- — \-'54. in-v -L aéh-n--'-4.4:-m.s¢..v Us

I-n.£u.nu glob:-4--ulb D-—— --mp... .......'_ .,. _“ -T’. 'W.'_ ,.
4. ~...~...uv L41. .a..u.n. "v.1. .:.5.L.u.::..L _:..1.n.1...t..cL1l

title under the Indian Claims Commission Act, I60 Stat. 1019, has been
determined in favor of the Indians, Otoe and Missouria Tribe v. United
 , 2 Ind. Cl. Comm. 335, 131 C. Cls. 633, cert. denied 350 U. s. 8h8.
In affirming the holding of this Commission the Court of Claims said:

% -z:- -1’: Both fromthe language of clause (L1) and its legis-lative history which we shall discuss later, we are of the
opinion that Congress intended that Indmn claimants should
have ac ause of action and should be entitled to recover the
value of the Indian title lands which had been taken by the
Government without the payment of compensation therefor,
whether the Government acquired that land by ratified treaty
of cession,‘ or whether the land was taken without the formality
of a treaty, even an unratified one.

If clause (h) permits Indian claimants to recover for the
uncompensated taking (deprivation) by treaty or otherwise of
a property right which. in itself created no legal right in the
ormsr against the Government, it. would seem reasonable to
conclude that Congress also intended that the same property
right ceded under a ratified treaty of cession for a grossly

inadequate consideration, would give rise to a cause of
action under clause (3); and also, that where the Government's dealings with" Indians comerning that same property
right were less than fair and honorable, the Indians should
have a claim under clause (5). A study of the legislative
history of the Act asa whole and of those three clauses in
particular, persuades us that Congress did so intend.

It is the extent of the aboriginal Indian interest in land held by

Indian title that is new questioned by defendant. In a technical legal

sense it is not a property right but a right of occupancy. Tee-hit-ton

case, supra. The courts and this Commission having determined that the

Indians may recover under the Act for the deprivation of Indian title, it
is necessary to ascertain whether such title includes the beneficial ownership of timber and minerals as it does under reservation title. Granting

the right to recover for Indian title which has been termed a "right of
occupancy" -- the same term which is applied to the manner in which Indian
tribes hold reservation title and where they have been found entitled to

recover for timber and minerals, should their interest in Indian title

lands be considered less substantial? In the Shoshone case, 30].; U. S. lll,

117, 82 L. ed. l2l8, 1219, the Supreme Court said:

Although the United States retained the fee, and the tribe's
right of occupancy was incapable of alienation or of being held
otherwise than in common, that right is as sacred and as securely
safeguarded as is fee simple title. Cherokee Ration v. Georgia, 5 Pet. 1, b8, 8 L. ed. 25, 142; Worcester v. Georgia, supra (6 Fat.
580, 8 L. ed. 508). Subiect to conditions imposed by the treatjgr,
the Shoshone Tribe had the right that has always been understood.
to belong to Indians. undisturbed oossessors of the soil :i‘rom tirrre
iznmemorial. Undersccring supplied .

 

 

     

 

The granting of reservations to Indian tribes gave them only the right of
occupancy, something that they always possessed in their lands, but the

establishment of such reservation title did secure to the tribes the

protection of the constitutional requirements of the Fifth Anrendment.
The right of occupancy remained the interest the tribes continued to
possess and this included substantial ownership as previously existed

in the tribes. As the Supreme Court said in United States'v. Algona

 

Immber Co., 305 U. S. hlS, 83 L. ed. 260:

 

The Klamath Reservation was set apart as tribal lands under
the Treaty with the Klamath Tribe of February l7, 1870, 16 Stat.
707, from.lands immemorially possessed by them. See United
States V} Klamath Indians, 30h U.S. ll9, 121. Under th
provisions of the treaty and established principles applicable
to land.reservations created for the benefit of the Indian
tribes, the Indians are beneficial owners of‘the land and the

' timber standing upon it and of the proceeds of their sale,
subject to the plenary power of control by the United States,
to be exercised for the benefit and protection of the Indians.
(Citing cases). The United States acquired no beneficial ownership in the tribal lands or their proceeds. and however we mav
define the nature of the legal interest acquired by the government as the inpleme nt of its control substantial ownership
remained'witr the tribe as it existed befdre the treaty.
United States v. Shoshone Tribe, supra, ll . Underscoring
supplied).

 

   

 

The Court of Claim has considered.the value of timber and.minerals
in awarding judgment for an Indian.tribe in a case involving Indian title.

588 Alcea Band of Tillamooks V. United States, llS C. Cls. h63. De 

fendant's counsel argue, however, that the presently urged contention
that Indian title does not include the beneficial incidents as found in
the value of timber and minerals was not urged in that case. The argnnent
was in effect made by defendant, however, in support of its petitien for
writ of certiorari (which was denied) to the United States Supreme Court

in a case involving Indian title -- Otoe and Missouria Tribe of Indians

V. The United States, 2 Ind. Cl. Comm. 335, 131 C. C15. 633, '

 

was denied.

350 U. S. 8h8.

It is true, as counsel for the Government argues, that in those
cases where the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court have allowed
compensation for the taking of Indian lands they were set apart for

the permanent occupancy of the Indians. The legal title did not pass

but there was permanence to their possession and use. It was this
permanency that apparemly gave the Indians a compensable interest,

although their rights in the land remained merely’ possessory, and included ownership of the timber and minerals of the lands. 5hoshone ‘V.

United States, supra.

jun.-1-3

 

Of course, lands held by "Indian title" were likewise possessory
rights but of uncertain ten1n‘e.3 they were rights the Geverrment 1-.*ou.'.‘..d
protect but could be taken by it without compensating the Indians therefor (unless directed by statute). However, the passage of the Indian
Claims Commission Act changed this and created compensahle interest in
such lands, as we decided in Otoe-Missouria case and as the Court of
Claims decided in a.ffi:r'm:Lng that decision. There is nothing in the
Indian Claims Commission Act, which made Indian title compensable, indicating that the Indian rights to the lands did not, for valuation
purposes, include the timber standing thereon or the mineral deposits.
Minerals aid timber are constituent elements of the soil; that is
common knowledge. So it can be presumed, we ‘believe, that in the
absence of an expression of some lcind in the act to do so, the value

of the lands includes the value of the minerals "1 and the standing

timber thereon.

C onsider ation

 

Article 6 of the l887 agreement required the defendant to pay the

 

petitioner $lS0,000. The G. A. 0. report, page l2 (Claimant’s Ex. No.
168) shows disbursements aggregating this sum; however, certain items

of the mount appear not to -the authorized ‘under sai‘d.'Artic_1e".—’6; ' they

are:
Maintaining lmr and order 5 22.73

Miscellaneous agency expense 560.00

Clerk 2,751.12

3,333.35

Then, the following items are charged against the $150,000 which are
plainly expenditures authorized by Article 11 of the agreement and should

be so c'na.rged.:

Medical supplies $1, 8111 .21.;

Pay and expenses of blacksmiths ' 6341.888
Pay of carpenter 52.50
Pay of physician 550.00
8 3,058.62

Because of the above, the Article 6 disbursements should be reduced
to the sum of $113,607.53. (Finding La).

Article ll of the agreemrrt required defendant to provide for the

 

Indians at "its own ‘expense 61- a competent physician, medicines, a
blacksmith and carpenter." The G.A.0. report, (p. 12) shows disbursements

for these categories as follows:

Medical supplies 8 2,712.86
Pay of blacksmith 3h,6h1.63
Pay of carpenters 9,32h.S9
Pay of physician 33.509.7h

$85,218.82

Add for total of similar items
erroneously included in.Article 6
expenditures

Total Article 11 charges

S 3,058.62

$883277ohh

‘With the above adjustments we conclude that the defendant is entitled
to a credit on the claim of $lh3,d07.S3 for Article 6 expenditures and
$88,277.hh for Article'll expenditures, a total of $23l,88h.97.

The petitioner contends that the defendant should not be allowed
credit for the Article 11 expenditures because it is expressly provided
in that Article that such expenditures were to be made by defendant "at
its own expense." We believe such disbursements were as much a part of
the consideration as was the $150,000 provided for in Article 6. Article.
11 provided that the cost of providing medicines, a physician, carpenter
and blacksmith.should be “in addition to the amount heretofore provided
* a," obviously'referring to the $150,000. Hence, is seems plain that the
Article ll expenditures were to be separate from and in addition to the

$150,000 provided for in Article 6 and were to be made indefinitely at the

expense of the Government.

Evaluation

 

The appraisers for the parties in this litigation agree that the

highest and best use of the lands of the Tract fits into three classifications: (l) agricultural lands, (2) timber lands and (3) mineral lands.
They disagree, however, on the amount of land included in each classification and the value thereof. The appraisers agree that the comparable

sales, or market data, approach is the proper method of evaluating the

agricultural.and timber lands. They disagree on the method of evaluating

6 S7

6 S8 : 

the mineral lands. From a study of the evidence and testimony of record
this Commission has found that lll,8,08O acres of the Coeur d'Alene tract
should be classified as mineral lands, 393,238 acres as agricultural lands,
and the remainder, l,8h8,606 acres, as timber lands. In support of their

conclusions as to value, the appraiser for petitioner, Mr. Henry T. Murray,

_aniexpert witnesses for petitioner, Mr. Fred 0. Jones, a consulting geologist,

and Father William N. Bischoff, historian, and C. Mac Miller, appraiser
for defendant, submitted written reports containing a wealth of valuable
information pertaining to the factors which affected the value of the
tract and form the basis for many of the findings of factherein made in
this case. In addition to the testimony and reports of the above named
experts this Commission also had the benefit of the testimony of Mr. Frank
Lilly, a research statistician, specializing in mining, who appeared before
the Commission for petitioner, and Professor W. Staley, professor of mining
at the University of Idaho, College of Mines, who testified as an expert
for defendant.
The differences in opinion of the experts, as to the value of the

Coeur d'Alene Tract, readily points up the difficult task confronting

this Commission lehich is called upon to evaluate petitioner's lands at
aremote time. Mr. Murray, petitioner's appraiser, based upon his study

of the value of the timber and agricultural lands and upon Mr. JorBs'
appraisal of the minerals, was of the opinion that the value of the lands
as of March 3, 1891, was $35,22s,ooo_.oo (Tr. 1307). Mr. Frank Lilly,
testifying for petitioner, stated that in his opinion the mining diS't‘.'§."'-'.-f.I'

in 1881;--l88S would have been worth a minimum of $10,000,000 and that 

..3:'."-'}if\sf,.
-_ . - - -'-.

the discovery of the Bunker Hill and Sullivan mines the . district in l887
would have had a minimum value of .$l5',000,000.00. Mr. Jones, petitioner's
mining expert , was of the opinion that the mineral resources had a minimum
value as of March 3, 1891, of $30,000,000.00 (Tr. 1106, ll68). Defendant's
appraiser, Mr. Miller, was of the opinion that the Coeur d‘Alene Tract as
of March 3, 1891, had a fair market value of $3,350,000.00. This appraiser
concluded that as of March 26, 1887 the known mineral deposits would have
added perhaps as much as $1,500,000 to the value of the Tract and such
minerals would have enhamed the value in 1891 to“ the extent of
$2,000,000.00. Proiessor Staley in testifying for defendant was of the
opinion that the mining district was worth $2,800,000.00 in 1891.
Agr iculturr al Lands

The agricultural lands are located for the most part in the western
portion of the tract, part of them being in the famous Palouse wheat belt
and others are found in the Rathdrum Prairie area. Some of the lands
herein classified as agricultural for the purposes of evaluation were
timbered and would have required clearing. The acreage classified as
agricultural lands total 393,238 acres. By 1887 a fairly active market
existed for these lands. Sales of these agicultural lands within the
Tract by the Northern Pacific Railway Company were to 1887 at $2.60 per
acre, and from l88T to l89l this railroad sold unimproved lands in Wklitman
and Spokane counties , Washington, and Kootenai County, Idaho,‘ for stated
considerations ranging from $2.50 an acre to $10.00 an acre for sales
usually consisting of l60 acres or less {Finding 29), at an average price

of $4.12 per acre. Taking into consideration the comparable sales, the

U1.
\0

demand for agricultural lands, the need for time to dispose of such a
tract of land and expenses incident thereto, and the necessity of clearing
some of the lands of timber, the Commission has found that the agricultural
lands were, as of March 3, 1891, of value in the amount of $589,857.00, or
at the rate of $1.50 per acre for 393,238 acres.

Timber Lands

 

The appraisers for both parties agreed that much of the Tract was
timber lands.
known as the best white pine area in the world. With the exception of the
jack pine area in the north of the Tract and the alpine growth in the

higher mountain regions, all of this timber was of good commercial quality.

4.1..
, u:..tE1’'‘’

'06. 1887-1891 e were no sales of timber lands within the
Freight rates were still prohibitive for shipment to the eastern
markets. During the period, the timber resources of the area served to
supply the local markets, as fuel f or steamboats and mining operations,

for timbering in the mines, railroad ties and for building materials.
Defendant's appraiser, Mr. Miller, was of the opinion that only that
timber which was accessible at the time would be of value, which he
estimated to be 500,000 acres, worth no more than $1.00 an acre. This
witness was of the opinion that any price placed on the inaccessible

timber lands would have been entirely speculative. Petitioner’s appraiser,
Mr. Murray, reported 21;, sales covering 3,7l9.h3 acres of timber lands on
the eastern side of the Bitterroot range not far from the Tract at an
average of 534.58 per acre in 1887-1888. These sales were admittedly more

accessible than  parts of the Coeur d'Alene Tract and were selective ..

Part of the Tract in the southern portion is in what is now ,

660

661

Mr. Fiurray considered that Congress by the Timber and Stone Act acknowledged
that timber lands were worth at least the sum of $2.50 per acre (of. Wan
sprigs ‘Iribe v. United States, 103 0. Cls. Thl) but that the price of

$2.50 should be weighted somewhat to reflect a willingness of buyers to pay
more than said minimum. Murray was of the opinion that a fair market price
for the timber was $3.00 per acre, which he adjusted because of the necessity of taking into account the size of the area classified as timber, the
time necessary to exploit or dispose of it, administrative charges and a
return on the investment. Mr. Murray was of the opinion that the value of

the timber lands as of March 26, 1887, was $1.28 per acre.

The evidence of record as set out in detail in the findings of fact

shows that although 1,t3i_;5,c306 acres of the '1'ract was timber land there

was little demand for it in the crucial period. Parts of the area due to
the rivers and Lake Coeur d'Alene, were readily accessible for timber oper-Q
ations while others were largely inaccessible. Timber sales near the Tract
were of but small, selective and easily accessible timber stands. A
prospective purchaser would have known these facts and although realizing
the potential of the timber lands he would have also been aware of the
prohibitive freight rates then in existence. Such a prospective purchaser
would also have considered the importance of the timber lands as a protection of the watershed so necessary to the mining and timber operations.
Taking into consideration the great amount of timber lands and all of the

other factors previously mentioned and more completely set out in the

findings of fact, the l, 8h8,606 acres of timber lands have been found to

6 62:1

have the value as of March 3, 1891, in the amount of $l,8h8,606.00, or at
the rate of $1.00 per acre.
Minerals

The Coeur d'Alene mining district, today one of the largest producing
 districts-in the world, has produced over one and a half billion
dollars worth of minerals to date and from the period 1880 to 1955 the
mining companies of the district have paid a total of $253,000,000 in
dividends. Both parties agree, however, that the value by which the
minerals would have enhanced the market price of the Coeur d'Ale ne Tract
is that value to be ascertained from facts which a prudent well informed
buyer and seller would have knovrn at the date of taking, that is, on
March ,, 1891. As previously pointed out the experts for the parties disagree as to the market value of the mining district. As of 1891, Pk. Jones,
petitioner-‘s expert, was of the opinion that the minimum value of the
mineral resources was $30,000,000.00. Mr. Lilly estimated a minimum
value about 1887 for the mining district of $15,000 ,000.00. Mr. C.
Marc Miller, defendant‘s appraiser, would have valued the mineral resources at about $2,000,000.00 in 1891, while-"Professor Staley set a
value of $2,800,000 for the same year. The methods of approach used by
the experts to the problem of placing a value on the mineral resources
vary as greatly as do their ultimate conclusions as to value.

The material and statistics gathered by the emrts have been of
assistance in arriving at a value for the mineral resources of the Tract.

Mr. Jones, petitioner's expert on minerals, determined the number c-.27."

claims filed within the mining district, both lode and placer, prior to

March 3, 1891.. He also ascertained from county records the sale of mining
claims between the period March 23, l887 to March 3, 1891, where the consideration shown on the deed was $10.00 or more. The consideration shown
on many of these deeds was for fractional parts, that is, a fourth, a half
or a sixteenth interest in the claim sold and Mr. Jones extended these to
show a full claim price. Then an average sales price per claim was computed. This expert then assumd that 9053 of the total claims filed were
valid (valuable) in one study and in another that 7555 of the claims were
valid in order to arrive at a value by multiplying the number of clam

by the average sales price.

Counsel for defendant correctly points out the manifest errors in
such an approach. In the first place, some of the claims filed were
duplicates, i.e., the locator would file his location notice on the same
claim year after year. (Tr. lO33). Next, as urged by defendaIIt’s counsel,
Mr. Jones heavily weighted his values by the extension of sales of
fractional parts of mining claims to show a full claim price. Defendant’s
counsel calls attention to Jones‘ report (Pet. Ex. 139, p. 172) for an
example of this erroneous method. This report shows a sale of an undivided
three-fourths interest in the Gold Hunter I-iine on November 10, l886, for
$214,500 which Mr. Jones extended to show a full claim sales price of
$32,666.66. On March 29, l887, he shows a sale of an undivided one-fourth
interest for if’-14,000.00 which he extended to a full claim sales price of
$16,000.00. On June 9, 1887, a sale oi‘,the claim is shown for a consideration of $17,500. Finally, on June l0, l887, a sale of the claim is

663

' shown for a consideration of $70,000.00.

On the same page of the report Mr. Jones shows a sale of an undivided one-sixteenth interest in

the Bunker Hill claim on April 25, 1887, for $62,500.00, which he

extends to a full claim sales price of $500,000.00, and on the same date
a sale of an undivided one-sixteenth interest in the Sullivan claim which
he also extended to a full claim sales price of $500,000.00. It is a
matter of general agreement among the authorities that the Bunker Hill
and Sullivan mines were sold at the same time for a cash consideration
of $625,000.00 or $650,000.00.

I The sale of the Bunker Hill and SuIL'Livan to Simeon 0. Reed in April
1887 is stressed by defendant's counsel as an example of transactions
showing greater considerationnamed in deeds of sale of claims than
actually changed hands in the sales. There appears to be general agreement that the sale was for a cash consideration of some $625,000.00 or
$650,000.00. Father Bischofi‘, petitioner's historian, reported that
Mr. Reed paid $731,616.02 for the Bunker Hill and Sullivan mines, the
comentrator, adjacent fractions, contracts in force, and unexpired‘
insurance (Pet. Ex. _l38, p. 33). The deeds of sale involving the

transfer of ownership to Reed, however, which are in evidence, rc—:r::ii‘”i:.re

considerations totaling $1,153, 1:96.00 (Pet. Exhibits hé, S0, 61, 

Attention was also called to the sale of the Mammoth Lode Claim ~:_«:r‘:;:; *1:-".'.:=..E3‘

outside the Coeur d‘Alene  District but within the Tract. There
were two deeds for the sale of that promrtjr showing a COnSidE?T$.‘§5-T1_-';‘.'-‘"1 of
$5,000,000.00 each while an investigation of said claim shovcecia 
development work ever. done on the property was the driving of 

tunnels into the hillside.

661;

665

It is for these reasons that the value of the mineral resources of
the Coeur d'Alene Tract may not be bottomed on Mr. Jones’ approach. The
great number of locations and the many transfers of interest in the mining
claims, however, do demonstrate interest in the areaand regard for its
potentialities.

The value of the mineral resources as found in the opinions expressed
by defen@.nt's expert witnesses, Mr. Miller and Professor Staley, and by
petitioner‘s.expert Mr. Lilly, are at best well informed guesses but rather
arbitrarily arrived at. Mr. Miller, however, did acknowledge that “Unquestionably, as of March 26, 1887, the mineral deposits of the Coeur
d'Alene Tract would have added very appreciably to the value of the Tract

in the opinion oi’ a well informe....

11175?“
spa.

or seller," and that "Never heless
the possibility and perhaps the probability existed that paying properties
would be developed in the area, and that the Bunker Hill and Sullivan
property would prove to be a profitable mining operation.”
It is, of course, at this late date impossible to know the extent
of development of all the claims. It is evident from the record that
exploration and development work was being carried on at a number of
the claims. The extent of existing ore in those mines that were then
opened is not known or the probable ore in sight. In "The Bunker Hill
Enterprise," by Thomas 51. Rickard, the author quoted a Mr. Lee who was
foreman of the mine, as writing (Def. Ex. 38, pp. 13.6 and ll7):
‘Prof. Clayton and I talked freely about the property and
he agreed with me that there was not one hundred and fifty
thousand dollars in sight at that time in the property that
Mr. Reed had paid $650,000 cash for, and I firmly believe

that the 2l ft. of lead ore sold the Sullivan and Bunker
Hill property.‘

Any well informed hypothetical purchaser as of March 3, 1891, while he
might have shared the optimism regarding the potentialities of the mining
district would.also have been aware, as was Mr. Lee, of the uncertainties
surrounding a new and but slightly developed mining region. Such a purchaser would also have been aware of the necessity of expanding large
sums of money for exploration and development of the mining claims and
for concentrators and tramways. As Rickard.observed “It takes money to
make mines, especially large mines needing mills and smelters“ (Pet.

Ex. l39, page 5?). Production figures and operating costs for all of

the opened mines as of March 3, 1891, are not available to aid in a
determination of*value for the mining district. The cost of production
necessarily plays an.important part in determining value. as the Court
of Claims said in The Sioux Tribe of Indians V. The United States, l36
C. Cls. ___f "% % % Not to be forgotten in establishing this valuation
are the facilities available for extracting the minerals and the means

of transportation available after they have been extracted. Therefore,
mere knowledge that gold in paying quantities lay beneath the ground in

a given tract of land does not make it valuable if it can be mined only
at an exhorbitant expense. Thus, the projected value of a piece of goldbearing land in l8?7 would not be as great as it is in this present day
of rapid transportation and modern mining methods." ‘While some transportation was at hand for the Coeur d'Alene Tract in l891 and added to
the value of the region, the mine operators were dependent upon improved

transportation facilities and fair rates of transportation and.reductir¢

to fulfill the promise of the mining district.

6

A review of the record justifies concluding that the potential of the
mineral resources of the Coeur d'Alene Tract as of March 3, 1891, was
sufficiently known to have added to the marlet value of the Trac . The
sum, of $2,221,200.00 appears to be a reasonable figure to apply as an enhancement of value due to the presence of minerals inclucnng gold in the
placer fields and quartz as well as lead and silver ore. with respect to
gold mining there appears to have been a decline prior to l887 but gold was
recovered for a number of years thereafter in reduced quantities and at
unknown cost.

The Commission concludes that the fair market value of the Coeur d'Alene
Tractlas of March’3, 1891, was $h,.6S9,663.00. The United States is entitled

to credit against this sum the amount of $l)g3,6n7,ff.3 expanded u-eae;— Article A

\

of the Agreement of March 26, 1887, and the sum of $88,277.M.; expended under
Article 11 of said Agreement, or a total sum of $;23l,88h,97, leaving a
balance due to petitioner tribe of $‘§L;,L;27,778.03, from which will be deiducted the offsets, if any, hereafter to be determined in accordance with
the Rules of the Commission.
Accordingl , an order will be entered for the sum of €f£]_;,)_;27,778.03
from which allowable offsets will be deducted.
Louis J. O'I~Iarr
Associate Commissioner
He concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt

Associate C orrsrzzis sioner

 

