BEFORE THE INDMN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TILLAMOOK TRIBE or IN’DIA1~IS,-ET AL. . )
Plaintiffs, i
V. 3 Docket No. 239
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, g
Defendant. g
Decided: November 23, 1955

Appearances:

Garland A. Ferguson, III with
whom were B. L. Crawford and
Joseph W. Creagh, Attorneys
for Plaintiffs .

Walter A. Rochow, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE} CO.‘.fi*.iISSION
Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
The issue in this case has become only the question of whether or
not the defendant adequately compensated the Indians for the land ceded
to it by the Treaty of October 31, 1892. The question of title is not
involved as the land was reservation land, nor is the capacity of the
plaintiff Confederated Tribesof Siletz Indians to prosecute the claim
questioned. The defendant contends that the Confederated Tribes of
Siletz Indians is the only party entitled to prosecute the action and

that the suit in behalf of the other plaintiffs should be dismissed. It

has been agreed by the other plaintiffs to consent to a dismissal,

u 58

therefore in the Findings of Fact we find that the claim is being prosecuted
gnlelyby the Confederated Tribe of Siletz Indians and that the claim of
other plaintiffs is being dismissed. (Defendant's Brief, p. 85: Plaintiff's Reply, p. 1”).

There has been some confusion as to the acreage involved. At the
inception of this litigation both parties apparently thought the acreage
involved was 178,330 acres; however, the evidence as disclosed by the
records of the Bureau of Land Management. establishes the acreage to
actually consist of 191,798.80 acres and this is the figure we find to
be correct by our findings. Therefore, the question now before this
Commission ism-“What was the fair ‘market value‘ of these lands when they
were ceded to the—defendant"~~October 31, 1892 (Defendant's Brief, pp. 58,
59).

0rdinariLy,market value is what a willing buyer would pay to a
willing seller in the open market at the date of the transaction involved.
However, peculiar circumstances may makeit impossible to determine a
"market values“ There may have been, for example, so few sales of
similar property that it cannot be predicted with any assurance that same
are determinative of the value of the property considered. It is then
conceded that there is no "market value" for the property in question.

But that does not put out of consideration the bearing which scattered
sales may have on what an ordinary purchaser would have paid for claimr
ant's property at the time in question. Nor will it deny the considerv
ation of sales of similarly conditioned and located property made not
too remotely prior to or subsequent to the sale date in question; but it
does require that the appraiser be wary as to the weight to be accorded

the few sales contemporary with that of the transaction involved and the

sales of the same or similar property at prior or subsequent times. The
appraiser must take into consideration the special circumstances surrounding the other sales which would not have affected the hypothetical buyer
whose hypothetic price must be considered as the value of the property
involved at the date of the transaction involved. Under these circumstances additional evidence must also be considered in determining what

a.pr0spective purchaser would have paid (Defendant's Brief, p. 60).

Mr. Justice Holmes expressed himself in the following language in
New York vs. Sage,239 U. S. 57, at page 61g "What the owner is entitled
to is the value of the property taken, and that means what it fairly may
be believed a purchaser in fair market conditions would have given for
it." And later Mr. Justice Clark in 338 U. S. 396, at page 302 said:
“Perhaps no warning has been more repeated than that the determination of
value cannot be reduced to inexorable rules.

Suffice to say that the

balance between the public‘s need and the claimant's loss has been struck,

in most cases, by awarding the claimant the monetary ‘market value’ of the

g

property taken. ‘ * * * * At times, however, the peculiar circumstances

may make it impossible to determine market value.” The defendant requests
by its requested finding No. 33 that this Commission find that “There were
no comparable land sales of large tracts within the vicinity of these
lands at or near the time of this cession. There is, therefore, a complete
lack of actual sales data as of that date with respect to the value of
large tracts of timber lands in this general area. This tends to indicate
the absence of a market at or about the time these lands were ceded to

the defendant.“ (Defendant‘s Brief, pp. 35—36).

The Court of Claims in its recent decision in the Otoe and
Missouria Tribe of Indians vs. The United States of America (decided
May 3, 1955) says with reference to the determination of market value
that “In the absence of a market at the time in question, and therefore
the absence of evidence of ‘market value‘ in the conventional sense.
this court and the Commission (Indian Claims Commission) have taken into consideration numerous other factors in determining the value of
lands ceded by the Indians." Reference is made to the findings of this
Commission in its recent decision in the Osage case and also the decisions of the Court of Claims in the Alcea and Rogue River cases. The
court then in reference to the principles and the factors taken into
consideration in the cases to which reference is made and which valuation nethods are approved says: "This method of valuation takes into
consideration whatever sales of neighboring lands are of record. It
considers the natural resources of the land ceded, including its
climate. vegetation, including timber, game and wild life, mineral resources, and whether they are of economical value at the time of the

cession or merely of Eotential value, water power, its then or Eotential use. markets and transportati0n——considering the ready markets_§t

 

that time and the Eotential market.” (Underscoring ours).

 

The evidence and our findings show that contemporany sales of the
land or neighboring lands are quite few; however, the few that are available show a recognition of a valuation much greater than the price paid
by defendant to plaintiffs for the land. Twenty~tno early deeds recorded
in Lincoln County, in which county the coded land lies, show that

from January 1872 to March 1875 these conveyances of 2219.92 acres

were made for a total consideration of $13,872.88, an average price Of

1: 60

$6.70 per acre. _It is presumed that these were farm lands upon which
there were very little, if any, improvements. Too much weight cannot
be given to the values indicated, but certainly the evidence is of
value very much greater than the 82 cents per acre paid by defendant.
we also refer to the 21 homestead entries involved in the prosecution
of W. N. Jones, et a1.,for conspiracy to defraud. Petitioners’
Exhibit 5, Appendix H, is a letter from Acting Commissioner of the
General Lands Office, dated September l9, 190M, in which he refers to
21 entries on the ceded land having been made by homesteaders for 160
acre tracts each, which had been transferred to another after patents
had.been issued for from $1500 to $uu00 each. These, of course, indicate values far in excess of 82 cents per acre. Defendant in its
brief refers to the Weyerheauser purchase of 900,000 acres of timber
land in Washington, West of the Cascadcs,in the year 1900,:at $6T00
per acre.¢~v _pC?.

It is strange that the ceded land being almost wholly timbered
land should have been opened up as public lands for homesteading when
there was a statute, called the Timber and Stone Act, enacted in 1878,
providing that timbered lands were marketable at not less than $2.50
per acre; which enactment evidences a congressional viewpoint that no
timber land was worth less than $2.50 per acre in 1878. That the homesteading was a mistake is shown by letter of Commissioner of the General
Land Office to the Secretary of the Interior, dated January 26, 1893,
stating that these lands being unsuitable for cultivation and being

timbered lands ought to be disposed of at not less than $2.50 per acre.

(Defendant's Exhibit 19).

In addition to the value of the land and its timber, its value was
enhanced by reason of its streams for transportation and its harbors,
their fish, its mountains and forests with their wild life, its water
power available for later development, and its scenic beauty--all
certainly contributing to its value and desirability for occupants as
well as for visitors.

That it was so long in being settled and acquired for private use
is due largely, we think, to the fact that it wasn‘t put on the market
as a.who1e compact tract or certainly in larger tracts than mere homesteads, and without residential and other homestead requirements. The
conditions under which it was available to the public were such as to
make its occupancy almost impossible. Its clearing was too expensive
for the uspal homesteading applicant and the tracts were available in
too small an acreage to justify the expense of exploiting the timber
thereon.

We cannot give much weight to either the appraisal of Mr. E. 0.
Fuller for the plaintiff or to that of hr. Norman E. Plummer for the
defendant. Mr. Fuller's appraisal is entirely theoretical and.unrealistic. It is based on sales made many years later, even sales made
as late as 1953 and 195%; and these sales figures were converted to
1891: dollars by applying the value of the dollar in 1891; to the value
of the l953 dollars. However, the information as to conditions at the

time and the record of such sales as were made whose dates were not

too remote for consideration-—the statistics as to timber and other

natural resources of the land--as to which the two witnesses differed

1ittle—-are all valuable information for the consideration of this

M63

Commission in arriving at its appraisal of the value pf $he'land.at the time

Mr; Plummer makes his appraisal in a lump sum for the entire tract of
191,798.80 acres without a single word of explanation as to how he
arrives at this amount, other than that it is based on the information
which he has assembled and which is in evidence. While Mr. Plummer
has insisted that the price paid by the defendant to the plaintiffs
of 82 cents an acre in no wise influenced him in his 1ump—sum valuation which amounts to 81.9 cents per acre, it seems to the Commission
to be a rather unusual coincidence that in the lump sum valuation of
191,798.80 acres that there shouhi only be a difference of one—tenth
of one cent between such valuation and the price paid by the defendant.
The land involved herein is a part of the land involved in the
Alcea Band of Tillamooks, et al. vs. The United States, decided by the
Court of Claims on January 3, 1950 (115 C. C18. M63 to 519). The
lands involved in that decision were valued by the Court of Claims as
of 1855 at $1.20 per acre. The total acreage involved in that litigation covered the acreage involved in the present law seat and lands
north and south of same--all of which were bound on the west by the
Pacific Ocean and on the east by the coast range of mountains, and
consisted largely of timber lands. The total was found by the Court
of Claims to have the same average value per acre. The conditions in
1355, as found by the Court of Claims, as to resources of ceded lands
in the way of timber, minerals, waters, wild life, etc., of course,
were practically the same then as they were in 1892»-as were the land
transactions considered-—and the findings of the court as to same are

entitled, we think, to be given great consideration by us. We refer

especially to findings 19 to 25 inclusive, and 32, 33, and 3h.

The court in its findings and opinion, stated that most of the
acreage involved in the law suit consisted of valuable timber land
and referred to the fact that railroad grant land in the area had sold
at an average price per acre of $u.23, (p. 50M«50§). and expressed the
opinion "that if the timber—lands in the tribal area had been available and offered for sale at or around 1855 in tracts of sufficient_

.:...p-4

 

size to attract the interest of lumber oopnenies, much of this timberland would have been sold for at least as much as the agriculturalp

land brought, and possiblg more." (Emphasis supplied) (p. 509-510).

 

pThe court goes on to say "under the facts and circumstances * ‘ °
we believe we are justified in considering the potential value of this
timber, particularly since we are convinced the people generally knew
that the humber industry was a promising one and that the timber in
Oregon was valuable.” (p. 510)

Taking into consideration all the factors mentioned by the Court of
Claims in the Alcoa case and in the Otoe case, and all the evidence in
the record, it seems to us that the land involved would have brought
in 1892 at least $3.00 per acre if it had been made available in large
blocks. Notwithstanding the primitive facilities for the utilization
of its timber, even in 1892, it is in evidence that saw mills were
numerous in the general territory and had been for some years, and that
the timberwlands of the Northwest, of which those involved constituted
a.part, had already attracted the attention of large operators, who,

of course, were aware of the existing opportunities and the potential

market and value in the near future.

H 6%

We think the value of $3.00 per acre. as of 1892, is fair and
reasonable; and that 82 cents per acre was an unconceivable consideration, and that therefore plaintiffs are entitled to an award of $3.00

‘("1-_.’,.;,

. N‘ ‘

per acre for 19l}798.8O acres, less the $1h2,60O heretofore paid, and

less such offsets as defendant may show itself entitled to.

Edgar E. Witt

&-qQ;.n...._.-u.--u-u-Iu—va.-an

Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

Louis J. O‘Merr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

