1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 394 ' 399

ssrorr, was INDIAN cLAn:s COMMISSION

THE WESTERN (OLD ssrrtm)
CHEROKEE INDIANS, on the
relation of Dorothea Owen,
John B. Sixkiller, Alice
Flourney—Smith, William B.
Keeler, Charles C. Victory
and O. H. P. Brewer,

Plaintiffs,
Docket No. #1 C

VUNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

‘ ¢ A a % * 4'- ‘_‘
,;.E:r;Cc.1.‘.rCJ.lLCvU :3 I

Wilfred Hearn, with whom were

George E. Norvell, Earl Boyd Pierce,
Dennis Bushyhead and Houston B. Tohee,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Jules H. Sigal and Ralph A. Barney
with whom was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech,

Attorneys for Defendant.
SEC 2 8 1950OPINION OF THE C MMISSION
O’Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

The claim involved in this proceeding is for the recovery from
defendant of the sum of $278,672.h6 and interest, which the plaintiffs
allege was paid out of trust funds belonging to a group of Cherokee

Indians known as Western or Old Settlers, to compensate the attorneys

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 394 anq

-3.
who successfully prosecuted an action against the defendant and obtained a judgment for said group in the sum of $800,386.31. See

Western Cherokee Indians v. United States, 27 C. Cls. 1, as modified
by Supreme Court, 11:23 U. s. #26, 37 L. ed. 509.

As stated above, the claim, as clearly shown by the allegations
of the petition, is to recover the amount paid out pf the Judgment
fund for attorneys‘ fees. The undisputed.proof is that the entire
cost of the litigation in so far as payment to attorneys is concerned
amounted to the sum of $lM2,UU6.6d and not the sum of $278,672,H6 as.
alleged in the petition. Defendant‘s Exhibits 10 and 11. In their
brief, plaintiffs refer to the sum of $2U3,ll5.58 as the amount "paid
out in payment for services rendered by attorneys and others in the
prosecution" of the action, Western Cherokees v. United States, 27
0. C15. 1, for which the expendituresaere made, but if plaintiffs
seek recovery for the entire expenses of the litigation, the petition
falls far short of making any claim except for attorneys‘ fees; however,
if plaintiffs had claimed reimbursement for the entire costs and_
expenses of the litigation our conclusions, herein expressed, wouldibe
the same. I

A brief review of the history of the Cherokee Tribe or Nation of
Indians will be helpful in understanding the litigation in which the
recovery of the amount expended for attorneys‘ fees is here claimed.

The Cherokee Indians formerly lived east of the Mississippi

river in parts of Georgia, Alabama and Tennessee, and early in the

1 Ind. c1. Com. 394 ' 401

Z3‘nineteenth century a part of the tribe, fron a section known as the
lower towns, became dissatisfied with their condition caused by the
scarcity of game and the encroachment of the white people and.wanted
to move west and continue the hunter life. The desires of this part
of the Cherokees were considered by the government and the lower town
Indians were permitted to select an area of land west of the Mississippi river between the Arkansas and White rivers in what is now the
State of Arkansas. in exchange for a part of Cherokee lands east of
the Mississippi river. See treaties of July 8, 1817, 7 Stat. l56.

and February 27. 1819, 7 Stat. 195. The Arkansas lands proved unfavorable for the Indians and by the treaty made by the Cherokees who
moved to Arkansas. and defendant, dated May 6. 1828, 7 Stat. 311, the
Western Cherokees ceded to the United States their Arkansas lands for
lands located in what is now the State of Oklahoma. The Cherokees who
moved west are historically known as the Western or Old settler Chero—
kees, while those who remained east of the Mississippi river are

known as the Eastern Cherokees.

The Eastern Cherokees finally concluded to move west and join
the western group and by treaty between the Cherokee Tribe of Indians
and the United States, dated December 29, 1835, 7 Stat. M78, the
Indians ceded to the United States, for a consideration of $5,000,000,
all their remaining lands east of the Mississippi river. The Western
Cherokees agreed to this treaty. The United States also ceded to the

Cherokees by this treaty for a consideration of $500,000 a tract of

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 394 _ 402
-11land comprising 800,000 acres. The $5,000,000 to be paid the Cherokee
tribe by the 1835 treaty was increased by $600,000 in the supplementary
treaty of March l, 1836, T Stat. U88, so the credit to the Cherokee
treaty fund amounted to the sum of $5,600,000.

Following the 1835 treaty dissension arose between the two factions.
The Western Cherokees claimed they had.been deprived of two—thirds of
their western lands by the settlement of the Eastern Cherokees among
them and had received no compensation therefor, while the Eastern
Cherokees had received the full $5,600,000 paid under the treaty of
1835-6. An attempt was made to settle the difficu1ties_by the treaty
of August 6, 18%, 9 stat. 871.

The treaty of l8H6 was between the United States, the Cherokee
Nation and the Western Cherokeese There was a fourth group called
the "Treaty Party," but it was settled.with and need not be further
considered. This treaty provided in effect that all lands of the_
Western Cherokees and.the 800,000 acres acquired by the 1835 treaty
should become the property of all the Cherokee people, those of the
East as well as those of the West, and.in order to settle the Western
Cherokees claim for their land occupied.by the Eastern Cherokees, they
were to receive one-third of the $5,600,000 treaty fund remaining
after naking certain deductions. A formula for determining the amount
payable the Western Cherokees was provided in the treaty; however, the
l8U6 treaty did not settle the controversy for the question then arose

as to the propriety of certain deductions and this controversy raged

1 Ind. (:1. Com. 394 _ 403
-5. I

until Congress by the Act of June 12, 1850, 9 Stat. 551+, 556, appropriated $532,896.9O which was paid the Western Cherokees. Other
adjustments and.payments were nade_by the defendant but there still
remained a dispute as to the interest of the Western Cherokees in

the treaty fund and the propriety of certain charges against it made
by the defendant. 5

By the Act of February 25, 1889, 25 Stat. 691+, the Court of-claims

was granted jurisdiction to try and determine what sums of money, if
‘any, were due from the United States to the Western Cherokee Indians,
arising or growing out of treaty stipulations and acts of Congress
relating thereto. Pursuant to this jurisdictional act, a suit was
instituted and tried, resulting in the judgment in favor of the claimants, which is referred to abovet It is the fees paid for legal
services in prosecuting this claim under the Act of February 25, 1889,
that the plaintiffs demand here. This act is silent as to the matter
of attorneys‘ fees. The plaintiffs point to no other statute nor to
any agreement requiring the defendant to pay or reimburse then for
such attorneys‘ fees, nor can we find any. According to the allegan

gtions of their petition they rely upon the relationship between the

5 parties for they allege that the defendant was the “guardian of their

respective persons, and curator of their communal joint and several
estates." On the assumption that the defendant, in administering the
treaty fund, acted as guardian or trustee for the Indians, they argue

in effect that the defendant was governed by the rules and liabilities

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 394 404
-5...

of an ordinary guardian or trustee and is therefore liable for attorneys‘ fees because of its improper administration of the trust
fund. The fundamental error of this reasoning is that the government
had.never been held to all the liabilities of an ordinary trustee,

cf. Osage v. United States, Docket No. 9. decided December 30, 19U8.
But even if the defendant were subject to the same liability as an
ordinary trustee there are no allegations in the petition or any proof
that would justify an award for the expenses of the suit under the Act

of 1889. The government in handling the treaty fund gained nothing

ifor itself and the proof shows beyond question that it acted in good i

faith in handling the treaty fund. During the administration of the
fund it made adjustments by paying into it public funds or by paying
plaintiffs large sums out of Congressional appropriations to satisfy
the demands of plaintiffs. Of course, the Court of Claims found that
there was due the Indians a sum of some $800,000, including interest,
in addition to the sums theretofore paid, but at no place did that
Court or the Supreme Court, in the opinions, even intimate that the
defendant acted otherwise than in best of faith and as it construed
the treaty stipulations to require. Certainly, no court would charge
an ordinary trustee with_attorneys‘ fees or other costs in an accounting action under facts shown here.
Another and equally compelling reason for denying plaintiffs’

claim is that the United States is not liable for attorneys‘ fees in

the absence of a statute permitting such a charge. Pigg1y_Wiggly

405
1 Ind. Cl. Com. 394 _?n

Corporation v.'United States, 112 C. Cls. 391.6332. Counsel have
cited no statute, nor hare we found any. which permits an allowance
of counsel fees in suits against the United States. Since the begin—
ning of our government the Supreme Court has consistently held that.
in the absence of statute directly permitting it, the United States
is not liable for the costs and expenses of litigation. United States
V. Chemical Foundation, 272 U. S. 1. 71 L. ed. 131, 1H5; United States
V. Worley, 281 U. S. 33M. YH L. ed. 887, 891. We are of course

. familiar with the case Reconstruction Finance Corp. V, Menihan. 312
U. s._81, 85 L. ‘ed. 595 (and the cases therein discussed), in which‘
the court allowed costs, but in that case the court made it clear that
governmental immunity as to costs did not apply to "federal'instrumen~
talities" which had been given the authority to "sue and be sued."i The
reasoning back of the determination being "that when the Congress
launched a governmental agency into the commercial world, and it endowed
it with authority to ‘sue and be sued3‘that agency is not less amenable
to judicial process than a private enterprise under like circumstances
would be“ in the absence of a contrary showing. The Court also applied
the principle that there is no presumption that a governmental agency‘
is clothed with sovereign immunity. It is plain that the above case
cannot apply here where the claim is not asserted against an instrumentality or agency of the government, but directly against it under a
jurisdictional act which merely permits a claim and is silent on the

question of costs and attorneys‘ fees. We find nothing in the Act of

I Ind. Cl. Comm. 394 406

-3.

August 13, l9U6 (28'U.S.C.A. 70) which can be construed as in anywise
permitting the collection or awarding of costs against the defendant.
Attorneys‘ fees are in the nature of costs and expenses of suit.

But plaintiffs, in their'brief, say that if there is no rule of
equity which permits the award they may recover under clause (5) of
section 2 of the Act creating the Indian Claims Commission, which
permits a claim "based upon fair and.honorable dealings not recognized
by any existing rule of law or equityo"

The argument of plaintiffs in support of their position may be
epitomized as follows: That the defendant, for a period of sixty years,
disputed the plaintiffs‘ right to the trust funds found to be due then
ern Cherokee case and accounted for them only after the
determination by the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court; that during
that entire period of time, the Executive branch of the government or
Congress could have submitted the disputed questions of fact and ques‘tions of law with respect to plaintiffs’ rights to the Court of Claims
for determination, and not having done so, the plaintiffs were'put to
the expense of paying attorneys to prosecute their claim.

Much of what we have said with respect to the relationship of the
parties and the immunity of the defendant from expenses of suit applies
to the argument outlined above. The solution of the problem involved
in plaintiffs‘ argument must, we think, be determined by the answer to_

this question: Did the Congress intend by said clause (5) to set aside

all settled law respecting the allowance of expenses of suits or claims

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 394 407

-9against the government and permit recovery of them under said clause.
(5)? To give the clause such effect would require us to read into
it a meaning far outside the text without anything to warrant an

. implication that such expenses should be allowed. We cannot escape
the feeling that if the Congress in passing the Indian Claims Commission
Act had any such.purpose in mind it would have made such purpose unmistakably clear in order to overcome the long~settled doctrine that
the government is immune from expenses of suit in the absence of a
statute directly authorizing them, Also, it must be presumed that
had Congress intended to permit claims for attorneys’ fees (aggregating many million of dollars, no doubt) heretofore paid out by C

C Indians in the successful prosecution of their claims against the
United States it would have made such an intention plain.

After the submission of this case, plaintiffs filed a motion to
make "The Cherokee Nation” an additional party plaintiff. The view
we have taken of this claim makes the additional party unnecessary
because our conclusions would be the same if the Cherokee-Nation had
been a party plaintiff from the beginning. Furthermore, in Western
(Old Settler) Cherokee Indians, Docket No. 2%, we held that the plaintiffs therein constituted an identifiable group within the provisions
of our act. The notion must, therefore, be denied.

It follows from the above that the petition herein must be dismissed.

Chief Commissioner Witt and Associate Commissioner Holt concur.

Dated this 28th day of December, 1950.

