BEFORE THE INDIAN CIADIS CCI'R-IISSIOI-3

CLYDE F. THEHPSON, et al. (Indians )
of California) ) Docket No. 31
)
ERRBBT RIBLIRG, et al. (Indians )
of California) ) Docket No. 37
)
h6»BANDS OFVHISSION IEDIANS ) Docket No. 80
. )
THE NORTHERN PAIUTE‘EATION, et a1. 3 Docket No. 87
THE‘SOUTHER§ RAIUTE:EiTIoR, et a1. ; Docket No. 88
YOKIAH TRIBE OF DIDIAZS, et a1. ; Docket No. 176
TARA TRIBE OF INDIANS ) Docket No. 215
- )
TRE I-IOHAVE INDIANS E-E9 ARE REEERB )
OF THE c:oLoRiDo RIVER INDIAN TRIBES, )
AND OTHERS ) Docket No. 283
)
I THE RASHDE TRIBE OF TEE STATES or )
NEVADA AND GALIFOREIA ) Docket No. 288
)
MOHAVE TRIBE OF INDIAES, et a1. a ‘Docket No. 295
THE QUECHAN TRIBE 0F”THE FORT IUMA )
RESEREXIION, GALIFGE1 ) Docket No. 319
.. ‘ )
PAUL JAE, et al., EACH on THEIR )
own BEIIALF AND on BEHALF OF THE )
BOUTHEBN PAIUTE NATION OF INDIAIB ; Docket No. 330
SHASTA TRIBE, et al. ) Docket No. 333
)
PITT RIVER INDIANS 3 Docket No. 3&7
CREEEHUEDI TRIBE, et.e1. g Docket No. 351
Petitioners, )
V. )
)
THE UNITED BTRTBB op EEERIQA, )
2)
Defendant. )

Decided: October 6, 1958

6 666

6 667‘. 

Appearances :

Ernest L. Wilkinson, Robert W.
Barker and Francis M. Goodwin,
Attorneys for Petitioners in
Docket 31

Reginald Foster
Attorney for Petitioners in
Docket 37

Norman M. Littell
Attorney for Petitioners in
Docket 80

A I. S. I-Ieissbrodt
Attorney for Petitioners in
Docket 88

Nicholas Allen
Attorney for Petitioners in
Docket 288

Harold Payne
Attorney for Petitioners in
Docket 295

Louis 1.. Phelps
Attorney for Petitioners in

Docket 3147

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry la’. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION _(_)_1f'_ _T_I_-I_{:."_‘_ CCRMISSION

O‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

On June 6, 1958, the petitioners in Dockets 31 and 37, who will hereafter be referred to as Indians of California, filed a motion to divide
the State of California into two ‘parts for the purpose of deterrnin:'Lng the

rights of the Indians of California and the other claimants to lands in

that State. Specifically, the plan proposed by the motion is to remove

from the area included in the claim of the Indians of California those
lands in the State which are claimed in separate suits by tribes which
we, by our decision of January 20, l9S8, held were entitled to sue independently of the Indians of California. The claims that would be placed
in this division are those of the Northern Paiute Nation, Docket 8?;
Southern Paiute Nation, Dockets 88 and 330,‘ Mohave Tribe, Dockets 283
and 2953 Biashoe Tribe, Docket 288; Quechan Tribe, Docket 319; Pitt Rivers,
Docket 311? 3 and Chemehuevi Tribe, Docket 351. Although the Klamath and
Modoc Tribes, Docket 100, have a pending claim for lands in California
which were excluded from the lands claimed by. the Indians of California
by a disclaimer filed on June 29, 1955, we include the California lands
involved in this claim in order that all tribal claims for California
lands will be included.

This division shall, for convenience of reference, be designated
Area A.

The other proposed division, which we shall hereafter refer to as
Area B, would include all remaining lands in California (that is, all
lands outside of proposed Area A), and would include the lands claizind
by the Mission Bands, Docket 80, Yokiah Tribe, Docket 176, Yana Tribe,
Docket 215 and the Shasta Tribe, Docket 333.

The defendant filed objections to the motion on June l8, 1958, on
the main ground that the Government would be prejudiced by the proposed '
plan. We do not see that defendant would be prejudiced by the proposed

Plan, for it seems clear that the Government would not be deprived of any

of its defenses to the claim of the Indians of California or to the claim

of any of the other groups included in the plan.

5 555 1::

After a careful study of the proposed plan for dividing the land
areas of the State for the purposes of this litigation, we are convinced
the plan has much merit, and with certain modifications would result in
the clarification of a confused situation that has arisen from the conflicting claims and contentions of the parties. Furthermore, it is, in
the main, in harmony with our decision of January 20, 1958, in Which We
held that each of the claimants‘, named above, could maintain its separate suit independently of the Indians of California.

The claims of the Yokiah, Yana and Shasta have been merged with the
claim of the Indians of California by our Order of the 6th day of
October, 1958, so they will be considered a party to the claim of the
Indians of California and hereafter all reference to the Indians of California shall include the Yokiah, Yana and Shasta, except where the dis‘ssion requires their separate mention.

The Mission Bands, Docket 80, did not join with the Yokiah, Yana,
Shasta and the Indians of California in their motion of June 6, 1958,
which resulted in the merger of the claims of the above cases for all purposes, including judgment, by our Order of the 6th day of October, 1958.
In fact, at the oral argmnent, on that motion on June 23, 1958 (Trans. PD.
14158-1Ll?8), counsel for the Mi._ssion Bands vigorously refused to join the
Indians of California in a consolidation of their claim with the latter
and insisted upon proceeding under their stipulation of June 1, l9SS, by
which their case would be held in abeyance pending the outcome of Dockets

31 and 37. (See our opinion of January 20, 1958, 6 Ind. Cls. Com. 93, 934,

for form of stipulation).

6669i

Since we have overruled the joint motion of the Indians of California, Mission Bands, Yokiah, Yana and Shasta tribes, filed on March 25',

1958, and the separate motion of the Mission Bands, filed on July 21;, l9S8,

to modify our decision of January 20, 1958, and permit the Mission Bands to

proceed under its stipulation of June 1, 1955, mentioned above, the question arises as to how best to determine the claim of the Mission Bands.
The record in the consolidated cases, Vol. XV, pp. 11401;-11:06, shows
the boundaries of the area claimed by the Mission Bands and for which
they seek compensation; also, by stipulation of the Indians of California
and the Mission Bands, filed on February 12, 1958, it is agreed by them
that the area within the boundaries of the Mission Bands‘ claim comprises
8,002,356 acres.

It is plain then, that insofar as these claimants are

concerned there is no question about the boundary and location of the

lands involved in Docket 80.

Counsel for the Mission Bands indicated in open hearing on June 23,
1958, that there were other theories than those under which the case has
been tried which he could and would present if the case were separately
prosecuted, but he also said it would take one or possibly two years to
present them. Manifestly, such a delay would work an injustice to the
Indians of California who have closed their case and are, according to the
statement of their counsel made to the Commission on June 23, 1958, not
opposed to hav@ the lands of the Mission Bands excluded from the area
claimed by the Indians of California.

Furthermore, we believe the Mission Bands should be given the right

to present their claim on every possible theory they may have under their

6 670

66'?

petition, unhampered by the legal theories under which the case has been
presented by the Indians of California. In saying this we do not intimate
that the case has been presented on an improper legal theory; we are simply
saying the Mission.Bands should not be denied the right to make a full
presentation of their case.

‘From the reccrd.before us, including statements of their counsel,

‘we are convinced that it is for the best interests of the Mission.Bands
that their case be heard as a separate claim and independent of the

claim of the Indians of California. .And to bring this about their lands,
as described above, will be excluded.from the lands claimed by the Indians
of California.

A definitive separation of California into the two areas presents a
practical problem that must be resolved in order to make the plan effective. The movants ask us to "determine from the record or from.proper
stipulations of the parties, the boundaries and totalarea in the aforesaid classification 'A1." The “record? referred to, we gather from the
oral argument on the motion, is the map of California prepared by the
'vitness,.A. L. Kroeber, and admitted in evidence as the petitioners‘
Exhibit ALK-1955 - Parts 1 and 2, on.which is shown the territory alleged
to have been occupied by each of the claimants (other than the Indians of
California) who have filed separate claims for California lands.

The primary'purpose of dividing the State into two parts is to limit
the land.claim of the Indians of California to all that part of'California
not included in the claims of those tribes or groups that have filed cases

for specific areas in the State. The exact boundaries of those lands are

not necessary for the division nor would the separate claimants be bound

by it except to the extent they may, by stipulation or otherwise, limit
their respective boundaries. that is-important, though, is that reasonably definite lines of division be fixed. For this purpose the boundary
lines of the tribal claimants insofar as shown on the Kroeber map, Ex.
A-T-K-1955 - parts 1 and 2, are acceptable, unless modified by stipulations
between the Indians of California and the respective tribes, except the
boundaries of the claim of the Mohave Tribe, Dockets 283 and'295, which
are referred to later.

We are not unmindful of the possibility that, should we make an
award to the Indians of California or any of the other claimants, there
might be overlaps which would result in double payments. This should be
guarded against and we suggest the parties in Dockets 87, 88, 288, 319,
330, 333, 31:7 and 351 give serious consideration to stipulations that
would remove the possibility of overlaps or uncertainty as to boundaries.

We have mentioned the Mohave case, Docket 295. This case involves
a large area of land in California extending west from the Colorado ‘River
to the Tehachapi Mountains. The same tribe filed another suit, Docket

283, for a much smaller area in California, and in the latter suit,

Dr. A. L. Kroeber, by a map admitted in evidence in Docket 283 as Ebthibit
N0. 283-2, shows the Mohave lands to be confined to a considerable distance
along the Colorado River. These cases have been consolidated for trial.
But because of great differences in the areas claimed, the boundaries of

the ‘Mohave lands that are included in Area A cannot be determined until

we decide from the evidence which, if any, lands the Mohave have proved to

have Indian title in California.

6 672 

We accordingly conclude that for the P1lI“P°S€‘ of detemining the
rigncs of the respective claimants to lands in California the State shall

be divided as follows:

. . _ 1-: _
Area A shall include all lands as shown by the map, Exhibit ALK 19,5

 

Parts 1 and 2, to have been occupied and used by the following tribes Or‘
groups: Northern Paiute, Klamath and Hodoc, Washoe, Quechans 3033191‘ 1'1
Paiute, Pitt River, Chemehnevi, Mohave’ (bomidaries to be detemined as
stated above) and Mission Bands whose area is described by Dr- A- 3»Kroeber at pp. 1140).:-lh06, Vol. XV or Transcript. and delineated °n

Exhibit ALK-1 955 - Part 1.

Area B shall include all lands in California not included in Area A

as above set forth.

Dividing the lands as shown above is for the P11113059 °f Simplifying
the procedure for presenting and detemining the rights 05' all litigants
sserting claims to lands in California, but in so doing We 3179 mt d9‘
temining the rights of any of the claimants to lands in that State, nor‘
are we passing upon the right or capacity of any of the claimants to maintain their claims; those are matters that will be determined from the

evidence in the record.

An order will be entered in accordance with the above opinion.

Louis J. O‘1"1arr
Q & . ‘ ‘
we concur; Associace Commissioner

Edgar E. Witt

 
Cnief COII11'nlSSlOI18I‘

I-In. M. Holt

““* 
Associate Coznmissioner

6 67 ,_

