8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 _ 620

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COHMISSION

ms UIRTAH UTE INDIANS or UTAH, )'
)
.Plaintiffs, )

) _Dockets Nos. 44 and 45

v. ) C

)
THE UNITED states or AMERICA, )
)
.Defendant. )

June l3, 1960

FINDINGS OF FACT AS TO PROPOSED CGHPROMISE
SETTLEMENT OF DOCKBTS 44 and 45

-I

The Commission has previously in the above numbered Dockets made and
entered Findings of Fact which were numbered as follows:

.With respect to No. 44, Findings number 1 to £3 inclusive, on the
21st day of February, l957;

;With respect to No. 45, Findings number 1 to 13 inclusive, on the

Zlst day_of-February, 1957;
,A hearing on the above numbered dockets, on the merits of the claims
filed was held jointly by agreement of counsel for petitioner and for

.defendant, for the reason that the same evidence would be applicable in each

of said dockets. By agreement of the parties, approved by the Commission,
separate findings, opinions and interlocutory orders were to be entered
in each.of the said docket numbers, and this was the procedure followed.
Because separate findings of fact have been made and entered in each of
.said docketinumbers the Commission now makes separate findings in the
present proceeding numbered as follows:

s1- That on May 23, 1960, the parties heroin filed with the Indian
Claims Commission a Joint Motion for Entry of Final Judgment based
upon a Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment in the above—cntitlcd

dockets made and executed by Ernest L Wilkinson, Attorney

5, na c1. Comm. 620 621

of Record for Plaintiffs; Perry W Morton, Assistant Attorney General;

and Keith Browne, Attorney for Defendant Said Stipulation is set forth

in words and figures as folio s to—wit:

STIPULATION FOR ENTRY OF FINAL JUDGMENT

It is hereby stipulated between counsel for the parties
that the above-entitled cases shall be settled and finally
disposed of by entry of final judgment as follométl H_,

1. There shall be entered in the above-entitled cases
after all allowable deductions, credits and offsets, a net
judgment of $7,700,000.00.

2. Entry of final judgment in said amount shall finally
dispose of all rights, claims or demands which plaintiffs
have asserted, or could have asserted, with respect to the
subject matter of the claims asserted in either or both of
said claims, and plaintiffs shall be barred thereby from
asserting any such right, claim or demand against defendant
in any future action.

3. Entry of final judgment in the aforesaid amount

shall finally dispose of all rights, claims, demands, payments
on the claim, counterclaims or offsets which the defendant
has.asserted, or could have asserted against the plaintiffs
under.Lhe.provisions of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commissdon(Acti{é. 9¢9;;60 Stat;}l0é9),'and.defendantZshall be
barred thereby from asserting in any future action any such
rights, claims, demands, payments on the claims, counterclaims
or offsets for the period June 8, 1865 through June 30, l959,
against plaintiffs, Uintah Ute Indians of Utah, also known as the
~Uintah Band. It is understood and agreed that the United States
shall not be barred by this stipulation or by any judgment 5
Pursuant thereto from claiming in any future Litigation offsets arising prior to June 8, 1865, or accruing subsequent to
June 30, 1959. It is expressly understood and agreed that
neither the stipulation and entry of final judgment herein

nor the stipulation and entry of final judgment in the

Court of Claims cases Uintah and White River Bands of_g£g
Indians v. United Sggggg, Nos; 47568, 47569, 47570, 47571

and 47572, shall be a bar to the assertion by defendant in
future litigation of a claim against plaintiffs Uintah

Band for any funds which the Court of Claims may find in
£3%££§2£E£2§_§§E§§_2§_EEG Endians v. United States, No.

47367. now pending before that court, were erroneously paid

 

     

 

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 622

to the Uintah Band. It is further understood that nothing
contained in this stipulation shall constitute any admission
of the correctness of any such claim or any liability of the
plaintiffs Uintah Band therefor.

4. The final judgment, entered pursuant to this stipulation shall be by way of compromise and settlement and shall
-not be construed as an admission of either party, for the
purposes of precedent or argument, in any other case.

5. The final judgment of the Indian Claims Commission
pursuant to this stipulation shall constitute a final determination by the Commission of each of the above-captioned cases,

‘ and said determination shall become final on the day it is
entered, both parties hereby waiving any and all rights to
appeal from or otherwise seek review of such final determination.
6. Counsel for the parties agree to execute and file

with the Commission a joint motion for entry of final judgment
pursuant to this stipulation, submitting a proposed form
of final order for the approval of the Commission.

.7. attached to this stipulation and incorporated herein

by reference are (a) resolutions of each of the following
bodies authorizing counsel for plaintiffs to enter into this
stipulation on the basis outlined in paragraphs one through
five’hereof: - '

(1) The General Council of the Ute Indian Tribe of the
-Uintah and Ouray Reservation; .(2) .The Business Committee of the Ute Indian Tribe of
.the Uintah and Ouray Reservation;

(3) The membership (stockholders) of the Affiliated
.Ute.Citizens of Utah;

(4) The Board of Directors of the.Affiliated Ute
Citizens of Utah; I

(S) .The General Council of the Uintah Band or Uintah
Ute Indians of Utah;

(b) approval of the terms of the settlement by the Secretary
of the Interior or his authorized representative. ‘

Attached to said Stipulation were properly signed and executed
approvals by the officials in said Indian organizations named in the

body of said Stipulation. The signature on the said authorizations of

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 623

the Indian organizations were duly authenticated by M. M. Zoller,
Superintendent, Uintah and Ouray Agency, Bureau of Indian Affairs,
Department of Interior.

2. At an open hearing before the Commission on May 25, 1960, oral
and documentary evidence was received showing approval of the said Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment by the Plaintiffs and attorneys Robert
W. Barker, Glen A. Wilkinson, and F. M. Goodwin, Associate Counsel of
Record for Plaintifts named as such in the contracts of employment
entered into between Ernest L. Wilkinson, attorney, and the Uintah Ute
Indians of Utah, which said contracts with proper extensions thereof are
now on file with the Commission.

.Duly signed and authenticated resolutions (and supporting data) of the

following named governing bodies of plaintiffs to-wit:

(1) ,The General Council of the Ute Indian Tribe of the
Uintah and Ouray Reservation;

(2) The Business Committee of the Ute Indian Tribe of
the Uintah and Ouray Reservation;

(3) The membership (stockholders) of the Affiliated Ute
:citizens of Utah; '

(4) The Board of Directors of the Affiliated Ute Citizens
of Utah; '

(5) The General Council of the Uintah Band or Uintah
Ute Indians of Utah:

were filed with the Commission as exhibits attached to the Stipulation
for Entry of Final Judgment and the Joint Motion for Entry of Judgment

and were received in evidence attached to said Stipulation and said
Motion, the exhibits being identified as: 1-A, l-B, l-C, 1-D, 1-E,llrF,
l-G, 1-H, 1.41, 1-.1, l-K, l-L, l-M, l--N, 1-o,'1-P, 1-Q, 1-2, 1-5, 1-r, l-U,

and 1-V, (1-V is a statement filed by Robert W. Barker, F. M. Goodwin,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 - 624

and Glen A. Wilkinson approving the Compromise Settlement.)

3. Attorneys contracts of employment provide that the attorneys

.shall be subject to the supervision of the Secretary of the Interior

or his duly authorized representative and they shall make no settlement

.or other adjustment of such claims, or matters of controversy, except

iwith the-approval of the tribe; and as a matter of actual practive also

with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized
representative acting in his behalf.

.An approval in accordance with the attorneys employment contract “and also as required by the Commission, of the proposed Stipulation for

*Entry of Final Judgment is contained in a letter, (Exhibit l-U) dated

_ May 24, 1960, from George W. Abbott, Solicitor for the Department of the

Interior, acting for the Secretary of the Interior, and addressed to

.Wilkinson, Cragun, and Barker, Attorneys at Law, Washington, D. C._This

' letter reviews the efforts put forth to acquaint the Ute Indians with the

terms of a compromise settlement of said numbered dockets for a net judgment of $7,700,000.00 and concludes as follows:

Upon full consideration of the information made available
to this office by your firm and the Bureau of Indian Affairs and
in the light of the approvals given the proposed compromise
by the Ute Indians and the recommendation for approval by
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, we hereby approve on,
behalf of the Secretary of the Interior the settlement of
the cases entitled The Uintah Ute Indians of Utah v. United

. States, Docket Nos. 44 and 45, before the Indian Claims
Commission, as proposed in‘your letter of February 10 to
the Assistant Attorney General and his reply of February 12
and as amended by subsequent correspondence between your
two offices.

4. aCounsel for the plaintiffs explained the current situation with

-u‘. nu. . In ‘CCC

respect to the record status of the two docket numbers and expressed

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 625

their opinions that the judgment was fair and equitable to both the Indian
plaintiffs and to the defendant, and was the best that could be obtained
under the circumstances.
Attorney Keith Browne, counsel for the defendant concurred in the
statements made by the plaintiffs counsel and expressed his opinion
teat the settlement was a good one.
5. Ernest L. Hilkinson, Robert W. Banker, and Glen A. Wilkinson
of counsel for the plaintiffs met with the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah
ed their affiliated and internal groups at Fort Duchosne on April 21
and 22, 1960 and explained to a mass meeting of the Ute tribe the proposed settlement, and how it effected their rights. Following the
attorneys statements there was a long discussion by members of the tribe
with the attorneys. Questions were asked and answers and other statements which had been made were translated into the Ute language by an
interpreter and repeated to the non-English speaking Utes. On the otheri
hand, the statements made by Utes who did not speak the English language

were translated into English so that there was a full opportunity for

an :xchange if views and explanations on any parts 3: in: se::;;ment union
were not understood by the Indians. The general :eet;ng and the gr up
meetings occupied the better part of the two days nrntioned. ll voting

was unanimous except in one case where two Ute Indians voted against the

proposed settlement.

Attorneys Robert H. Barker and Glen A. Wilkinson, who appeared
before the Conmission, expressed the positive opinion that the Indians
fully understood the proposed compromise settlement and expr~-g

views freely and without any pressure of any kind being exerted upon them.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 626

Mr. John Bouden, attorney of Salt Lake City, Utah, and general

counsel for the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah, and their affiliated groups,

, F

was3present at the meetings held in Fort Duchesne, Utah, to advise his
clients with respect to matters connected with the proposed compromise

settlement. He approved the settlement and advised his clients to

.accept it. Mr. Boyden also appeared before the Commission and participated

in a discussion about how the final judgment should be drawn with respect

to the proposed compromise settlement. He expressed no opposition to the
approval of the compromise settlement.
6. Preston Allen of Altonah, Utah, testified that he was a Ute

Indian of mixed blood, 46 years old, and President of the Board of Directors
of the Affiliated Ute.Citizens, which is an organization of Ute Indians

that have been separated from the Ute Indian tribe by virtue of Public Law
d71 of the 83rd.Congress. This organization consists of members or former ‘
members of the Ute tribe having 1/2 or less of Indian blood. Mr. Allen
said he was a high school graduate; that his present occupation aside from

his work with the.Affiliated Ute Citizens of Utah, is a livestock raiser.

He appeared pursuant to authorization of the membership of the Citizens

group and its Board of.Directors.' He was present at the mass meetings

.at;Fort Duchesne, Utah, of the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah on April 21

and 22, 1960; that there were three meetings in which he was directly

involved. One was meeting of the Board of Directors of the Affiliated

Ute Citizens on April 21; another was a meeting of the general membership
of the Ute Indian tribe and Affiliated Ute Citizens on April 22; then

there was still another meeting of the Board of Directors of the Affiliated

Ute Citizens on April 22; that at the general meeting he attended, that

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 6-Z7

of the Ute tribe and the Citizens group on April 22, there was a separate
vote by the Uintah Band and the Uintah Band is a part of the Uintah tribe;
that Ernest L. Wilkinson, Robert W. Barker, and Glen A. Wilkinson were
present at the meetings and made explanations to the group; that-these
explanations were also interpreted into the Ute language. There were

questions raised and some discussion utilizing the Ute language. When

this occurred there was an interpretation from the Ute language into the

_ English and from the English into the Ute language. There were many

questions asked. It was a long meeting lasting nearly all day. There
.was a large attendance.

On the basis of the explanations the witness said he understood pretty
well what was involved. He has personally followed the litigation closely

throughout its history. He formed the judgment that the Ute Indians

should accept the proposed settlement; that the settlement was fair and
equitable. He believed that all of the people who were present at the
meeting understood the major factors involved in the proposed stealement. No pressure of any kind was exerted on the Indians to secure their

approval. As directed by the Board of Directors of the Affiliated Ute

.Citizens, who authorized him to represent them.at the meeting, he approved

-the settlement.‘

The witness said that all of the mixed blood Indians understood the

.English language; they read it and spoke it. ’

At the general meeting of the Ute tribe both full blood and mixed

blood Indians had the right to vote and to participate in the meetings.
Later there were separate meetings hald for the separate groups within the

Ute tribe. Part of the voting was done separately by each of the groups

named in these proceedings.

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 628

"I am.fairly well acquainted with practically all of the members of

.3

the Ute tribe and the Ute Citizens group and have heard the compromise
settlement discussed by various Ute Indians. I have not heard of any
opposition from any of the groups. There are no adverse factions of
the Ute Indians opposed to the settlement."

7. Mr. Joseph Workman of Roosevelt, Utah, testified that he was 50 years
old, a member of the Affiliated Ute Citizens of Utah and a member of the
Ute Indian tribe; that he was Vice President of the Board of Directors
of the Citizens group; that he is a Ute Indian of one-fourth blood; that
his formal education consisted of studies to the 8th grade, some of which
was public schools in Ogden, Utah; that at present his occupation is
a full time employee of the Affiliated Ute Citizens.

He appeared before the Commission pursuant to the authorization of
the.Affiliated Citizens and their Board of Directors at their meeting on
April.2l, 1960. he heard the explanations made by the attorneys, at the
general meeting of the Ute Indian tribe and at the separate meetings.
There were something in excess of 225 people at the general meeting of the
tribe.

He said Mr. Jason Cuch was elected to serve, and did serve, as Chairman of the Ute tribe meeting. He heard the full discussion; there was a
lot said about the pros and cons of the settlement. {e was present during
the entire meeting; testified that interpretations were made from English’
to Ute language and vice versa as was testified to by Mr. Allen. “I
formed the opinion that the Indians should accept the settlement as
proposed by the attorneys. I know personally many of the full blood Ute
Indians and they were generally favorable to the proposed compromise

settlement."

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 629

He was duly authorized by the Affililiated Ute Citizens to sign the

Stipulation of Settlement and to appear at Washington, D. C. in favor of
the proposed settlement. The vote of the Affiliated Ute Citizens was
unanimous in favor of accepting the compromise settlement. He knew of
no opposition at the meetings to the proposed settlement but had heard

some Indians outside of the meetings who had discussed the matter but

there was no organized opposition to it. He knew of no distressed people
who were pressured into approving the agreement.

He testified that at the special general oouncil meeting on April 22,
1960, he estimated that there were 178 full blood and 130 mixed blood
Indian members present and this estimate accorded with the minutes of.
the meetingQ

8. Mr. Harvey Natchess testified that he lived at Randelette, Uintah
County, Utah, was 40 years old; that he is a member of the Business
Committee of the Ute Indian tribe; that the Business Committee was composed of six members; that he is an Indian of the full blood; that he

'1'

is a graduate from the public high school at Roosevelt, Utah; that he is

a farmer and lives on the Indian reservation. He ferns 120 acres of
inherited land.
"I an.here as a representative of the Uintah Band, one of the Bands

of the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah. I was present at the general meeting
of the tribe and also at the Affiliated Citizens of Utah," said Mr.

Natchess.

He acted as an interpreter at those meetings. He understands the Ute
Indian language. He heard the statements made by the three claims attorneys

who were there and he interpreted those explanations into the Ute language,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 630

and also interpreted questions or statements made in the Ute language, into
the English language. "I personally think that the settlement is a settlement that is coming to us. We should have it and make the best use of it

I believe it is better to make a settlement than to continue the litigation,"

he said.

"The legal problems were explained to the Indians by the attorneys

‘to. _g

.and it was pointed out that with continuing the litigation there was some

danger that there might be a reversal or a cutting down of the area.

There are a lot of reasons why it might be advisable to settle and I agreed

with the reasons for settlement. The vote was almost unanimous, something

like 78 to 2."
He testified he had discussed the settlement with the full bloods;

the majority of the full bloods understand the English language. At the

.meetings the full bloods did not ask questions. They seemed to understand

what was said and his interpretation of it. Most of the full bloods

have.been to school. He has heard no criticism of the settlement since

the meeting.‘

9. Charles Atwine of Neola, Utah, called as a witness by plaintiffs

.testified in substance as follows:

;That he is 58 years old and occupies an official position with the

-Ute Indian tribe as its Chief. His formal schooling extended to the 9th

grade. He had heard all the previous witnesses testifying in this hearing,

and he was present at a general meeting of all the Ute groups on April 22nd
this year. He heard the explanations of the plaintiffs attorneys; he
speaks the Ute language as well as the English language, and felt that the
Indians were getting a good explanation of what was involved. There were

not nmny questions asked by the Indians. He heard the explanation of the

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 631

attorneys of what the appraisers, who had been hired by the plaintiffs to

appraise the prooertv felt, in

F1‘

heir best judgment, the tribe could look

forward to if the litigation was continued without a recpromise settlement.

On the basis of that explanation he came to the ccnciesion that the
compromise settlement should be accepted. He attended this hearing as an
official representative of the Uintah Band, a part of the Ute Indian tribe
of Utah; that as a result of the explanation made at this meeting with
the attorneys the Uintah band voted to direct the witness and Harvey
Natchess to Sign the stipulation.

The witness is a farmer at Neola, Utah. when he said he was chief

he meant chief of the Uintah Band of the Utes. Before the reorganization

under the Wheeler-Howard Act the Ute Indians had chiefs. His father,

.was a chief and his grandfather was a chief.

He knows most of the full blood Ute Indians, both those on and off
the reserfation. He heard them discussing the settlement and that they
wanted to go through with it. They seemed to understand it very well.
The explanation made by the attorneys satisfied him to the point where
he and others were in full agreement in favor of tie settlement.

10. Jason Cuch, called as a witness in behaii of the plaintiffs

testified in substance as follows:
He lives at Fort Duchesne, Utah, is 36 years old, and is a member of
the Business Committee of the Ute Indian tribe. at the April 22nd meeting’

he was the acting chairman. He graduated from high school and had one

year and a half of commercial training in a business college in Salt Lake

‘ 1

City, Utah, and also attended school in Kansas. He oeiievas the Indians

have a reasonable grasp of what is involved one way or another in the

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 632

proposed settlement. He heard rumors that some of the Indians were

claiming the settlement should be for 17 million dollars; that the rumor
was traceable to one group known as The Independent Utes. This group

has been sponsored and solidified by a person who is a non—member of the
Ute tribe. This person created quite a bit of a agitation on the reservation
but this group is very small. Some of the original members have left

the group, It has always agitated on problems not connected with the
proposed compromise settlement. There was one lady who stated that the
settlement should have been for 100 million dollars, but when the vote

was taken all persons present at the general meeting voted to approve

the proposed compromise settlement. No pressure of any kind was used *
to influence the members of the tribe. He is an authorized delegate

of the Ute Indian tribe and a member of its council. The Ute Indian

tribe voted unanimously for the proposed settlement.

The witness isra full time clerk of the tribe with his office at

.Fort Duchesne, Utah. The Independent group he mentioned had taken no

formal opposition to the proposed settlement, but partieipated in the

proceedings held to consider the proposed settlement. Some were critical

of the tribal administration on other matters. Witness said he was
payroll clerk for the tribal employees who consisted of from 300 to 400
people. They are engaged in building a division fence between the full
blood Utes and the mixed blood Utes.

When asked how he felt personally about the settlement he said that
it would be a benefit and it would be one means of getting developments

which the Indians needed. He said, "Probably we should ask for more

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 533

money". During the examination of the witness by Commissioner Holt the
following occurred:

Commissioner Holt: what do you base your remark upon that you
think they should have more? Just a guess at it or do you have
any facts or anythine in your own mind why they should have more

in_a settlement? You donft do-you?

The Witness: Well, I meet these Indians and some of them say
that, well, why couldn't it be more, and I feel the same way. If
we could have more, all the better, but on the other hand, it was
explained to us by the claims attorneys where several questions
.are involved, so we couldn't have more, and I feel that rather
than delaying and prolonging the claim that it may be a good thing
to settle for this amount.

Commissioner Holt: And, therefore, it is satisfactory?

 

The Witness: Yes.

 

Commissioner Watkins: swell, you realize that this compromise
settlement means that you couldn't have everything that you feel
you ought to have. In other words, you have to give some in order
to get a settlement.

 

The Witness: Yes.

 

ll. .Quray Mccooh, on behalf of plaintiffs testified in substance as
follows;

9

That he was a member of the Uncompahgre River Band Indians, one of the
units of the Ute Tribe. He is 43 years of age and lives in Fort Duchesne,
Utah which is the location of the Uintah Ouray Indian Agency and is the

same place.where the meetings to consider the compromise settlement were

held. Witness went to boarding school and is a member of the Ute Business
Committee and also a member of the Uncompahgre Band. This Band together

with the White River and the Uintah Bands constitute the Ute Indian tribe.

The Business Committee is_composed of six members from the three bands,

two from each band. He was present on the April 22nd meeting we have

discussed. He felt that the Indians understood what was said and that

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620   634

he personally got enough of the explanation to enable him to decide
whether or not he should vote for or against the proposed compromise
settlement. He said he was satisfied with the settlement. He also

testified that he was delegated by the Business Committee to represent
it at this hearing and the Business Committee voted unanimously for
approval of the settlement. There was no pressure used to get any one
to sign the stipulation or take any other action. When queried with
respect to any opposition to the proposed settlement he seid the Uncompragrah band had experience, "in these things and judgments. The groups
primary concern was to find how the judgment was to be used after it

was obtained rather than asking questions about whether or not it should

be accepted.

Queried with respect to his formal education, the witness said he
.went to school during the time they had boarding schools and had studied
up to and including the 8th grade at White Rocks Indian School. He said
he had served on the Indian Board of Education as Chairman of the Board.
He is also Vice President of the tribal Farm Organization and has supervision of some of its farm activities.

.l2. During the course of the litigation of Docket Nos. 44 and 45
and prior to the hearing on the proposed compromise settlement, the
Commission received a great deal of evidence, both written and oral, and
heard at length counsel for the parties, both on legal and factual issues
involved in the subject matter of the claims against the United States;
and by reason thereof became familiar with the merits of said claims; with
the lands involved; and to certain extent with uses to which said lands

were susceptible when used under either Indian or white occupation.

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 520 ’ _ 535

l3. Interlocutory orders, based on Findings and Opinions rendered
in each of said Docket numbers, favoring plaintiffs were made and entered.

on the-Zlst day of February, 1957; and said interlocutory Orders are

hereby referred to and by this reference made a part of these Findings.
14. With respect to lands involved in Docket No. 44, the time of
taking of said lands by the defendant is not fixed. The Commission, in
its Interlocutory Order entered on February 21st, 1957, found that the
defendant is liable to plaintiffs for the value of all the lands within
.the boundaries of the area fixed in Finding No. 3 which plaintiffs may
hereafter prove were disposed of or acquired by defendant. It was also
ordered that a time hereafter will be set for a hearing of such proof as
may be offered by either party, that touches on the deprivation of
plaintiffs of the lands in said area and the various off-sets. It has
.provided that the hearings as to the value of such land shall not be had
until there has been a determination of the lands the plaintiffs have been
deprived of and the dates of such depreviation. The Commission finds that
no hearings have been held for the purpose of taking evidence on when said‘

lands were disposed of or were acquired by the defendant so that as of this
time no established date has been determined when said lands were taken

rby the defendant from the plaintiffs.

The Commission takes judicial notice of the fact that there is a
considerable acreage of said land, the title to which remains in the United
States, which is being more or less used for public purposes.

On March 12, 1959, a.written Stipulation on Acreage, signed and

executed on February 6, 1959, by Ernest L. Wilkinson, Attorney of Record

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 636

for plaintiffs and.Perry W. Morton, Assistant Attorney General, lands

division, and Keith Browne, Attorney for defendant in Docket No. 44,

h was filed with the Commission.

,The Stipulation on Acreage reads as follows:

STIPULATION ON ACREAGE
It is hereby stipulated between the parties herein, that
.the tract of land described in Finding 3 of the Commission's

decision of February 21, 1957 (5 Ind. Cl. Comm), contains
6,369,280 acres. M"

'For the purpose of determining the fairness of the Compromise Settlement

the Commission adopts the acreage agreed on in the said Stipulation as a
top limit.for which the defendant may be liable under the terms of said
.Inter1ocutory Order.

No. 15. That with respect to Docket No. 45 the Commission has
already found, and so ordered, that “the plaintiffs recover from the
defendant the value of an undivided one-half interest in the lands of
said reservation as of August 15, 1882, less such off—sets, counterclaims,
or other demands as are allowable under the Indian Claims Commission Act."

That.thereais filed with the exhibits.in said docket number a copy of a

letter.from Fred W; Johnson, Acting Director of the Bureau of Land Manage*ment, in which the matter of the acreage of the lands claimed in Docket
No. 45 is discussed. According to this letter this tract ¢0ntainS
2,487,474.83 acres. This is intended to be the acreage involved in the
Uintah Reservation established by Executive Order of October 3, 1861.

For the purpose of the present proceedings the Commission adopts the
acreage of this reservation as above stated, to—wit: 2,487,&7&.83 acres,
and the date of taking of an undivided one-half of said lands by the

defendant as of August 15, 1882, as set forth in said Interlocutory Order

I
heretofore referred to.

8 End. Cl. Comm. 620 637

16. ie conclude that the compromise agreement has been carefully
presented to the members of the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah and the
various sub-divisions thereof, and the said plaintiffs, its sub-divisions
and membership have approved said compromise agreement.

17. That said compromise stipulation or agreement under all the

.circumstances is fair to the plaintiffs and defendant.

Edgar E. Witt

 

Chief Commissioner

wm M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

Arthur V. Watkins

 

Associate Commissioner

