an Tm Izmir-ms cm n-:s COE-E-1ISSlOI\'=

 N!a.TION, Plaintiff, )
vs. % Docket No. 169

3:. UNITED STATES or Id-EEEICA, §
‘Defendant. %

Decided: April 28, 1958
Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell,
Attorney for Plaintiff

Ilet I-I . Fredericks ,

with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION 93 21-I_§ COMMISSION

itt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.‘

The Creek Nation is herein asserting a claim against the United
ates Government based on allegations that the defendant Government is
able to it because the so-called Dawes Commission, acting under legis-;
tion of Congress and agreements entered into between the Creeks and the
Vermnent, wrongfully placed persons on the rolls as citizens of said
tion, who thereby became wrongfully entitled to share in the property

said nation, to the loss of plaintiff, for which loss said tribe

serts liability of the defendant.

On May 17, 1957 the defendant filed its motion for summary judgment

dismissal of this

aim upon the ground that matters put in issue

I‘)

I‘ ) J
C)

are res judicata, by reason of a previous decision adverse to plaintiff

in the case of the Creek Nation vs. United States, decided January 6,

 

19‘u,1, and reported in 92 c. Cls. 31:6; reconsidered and affirmed in 93
C. Cls. 76?; certiorari denied by the SuprernepCourt October 20, 19141,
3111 U. S. 667. Defendant further contends that the petition of the plaintiff is a collateral attack upon the final judgment of the Dawes Commission and does not, therefore, state a cause of action over which this
Commission has jurisdiction.

The contention of the Government makes it necessary to examine the
issues determined in the former case and the asserted bases of liability
therein, and compare them with those in the present case.

It is undisputed that the parties in the two cases are the same,
and that the claim of liability of losses accruing to the petitioner is
based upon the same facts-except in the first case liability was claimed
for the wrongful placing of two thousand persons on the rolls as citizens
of the Creek Nation, while in the instant case liability is claimed for
the alleged wrongml placing of three hundred persons on the rolls.

However, the claim of liability in the previous case was an alleged

legal liability by reason of errors and irregularities and was not based

 

on fraud or any other equitable ground. Moreover, the defendant contended

that the Act under which the suit was brought did not give the Court jul"5L.i3"diction to adjudicate equitable claims , and that Court did not consider it
necessary to determine whether it had such jurisdiction.

In the deCiSi=§.3_';'_'?.

of the Court of Claims appears the following statement:

We do not thi.nl<: it i.s necessary to determi.ne whether this

Court has had its jurisdiction enlarged by the Act under

which this suit is brought. The petition does not allege

want of jurisdiction, fraud, or any other ground of equitable
interference which would justify the court in setting aside

the decrees of the Dawes Commission. It merely alleges errors
and irregularities, which, as has often been held, are not sufficient to set aside a judgment when attacked collaterally.
They are clearly insufficient to form a basis for holding the
decrees of the Dawes Commission to be void.

The defendant demurred to the petition on the ground that the facts
set forth therein did not furnish grounds for relief.. There was no ‘trial
on the facts. The court sustained the dmurrer and dismissed‘ the petition. ‘

In the instant case the petition asks "that the decisions of the
Dawes Commission, in placing said erroneous enrollees on the Creek tribal
rolls . . . without jurisdiction, and by accident or mistake, be revised

and corrected"; and also that plaintiff be awarded judgment against

 

-endant for the loss of its lands and funds, thus occasioned by reason
of the "failure of defendant to deal honorably and fairly without regard
for any rule of law or equity.“

The basis of liability claimed in the previous law suit was stated
by the court to be limited to legal liability, which the court held did
not exist.

At the time of the previdus law suit liability of the defendant to
the petitioner on the basis claimed in the present law suit did not exist,
and therefore the decision could not possibly be an adjudication of such
liability, which was created by the Indian Claims Commission Act of

August 13, 19b6, Western (Old Settler) Cherokee Indians vs. United States,

"I. '1 an '-o "*."r :3 .' TV"'¢‘J".}‘ Q{',"'L A0
l Ind. Clss Comm. 203 llh Co Cls. fiés Chickesam nation vs. LuluCQ c-loes,

jar-u-:1:-I-u

   

3 Ind. Cls. Comm. L02, 132 0. C15. 359.

In keeping with the decisions cited, defendant's motion for summary
judgment must be denied. However, such holding 15 merely 35 to juris“
diction; that this Commission shall entertain the petition and shall

hear and determine the claims asserted, the merits thereof and the P3003

that will be required to establish the same are not involved.

Edgar E.'witt

 

Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

Wh. H. Holt
ES__c_;(_-3::-E_p'}-__4:_> (7.:-wr:-rn-? e--e--1 nvanu

1-: \— -.u—-....-u.a..J l...aq.¢.u- ggngj.

DISSEhrING OFIEIOR OF CGHEISSIOKER O‘MARR

The gist of the present petition is set forth in paragraphs X and
XV wherein it is alleged that the Dawes Commission; with the approval
of the Secretary of the Interior; in violation of the tenns of the Curtis
Act of June 28, 1898, 30 stat. h9S, and certain Creek agreements, erroneously added names of persons who were not citizens of the Creek Nation
and therefore not entitled to enrollment, and made duplicate and triplicate enrollments to one and the same person; that as a result of such
errors each person so enrolled received Creek lands and funds which'were
thereby lost to that nation.

The defendant filed its motion to dismiss the petition herein on the
ground.that the claim now asserted had been.previously decided against the
plaintiff by two decisions of the Court of Claims in No. F%373, 92 Co 918'8 and 93 C. Cls. 767.
‘With the motion, the defendant submitted copies of the petitions

filed by the plaintiff in said court, which are as follows:

 

Exhibit FA" is the original petition filed in the Court of Claims

on December 2, 1926. This petition need not be considered because it was

superseded by an amended petition.filed on December 2?, 1937.

 

Exhibit "B" is an “Amended Petition" filed on December 2?, 1937,
and is the petition before the Court of Claims which the court dismissed.

To this amended petition the defendant demurred on the ground that the

facts set forth did not furnish grounds for relief. The court sustained

the demurrer and dismissed the petition. See opinion in 92 C. Cls. 3h6

which was rendered in case No. Fv373 on January 6, l9hl.

Exhibit “C”. Af‘er the first decision of the Court of Claims
above cited, the plaintiff, on February 2h, l9hl, filed a pleading
entitled "Second.Amended Petition.“ To this petition.defendant demurred as follows:

Defendant demure to the second amended.petition of the
plaintiff upon the grounds (a) that the said petition does
not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause of action,
and (b) that the cause of action attempted to be alleged is
not within the jurisdiction of the court.

This petition, Exhibit C, is important because its paragraphs Nos.
II to XV, inclusive, are, except for minor changes which do not affect
the substance, identical to the allegations now set forth in the petition'before us as paragraphs II to X, XII to XVI. And paragraph XV

of Exhibit C is in substance included in paragraphs XVIII and XXI of the

1'\‘v'|:u--r'~v-s4- -r-ya-.13--".’ 4-3. _.-.a...
3-— -—-‘--'---<- x-v\.-vv'.b\.o..|.\J.La.¢

The second amended.petition and the demurrer were submitted to the

Court of Claims and the court on June 2,‘ 19141, held:

“Defendant‘s denurrer to plaintiff‘s second amended

petition sustained, and petition dismissed." (See 93
 c. Cls. 767).

There was no opinion, but in View of the comprehensive discussion
of the issues in the opinion of January 6,ll9hl (92 Co Clso 3H5) D0

opinion was necessary, but it will not be seriously contended, I believe,

that the judgment of dismissal is any less effective because there was ne

opinion.
The Commission, according to its opinion, denied the defendant‘s
motion on two main grounds: (1) That since the dismissal by the Court

of Claims in the former case was rendered on a demurrer to the petition

\_;.}

K11

in that case there was no trial on the merits; and 9(2) that the 8'I‘0"~3Y‘=5l‘-'='
apon which liability is now claimed did not exist at the time the former
claim was decided.

It is fundamental to the doctrine of _r_e_§ Qudicata that the judgment
relied upon as a bar to a second action must have been rendered ‘on the
merits, 30 Am. Jur. 9hh_., sec. 208 and cases cited. The first question
then is whether the action of the Court of Claims in sustaining the defendant‘s demurrer and dismissing the claim was a disposition of the
former case on the merits.

It is correctly stated in the Commission‘s opinion that the parties

in the two cases are the same and that the claim of liability for losses

accruing to the petitioner is based upon the same pleaded facts, except

. T" i':‘''’—.'‘ n ‘I o. .-'9. -v -‘F
3'.” the f0?."!'.'!‘?1" 93$? ti‘? C194“ ‘E'~.T1"...S £32.‘ '..':L:':;;_,»'..“.".:.I‘_'.3._'; ylaulzrg  pv:.L‘::~v.u.:> U11

.. ‘VII’--—-any

‘ the Creek rolls, while in the present case it is alleged that the number

so placed on such rolls was 300.
It is the rule of the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court, and ‘in
all other courts, I believe, that the disposal of a case on a demurrer is
as much a determination on the merits as a trial of the facts alleged in
a pleading; and the reason is that the demurrer admits the well-pleaded
facts. There are cases, of course, to which the rule does not apply, but
they are invariably cases in which the pleading is materially defective
because of an omission of essential allegations.

Oerlikon et al. ‘U’. United

States, l2l C. Cls. 616, illustrates the exception to the general rule, but

it does not apply here,

The Court of Claims suc=..inctly stated the rule in Fcrter v, United.

States, 20 C. Cls. 30?, 31h, thus:

In the year 1871; a suit was commenced in this court by
the petitioners, founded on the same cau.se of action embraced
in the petition in this case. To the Petitiofl 3 g€'319I‘E'-'11
demurrer was filed by th.e United States, and, by the consent
of the attorneys for the claimants, said dmurrer was sustained and cause dismissed. That in legal effect in this
court is equivalent to a judgment on the merits of the case,
and operates in law as a bar to the petitioners‘ right to
recover in this proceeding.

See also Brown v. District of Columbia, 19 C. (315. M45, lL59*-LL50.

   

In the case Gould v. Evansville, etc” 91 U. S. 526, S33, 23 L. Ed.

LL16, LL19, the rule is stated and elaborated upon as follows:

Decided cases may be found in which it is questioned
whether a former judgment can be a bar to a subsequent action,
even for the same cause, if it appears that the first judgment was rendered on demurrer; but it is settled law, that it

1:12:92 no '3.......“ ‘£37333: ."..‘:'; principle wlretix-ax‘ the ;facts upon *5-mien

the court proceeded were proved by competent evidence, or
whether they were admitted by the parties; and that the admission, even if by way of demurrer to a pleading in which the
facts are alleged, is just as available to the opposite party
as if the admission was made ore tenus before a jury.

From these suggestions and authorities two propositions
may be deduced, each of which has more or less application
to certain views of the case before the court: (1) Tint a
judgment rendered upon demurrer to the declaration or to a
material pleading, setting forth the facts, is equally conclusive of the matters confessed by the demurrer as a verdict
finding the same facts would be, since the matters in controversy are established in the former case, as well as in the
latter, by matter of record; and the rule is, that facts thus
established can never after be contested between the same
parties or those in privity with them. (2) That if judgment
is rendered for the defendant on demurrer to the declaration,
or to a material pleading in chief, the plaintiff can never
after maintain against the same defendant or‘ his privies any
similar or concurrent action for the same cause upon the same
grounds as were disclosed in the first declaration; for the
reason that the judgment upon such a demurrer determines the
merits of the cause, and a final judgment deciding the right
must put an end to the dispute, else the litigation would be
endless.

See also Northern Pacific vc Slaght, 203 U. S. l22, 130, 51 L» Ede 738

   

1, where it is stated: "It is well established that a jud demurrer is as conclusive as one rendered upon proof."

The above disposes of the Commission‘s holding that there was no
trial on the merits in the former case.

The determinative question then is whether the present petition
alleges facts that were not grounds for recovery w"ren the former case
was decided against the plaintiff. The Commis sicn has quoted this
language from the prayer of the petition as indicative of the difference
between the cause of action pleaded in the former case and the one now
before us:

"that the decisions of the Dawes Commission, in placing said

erroneous enrollees on the Creek tribal rolls‘-:9 «tr: without jurisdiction,

an--\-3 1-.--— —---~—’

c....;u. '..a_y u.u\.3.L

dent or mistake be revised and corrected '3.‘ '39."

It plainly appears from the present petition and the plaintiff‘s
L. :1‘ that the alleged erroneous enrollments were made by official action
if the Dawes Commission, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior,
is required by the Curtis Act of June 28, 1898, 30 Stat. 1495. So what the
nlaintiff now asks is that we ignore the adjudication of the Dawes Com‘1iSS3-OI1 that the 300 Persons (whoever they are - a fact not disclosed by

;he pleading) were entitled to enrollment as citizens of the Creek Iiation

and as such entitled to the lands and funds here complained of resulting

'rom such enrollments.

The judicial status of the Dawes Commission is not open to question,

or in United States v.‘.~5ildcat, Zhh U. S. ll_'L, ll8, the Supreme Court

 

_.2 ‘I::.J.C1‘3

-31- 41- '3’: There was thus constituted a quasi judicial
tribunal whose judgments within the limits of its jurisdiction were only subject to attack for fraud or such
mistake of law or fact as would. justify the holding that
its judgments were voidable. »:::—~ «:2 atWhen the Commission proceeded in good faith to determine
the matter and to act upon information before it, not arbitrarily, but according to its best judgment, we thirrlz it was
the intention of the act that the matter, upon the approval
of the Secretary, should be finally concluded and the rights

of the parties forever settled, subject to such attacks as
could successfully be made upon judgments of this character

for fraud or mistake.
And again the same court in United States V.  260 U. S. 220,
225', referred to the effect of the determinations of the Dawes Commission
by this language:
It must be accepted now as finally settled that the enrolment of a member of an Indian tribe by the Dawes Commission,
when duly approved, amounts to a judgnent in an adversary

proceeding dstermttirg the eJ;istt-,noe of the in.1i'v*id'ual and his

right to membership, subject, of course, to impeacment under

the well-established rules where such judgments are involved.

The Court of Claims in Greek Nation v. United States, 92 C. Cls. 3146,
also decided that in the absence of fraud or intentional misconduct the
decrees of the Dawes Commission were final. .‘_‘__ .

What these cases hold is that as against a second claim between the
same parties for the same subject matter based upon intrinsic mistake or
fraud, which is the claim stated in the present petition, the adjudication of the Dawes Commission‘ is final and 3-__e_s judicata.

By comparing the allegations of the “Amended Petition“ and the
"Second Amended Petition," which are referred to above, with the present

petition it will be seen that they are essentially the same and seek a

determination by the Indian Claims Commission that the adjudications of

the Danes Commission were erroneous in that it enrolled as citizens of

2 Creek Ration persons not entitled to errollment, or in effect, they
now ask us to ignore and correct the adjudications of the Danes Commission
and award the Indians the value of the lands and the amount of funds of
the Greeks that passed to the erroneous enrollees.

The allegations of the present petition are, but for minor changes,
identical to the allegations contained in the “Second Amended Petition, "
except that they now add that the plaintiff “is entitled to redress under
the principles of fair and honorable dealings between the plaintiff and
defendant, without regard to any existing rule of law or equity 4‘: 44'."

This clause mill be considered later.

What the present petition and the two former petitions allege is

merely that the D.'—!.1.:F!2=. Cnnn-n_ji_gg3°_n3-3 made ;_:s:~:v_-«gag-'}g-*_-gjn_1_g €>77f‘~'*'1"”"*"""'" “*4 9*“ "“""*

____. - 1...-.._-.._.s.r .--—....'.-a.'...a’ --¢..n-... ..l...'v..s ‘an...

purposes of the motion it must be admitted that they did, but as stated
a..... we there was a determination of such enrollments and there are no
allegations in the present petition or the former petitions that the
adjudications of the Danes Commission were the result of extrinsic mistakegthat would void such determinations. It is true that the prayer
quoted above says the Danes Commission was "without jurisdiction" but a
reading of the petition shows that what was meant was that it must enroll
ml)’ Persons eligible for enrollment.

But as stated in United States v.

fildcat, 2M4 U. S. 111, 118, correct conclusions as to enrollments were

zot _necessary to the binding character of the Dawes Commission's decisions.

The distinction between intrinsic fraud or mistake and extrinsic

‘rand or mist-ake is plai 7*’ s '‘"-m in ‘Biger '17. ‘Twin State Oil Co.,

 

L;2 F, (2a) 509 (o. 0., A.., loth Circuit) cited by plaintiff as authority
for impeaohing the adjudication of the Dawes Commission in this case.

In the Tiger case, the Danes Commis sion erroneously made two enrollments and allotments to the same person, the first in the .e of
Tiger and the other in the name of Do-sa-cher. The suit involved the
second allotment which had been conveyed to the oil company. The plaintiffs (heirs of Do-sat-I-cher) contended that the act of the Danes Commis sion in enrolling Do-saw-cher could not be attacked collaterally by
the Gorerment, as it did in defending the case in the interest of the
Greeks.

As shown by the court‘ s opinion, it was held that the determination
of the Danes Commission could not be impeached for intrinsic mistake
if the Ccrxissicn had dete1'-mined that no duplication or the allot-ment
had in fact existed. But, as the court stated, the Dawes Commission
did not so determine; on the contrary, it found that the duplication
did exist and notified the Secretary thereof and recommended that
Do-saw-cher‘s name be stricken from the Creek rolls and that the deed
issued in his name be cancelled, which he did. The fact that the Secretary's action was ineffectual is not material to the question here, for,

as the court held, the error was "not intrinsic mistake in "the decision

of disputed facts or law in a matter presented to and determined by it”

[the Dawes Commissio_r_17. Again the court said: "The duplicate enroll:r:ae;:*1t

and allotment was not an intrinsic mistake in a determination, but an

extrinsic mistake in making two records of one determination."

 

From the above, it is plain that since, according to allegations
c..- the petition, there had been a detemination by the Dawes Corrsiission
of the validity of the enrollments here complained of, such determination
See

cannot now be impeached upon the mere mistakes of that Commission.

United States v. Wildcat, 61 L. Ed. lO2b.; United States v. Atkins,

     

6? L. Ed. 22h; Tiger v, United.States, us (2d) 509; Creek Nation V} United

States, 92 C. Cls. 3146. So the Tiger case instead of supporting the

plaintiff‘ s position holds that the judgments of the Dawes Commission are

final and cannot be attacked collaterally.

Moreover, the Court of Claims has twice decided the present claim
against the plaintiff, holding that the judgments of the Dawes Commission
are not subject to collateral attack and are _r_e_s_ judicata.

The first case was decided on Janus- 26, 19?‘, 92 C. Cls. 31; . The

"ition in that case was based upon errors and irregularities of the
Dawes Commission and the petition was disnissed because the a_'L'Leged facts
were “clearly insufficient to form a ‘rnsis for holding the decrees of the
Dawes to be void." The petition before the court was the "Amended Petition," Exhibit B, mentioned above, and was in substance the same'as the
present petition. In that decision the court did not, as counsel for the
Creeks now contend, hold that it had no jurisdiction to grant the relief
sought. On the contrary, it only decided that, whether it had jurisdiction
to set aside the decrees of the Dawes Commission or not, the allegations

of the petition did not state facts that would justify equitable interference with such decrees, namely, want of jurisdiction, fraud or any other

ti

equitable grounds, and it then proceeded to pass upon the éllegatio. of the petition and dismissed it. Early in its opinion the court said:
"The action is not instituted for the primary purpose of setting aside
or modifying the judgment of this tribunal [ism-res Commissio_:37 and conS8<?.11€1'1‘51)' is not a direct attack upon it."

The second decision was on the J “Second Amended Petition," Exhibit C,

and sustained a demurrer to that on June 2, 19141.; 93 Co 015- 767»

As I have said before, and as the Commission holds, the case decided
by the Court of Claims and the present case are the same and based upon

the same pleaded facts. So the two decisions of the Court of Claims

are res judicata of the questions raised by defendant’s motion and a bar

to the present claim.

 -IIIII-I-:3  L j ¢ - -.-..\."|... T‘ ,%_9 _
& ~---.LL cusu sat.-.u\..u. uuJ.t: .l.n'-_-,¢:._L_1_.i,1','~_-"',S

 

The plaintiff contends, and the Commission apparently agrees, that
because clause (5), the fair and honorable dealings clause, was not in
existence at the time the former decisions of the Court of Claims were
rendered they are not 3_~_e_§ judicata of the right of the Creeks to maintain
the present claim. They and the Commission rely upon the following

decisions of the Court of Claims,

In Western Cherokee v. United States, llh C. Cls. 716, the Cherokee

 

filed its claim with us for compensation for an outlet extending west of
the 100th meridian west of lands that had been ceded by treaty in l8l'?
(7 Stats 155), but provision for the outlet was either intentionally or
mistakenly omitted from the treaty._ They alleged that except for the

mistake or had the United States dealtjfairly and honorably with them

they would have received the outlet lands or would have been paid for

 We sustained the defendant‘s motion to dismiss on the ground that

-8ehe issues presented had been determined by the Court of Claitns in

Eastern Cherokee et al, v, United States, 88 C. Cls. 162. In that case,

 

the court now. holds, that it was confined to claims arising out of the
treaty of l8l7 and therefore, “By no process of liberal interpretation
could a provision for an outlet to the west, which was not mentioned in
the treaty, be incorporated into the treaty, no matter what may have
been the reason for its omission.“ Hence, at the time of its former
adjudication, the court had no power to make an award based upon the

omission. So, it held the former adjudication was not a bar to the

Cherokee claim presented to us.

Incidentally, the Cherokee claim involved in the above appeal was

decided by us against the Cherokee on the merits on February 2, 1952,
.nd. Cls. Comm. 22.

The other case is Chickasaw v. United States, 132 c. Cls. 359. The
Chickasaw presented its claim to us for the value of an interest of the
Chickasaw in certain lands erroneously allotted Choctaw freedmen out of
lands jointly owned by the Chickasaw and Choctaw. In their petition filed
with the Commission the Chickasaw alleged in certain agreements with the
defendant they were misled by the language employed and that there was a
unilateral mistake on their part as to the meaning of the agreements.

We sustained the de;E'endant‘s motion to dianiss on the ground that

the issues presented to us had been adjudicated by the Supreme Court in

Zhickasaw V. United States, 318 U. S. LL23, and that decision was a bar

to the second claim for their interest in the lands allotted the Choctaw.

g1‘. .ug¢g.gg.g-\q._¢ u.-uuul-t-av- '-'

In reversing, the Court of Clazlms (132 C. Cls. 363) stated that the
Supreme Court did not and could not decide upon the validity of the
new grounds of the claim because they were not then grounds for a claim.

But those cases do not support the plaintiff‘s right to maintain
the present claim for the obvious reason that in those cases the court
held there had been no trial upon the merits of the cases relied upon as
a bar to the new claims set forth  the petitions filed with us.‘

The present claim is entirely different in that it is the same claim

that was presented to the Court of Claims and twice dismissed on the
merits. It is true that the fair and honorable dealings clause is invoked

in the present petition, but, as will be seen later, such ground does not

change the effect of the bar of the former decisions.

In _Q_r._r;a_haL_,Tribe v. hI_3_I_3ite%d States, 6 Ind. 01.:-,. com. 68,- 93-81:,

..___-._-3-: -n—o-—

(Rare-".’ AAA

‘ -.-og-pun-I-runs

December 27, 1957), we considered clause (3) in a case similar to that here

under consideration, and we said:

it '35 ‘fr Clause (5) of section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission
Act does not supply a claimant with a new theory under which he
may prosecute a perfectly valid legal or equitable claim. The
Court of Claims has made this position abundantly clear in the

case of the Blackfeet and Gros Ventre Tribe v. United States,
127 C. Cls. 30?, where in urmistakable language it stated:

‘The contention is without merit. Clause (5) has
reference to moral claims which were not recognized
by any rule of law or equity. If a tribe was not entitled to recover under any rule of law or equity, it
still might recover under clause (5); but if its claim

was recognized by a rule of law or equity, then clause
(5) has no application.‘

And in a prior case, Western Cherokee v. United States,_ 116
C. Cls. 665, which was an appeal from a judgment of this Corrr.-:;.iss:i.<;:=:;ov‘.a
dismissing a petition for additional interest on a claim previo*=.;=.s',i:,

determined by that court, --it was there contended before us 

the Court of Claims that there could have been no determination

6 21:5’

on the merits in the for.-mrer cases because the fair and ‘nonorable dealings clause was not in existence at the time of

the former decisions and that clause permits a reconsideration
of the interest duestiton hr this Commission. In overruling
these contentions, the court said at page 677:

*4-4' 4% % In addition, we think it is clear from the
history of the Act of 19116 that Congress did not intend
to confer upon the Commission jurisdiction to pemit
claims, such as are here involved, to be re-litigated
under clause (5) of Section 2 on the basis of fair and
honorable dealings. Clause (5) obviously has reference
to the fundamental character of the claim rather than to
the theory on which an Indian tribe or band may seek to
invoke the jurisdiction of the Indian Clairre Commission.‘

And at page 678 added:

be —t:-- 4- If the claims made by appellants in these cases

could be again heard and determined by the Indian Claims
Commission, it would be difficult to imagine a claim, even
though previously considered and decided on the merits by
this court, which could not be relitigated before the Commission merely by basing the claimed right of recovery on
the prov:'..cicn of clause (3), supra. Clause (5) was intended,
as its language clearly shows, when considered in the light
of history and other provisions of Section 2, to cover only
moral claims based on justice and fair and honorable dealings or broad principles of equity and justice, with respect _ .
to which no court had theretofore made a determination on

the merits, or could have made such a determination under
the terms of prior jurisdictional acts.’

 

Plaintiff ‘s present claim, under the facts alleged in its petition, falls
iquarely within the proscription of the rule of the above cases. It is a
laim not only previously recognized by a rule of law or equity, but one
,hat has been twice adjudicatedby the Court of Claims on the merits under a
iurisdictional act giving it jurisdiction to finally dispose of it, as it
lid against the Greeks. 92 C. Cls. 3116 and 93 C. Cls. 767.

For the reasons stated I am of the opinion the defemant‘s motion to

Lismiss should have been sustained and the present petition dismissed.

Louis J. 0*}-‘I2:-.rr
Associate Cornmissioner

 

