BEFORE THE IDDIAH CLAINS COMMISSION

THE SEMINOLE NATION,
Plaintiff,
Docket E0. 150

THE UNITED STATES OF AEERICA,

VVVVVVVVV

Defendant.

Decided: December 5, 1955
Appearances:

Roy St. Lewis

Paul M. Tfiebel

Attorneys for Plaintiff

Clifford R. Stearns, with whom

was Kr. Perry W. Morton, Assistant Attorney General, Attorneys

for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE CCEMISSIOU

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The claim in this case as made by the evidence and plaintiff's requested findings of fact is for the alleged excess value of 320 acres of
land in Oklahoma known as the Emahaka School Tract over and above the
amount received for said land from the sale thereof made by the defendant
for the benefit of plaintiff. Plaintiff alleges that said land was its
PT0Perty at the time the defendant in 1920 contracted to sell the same to
one Walter Ferguson; that said sale for the benefit of the plaintiff had
been authorized by Act of Congress of April 26, 1906 (BM Stat. 137) and

Act of April 30, 1903 (35 Stat. 770); that contract for the sale of the

-and to said Ferguson was made on July 31, 1920 for the sum of $27,230.00;

that said sale was for a cash payment of one—fourth of total purchase
price, to wit: $6,820.00 and that further payments together with interest
thereon were to become due in one and two years; that the said Ferguson
made no further payments thereon but that extensions were granted him by
the defendant, and that his right of purchase was thereafter by him transferred to one V. V. Harris, who was on February 5, 1923 permitted to pay
the full amount of the balance due; and that thereafter on December 22,
192% a patent was issued and delivered to said Harris by the Secretary of
the Interior for said land.

Plaintiff alleges that its chief and other members of the tribe protested the making of the original contract of sale at the time for the
reason that oil prospects had developed in the vicinity of the land involved
and that it would be to the best interest of the tribe for said land to be
withheld from sale, and its value to plaintiff as oil producing property
thereby be made to accrue to plaintiff. Plaintiff alleges that thereafter,
through its chief: and other members of the tribe, it protested the granting
of extensions to the said Ferguson of time for making deferred payments and
urged that by reason of the failure to make said deferred payments hisi
original contract be cancelled and forfeited and the land reclaimed for the
benefit of plaintiff. It is further alleged by the plaintiff that prior
to acceptance of full payment on Februe y 5, 1983 and prior to issuance of
patent in December 192% that the land had greatly enhanced in value by
reason of the oil development in its vicinity and that defendant‘s failure to cancel said contract of sale as it had a legal right to do and

resell said lands for the benefit of plaintiff, as was its duty as the

guardian of plaintiff and in keeping with fair and honorable dealings,
caused a loss to plaintiff of not less than $Ml,220.00, for which said sum
together with interest from December 22, 192E plaintiff asked judgment.

The defendant contends first that the claim is res judicata by reason of prior suits involving the same claim in the Court of Claims; and
that if its plea of res judicata be not sustained, that this Commission has
not the jurisdiction to review the action of the Secretary of the Interior
in disposing of the land; and that in any event the land was sold for its
fair market value on July 3l, 1920 and that it had no greater value at any
time prior to December 22, 192k.

The claim of res judicata is based on several law suits in behalf of
the Seminole Nation as to which defendant says that same "were sufficiently
broad in the language of the petitions to include the 320 acre Euahaka tract
itself." (Defendantis brief p. 2h) It would take a very lengthy discussion
to analyze the claims made in these several suits referred to and the decisions of the courts therein and this Commission thinks it will suffice to
say that it has carefully examined the same and is of the opinion that the
exact claim as now before this Commission was never made in the previous
law suits and no decision was made therein in which same was involved; and
that therefore the plea of res judicata cannot be sustained.

This Commission is further of the opinion that it has jurisdiction to
review the action of the Secretary of the Interior of which complaint is
made and which forms the basis of plaintiff's claim. The cases cited by
defendant in support of its contention in this respect have been carefully considered and we think they do not sustain defendant's viewpoint.

In the case of Wagner, Whirler and Derrick Corporation vs. The United

States (128 c. Cls. 382) the holding that the decision of the head of a

department was final and.conclusive unless “it is fraudulent or arbitrary or capricious or so grossly erroneous as to inply bad faith" was
based on a statute which required such a decision in that case. The case
of Croghan vs. The United States (116 C. Cls. 57?) involved the dismissal
of an employee by a Government agency and is not applicable to the facts
and the issues in the instant case. The case of Mole Lake Band vs. The
United States (113 C. Cls. 16) we think holds in effect just the contrary
of the contention made for it by the defendant. While the plaintiff was
denied recovery in the case, the decision held that it was not entitled to
a recovery because the court "found that the Government did not fail in

its duty as a guardian.” The obvious inference is that had the Government

 

_failed in its duty the plaintiff would have been entitled to recover anv

   

damages sustained thereby. There is not a hint in the opinion to the

effect that the court did not have jurisdiction to consider the actions of
the Government agency in respect to the matters of which complaint was made.
(emphasis supplied)

Our viewpoint with reference to the above defenses brings us to the
consideration of the merits of defendant's claim as asserted-~that is
whether the market value of the land involved was greater between July 31,
1920 and February 5, 1923 and December 22, l92h and if it was, whether defendant was guilty of a failure in its duty to the plaintiff because it
did not cancel the sale of July 1920 and make a resale of the property.

The evidence shows that the tract was appraised for $22,780.00 in .
1920 before a producing oil well was developed in its vicinity; and that
it was sold for $27,230.00 at an auction sale on July 31, 1920, the amount

being in excess of the appraised value at that time. However, it is to

be noted that some of the Seminole Indians protested this sale on the
ground that oil prospects justified holding the property off the market

at the time. The sale was for a cash payment of $6,820.00, a like amount
to be paid in one year and the balance in two years from the date of sale,
deferred installments to draw 5 per cent interest. Said contract of sale
further provided that "should any payment be not made when due, the sale
thereof may be cancelled and the rights of the purchaser therein delcared
forfeited in the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior." The purchaser made default in the payments of the first deferred installment when
due and the second and full payment of the balance was not paid when due,
but extensions of time were granted by the Secretary of the Interior to
the purchaser, Ferguson, and to his assignee, V. V. Harris, and said Harris
was permitted to make payment of the total balance on February 5, 1923.

The evidence shows that the Indians protested from time to time to the
granting of extensions of time for the payments of deferred installments
and that these protests were made not only by individual members but by
action of the entire membership of the tribe, and that no tribal chief
would ever join in executing a patent or deed to the purchaser; and that
ultimately the patent was executed by the Secretary of the Interior alone
on December 22, 192%. It is significant tlst in the letters passing between the Superintendent of Indian Affairs and the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior that they insisted on carrying
wit the contract as originally made in July 1920, and gave no consideration
to the request of the Indians that the sale be cancelled because the market
value had increased. In fact as late as November 192%, when the execution

of the Deed to Harris over ‘he protest of the Indians was being considered,

#81

after he had been permitted to ay the original purchase price, the Indian
Commissioner in a letter to the Secretary of the Interior with reference
to the complaint as to the consideration said that same need not be considered and that the only complaint Qhich was being considered was due to

     

the extension given on deferred ayments. The letter proceeded to give

 

T933033 for extending leniency t° the purchaser. These communications all

 

show a recognition of the fact that the contract of sale authorized its
cancellation, at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior, because
of the failure to comply with the installment payments. In no communication was it indicated that the possible increase of value of the land was
considered.

The oil activities in the vicinity of the land involved were beginning
to be recognized as enhancing the value of the mineral prospects of the land
prior to the sale in July 1920. The appraisal of the land in l9li included
$6.00 per acre for speculative oil and gas rights. Between July 1919 and
1920 an oil well was brought in about a mile and half north of the tract,
and though production was light it brought about increased interest in the
oil and gas possibilities of the land in the vicinity and the Government
apbraisal, by reason of oil possibilities, for the tract involved herein
was increased from $6.00 to $25.00 per acre. It seems that the first substantial production of oil in the vicinity was the Betsy Foster well 0nd
March 17, 1923, which was some two and one-half miles distant iron the
land involved. There was much excitement and leasing of oil property in
all directions from the Foster well. During this period of time the wit~

ness Collier testified to having leased land for oil development in the

use

vicinity of the tract involved for $100.00 per acre and of getting $200.00
per acre for lease and royalty. The witness Criswell testified to leasing
for oil andfgas and knowing of others doing so during the years 1922 and
1923 in the vicinity of the land involved in which the consideration was
$100.00 per acre. The witness Jacobs testified to getting $500.00 per
acre. The exact dates of these leases and sales are not definite but are
testified to as being in the years l922 and 1925. The purchaser of the

land, V. V. Harris, in a letter dated May 22, 1923, some months after he

had paid for the land, states that the value of the land at the time of

his letter was ‘between $30,000.00 and $75,000 .00. While the defendant

urges that little weight should be given to this statement for the reason
that the writer is boosting the value of his own land and to that extent

is self-serving, we nevertheless think it has some weight and entitled to.
consideration in connection with the other evidence of the values in the
vicinity, and indicates that at the time the letter was written (which was
sometime before the patent was executed) that the land had a far greater mar»
ket value then than the price paid for it.

Witnesses David L. Dooly and C. V. Sidwell, who are petroleum engineers

and geologists, testified as experts for the defendant, without ever

having had any personal experience in the section of the country involved

at the time in question, as to what they thought the value of the land in
question for oil and gas was at that time, and it was their opinion that

the land sold for its market value at the time of its sale and that it was
not worth any more than that amount at any time up to December, 192%.

In view of the testimony of persons personally acquainted with the oil

development in and about the land herein involved and during the period involved, it seems to us that the value of the property for oil and gas

It 83

development could not have failed to increase during these years. At the time
of the sale in 1920 there had been no production in land adjacent to the
property involved but within the next three or four years there was great activity—»
several producing wells were brought in on tracts adjacent or very near that ine
volved and it seems to us that the preponderance of the evidence justifies a
finding of increased value of the mineral possibilities between July, 1920

and February, 1923 and December, 192%, whichever later date might be said to

be the final controlling date for fixing the value. Our great difficulty is
determining just what the fair value should be fixed at as determining the liar
bility of the defendant, if any, taking into consideration the unquestioned increase and fluctuations in value due to oil development and oil activity and

the varying amounts for which mineral rights in lands similarly situated to

that of plaintiff were selling for. The Commission thinks the value of the
surface and minerals of the tract at periods between July, 1920 and February,
l923, and up to December, l92M, was not less than $200.00 per acre or a total of

$6H,000.00.

The evidence seems to us to show that the Government was derelict by
reason of its failure to give consideration to the interests of the plaintiff
Indians. In no one of the communications passing between Government officials
discussing the protests of the Indians to the consummation of this sale was the
question of whether or not the property had enhanced in value subsequent to the
Original sale date and prior to final payment of the purchase and the execution
of the deed or patent to the purchaser given consideration. The sale contract
Provided that said sale could be cancelled and the rights of the purchaser
declared forfeited at the discretion of the Secretary of the Interior should
any payment not be made when due. The very first pa sent that came due was not
Paid when due, nor was the second payment paid when due. It seems to us that

3 Proper consideration of the rights of the plaintiff Indians certainly required of the defendant that when these payments cane due, or at least when

‘Pd

the second payment was due and not paid, and when the sale of the lands in the
first instance had been protested by the Indians, and said protests were conw
tinuing, that some investigation should have been made as to whether or not
there had been an increase in the value of the property and a realization had
that the interests of the Indians would be best served by the cancellation or
forfeiture of the sale and resale of same so as to get for the Indians the
enhanced value that the evidence seems to us to well establish as having come
about. The tenor of the communications to which we have referred seemed to
have only in mind the question of the proper and fair treatment of the purw
chaser and the consideration due him. Had it been thought unfair to keep the
money that he had paid,then it was well within the power of the Secretary of
the Interior to return the payment. In the Mole Lake Band case, to*which we
have previously referred, the court held under very similar circumstances to
that involved in the instant case, that the Government had undertaken the
responsibility of a guardianship, and owed its ward "a high degree of diligence,
Having failed in discharging its duty in the respect indicated, as we think it
did, it is our opinion that the plaintiff is entitled to an award for the dif%
ference we_find in the value of the surface and minerals of $200.00 per acre,
that is $6M,000.00, and the amount received, $29,786.3h——a difference of
$3u,213.66.
The plaintiff contends that the valuation of the tract should be that
on the date of the conveyance, December 22, 1924; the defendant in its brief

(p. 30) indicates the highest value between 1920 and 192% can be considered,

but during the trial orally argued for a valuation between July, 1920 and

February 5, 1923 (Oklahoma Hearing Apr. 29, 195%, p. 15). We have fixed the

Value as between 1920 and 1923, and l92H.

ll

It is not thought that the character of the transactions involved
by reason of which the aforesaid liability is found to accrue, entitles
the plaintiff to interest.

E&ger E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

DISSENTING OPIEION

I cannot agree with the decision in this case because I believe
the claim was tried and decided upon an erroneous legal theory.

The petition is confusing because it includes a claim for the loss
of a school building for which claim was made in the amount of $50,000.
This claim was abandoned during the trial (Transcript of March 31, 195M,
p. H), so there remains the claim for the value of the land sold, that
is, the 320 acres described in paragraph XIII of the petition, known
as the Emahaka Mission tract, which for brevity will hereafter be re~
ferred to as Emahaka tract.

The theory, as disclosed by the allegations of the petition conm
tained in paragraph XIII to XIX, is that the Government is liable to
the Seminole for the failure of the Secretary of the Interior to cancel
the sale of the Euahaka tract to Ferguson, as he had the power to do
under the conditions of the sale, and to resell the property at a higher
price than the $27,280 paid by Ferguson and his assignee, Harris, which
it is alleged "was in plain violation of its duties as guardian of plain»
tiff, and of fair and honorable dealings between defendant and plaintiff,
its dependent Indian ward." As I understand the opinion in this case
the Commission adopted the theory of liability in its decision.

As I View this claim the primary question before the Commission
is: Did the Secretary of the Interior, in the sale of the Emahaka tract
and in extending the time for making the deferred payments of the purchase price, act with the care, diligence and skill required of a

fiduciary?‘

It is not, nor can it be, denied that in offering the Emahaka
tract for sale under section 15 of the Act of.April 26, l906, 3h Stat.
137, or the Act of April 30, l908, 35 Stat. 70, 71, the Secretary of
the Interior was acting in a fiduciary capacity and his action in
waiving the defaults of Ferguson and accepting the balance of the
purchase price with interest from the date of sale from Ferguson's
assignee, Harris, he was acting as trustee and that his action must
be governed by the law applicable to trustees. By both acts mentioned
above he was given possession of the tract and directed to appraise
and sell it for the benefit of the Seminole, while he is referred to
as guardian in the petition, it is clear he wastacting as a trustee.
In any event, the designation is not important, for the duties and
liabilities would be the same under the acts cited.

The duties and obligations of a trustee are too well known to
require extended discussion. They are that a trustee must act in good
faith and exercise due care, diligence and skill in dealing with the
trust property. The question of the good faith of the Secretary does
not even remotely enter into this case, and when the trustee meets
the required standard of care, diligence and skill no liability attaches
to handling of trust property. (51; Am. Jnr. 355, sec. 321). This
standard is universally defined to be that of an ordinarily prudent
man in the conduct of his private affairs under like circumstances, with
a similar object in view. (5% Am. Jur. 256, sec. 322).

The published and posted notice of the sale was made on June 15,

1920, (Def. Ex. l5) and stated the appraised value to be $16,700. This

use

appraisement was apparently made in 1919 and as shown by it the land
and improvements were appraised at $15,100 plus $5.00 per acre, or

$1600, for oil and gas. (See appraisement of June 13, 1919, and letter

of Superintendent, dated July 17, 1919, transmitting the appraisement,

same being Def. Exs. 13(0) and l3(b)), But in subsequent correspondence
referring to the oil and gas item in this appraisenent it was erroneously
stated to be $6.00 per acre. (See Superintendent's letter of January 28,

1920, part of Def. Ex. 13(h)). The sale was held as advertised on
July 31, 1920, without tribal objection.
That the land had a value of $50.00 per acre for agricultural

purposes is generally conceded, in fact that is the value placed upon

it by Harris, the assignee of Ferguson (Plain. Ex. 39), so it is plain
that the high bid of Ferguson of $27,280 or $85.25 per acre, included
$35.25 per acre, or $11,280, for a potential oil and cas value, that is,

a speculative value, It is this oil and gas value that forms the basis

for this claim, as contended by the Seminole.

Now, it cannot be seriously denied that a valid sale had been made
on July 31, 1920, and at a price that included a speculative value for

oil and gas, so the inquiry must be as to what occurred between the sale
and December 22, 1923, the date on which title passed to Harris, which

would require or justify the cancellation of the sale and resale of

the Emahaka tract.

The only ground stated in the Indians‘ objections was that because

of oil drilling activities in the vicinity of the tract the value of the

9 89

land, in so far as oil and gas are concerned, had increased (Plain. Ex. H0),

but the question before the Commission was, or should have been, whether
the Secretary acted with the care, diligence and skill the law imposed

upon him in the sale of the property and in extending time for making

the deferred payments. This is to be governed by the evidence which is

plain and undisputed.

As early as July 11, 1919 (Def. Ex. 1;;(s)),, he United States 011

Inspector reported to the Superintendent of the Five Civilized Tribes
that there had been drilling for oil to the north and east of the tract
resulting in dry holes and that there was no production "in any of the
townships adjacent to the one in which this tract of land is located."
And again, on January 9, 1520, (Def. Ex. l3—d) the Assistant Commissioner
of Indian Affairs requested an examination of the tract "with a View to

a probable exploration for oil and gas," and on January 23, l920, (Def.
Ex. 13-f)the Inspector reported that within a distance of from l—3/U
miles to 2-3/H miles of the tract three "dry holes" had resulted from

the drilling, stating further: "These failures may be considered conclusive tests of this general area." He also mentioned a well then

drilling 1-l/M miles north. This well came in before the sale, (Def. Ex.
16) causing the Inspector to increase his appraisement for oil and gas
from $5.00 to $25.00 per acre to cover a speculative value. The accuracy
of the Inspector's report was proven by subsequent developments, for as
shown by the testimony of the witness Dooley (Trans. pp. 81-227) and the
Map, Def. Ex. #8, dry holes resulted from drilling on all sides of the

tract, as well as two holes within the tract, except that four wells of

small production were brought in south of the tract in Section 18-7N#l8E.

(Def. Exs. 11-8 and 19-11 to lll). _And it is conclusively shown that no
producing well was brought in in Seminole County, in which the tract
is located, until March 17, late}, (Trans., p. 111 and Def. Ex. 1:7,

p. HO) some three miles northeast of the Emahaka tract. So the
Inspector was correct in stating that the tractfpossesses a small
prospective value, only, as an oil and gas proposition * * ‘."

So throughout the period from the sale and up to February 3, 1923,
when the payments of the delinquent installments of purchase price were
made, with accrued interest, there had been no well with commercial
production in Seminole County, but the Secretary then had a firm bid
for the land which contained a speculative sum of $11,280 for oil and
gas. In addition, he had the unqualified recommendations of successive
superintendents of the Five Civilized Tribes, the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs and the U. S. Oil Inspector, all responsible public officials.
of his department and men in direct charge of the transaction and in a
position to know, and did know, of the developments, that the sale was
proper and that the balance of the purchase price be accepted. Care
and prudence required the consummation of the sale. Even had the value
of the mineral rights advancedaafter the delinquent payments, that would
have been no evidence of imprudence on the Secretary's part, for, as
stated in Re Fulton Trust Co. (N. L), 77 A.L.R. LL99:

"In determining whether-the acts of a trustee have been
prudent within the meaning of the rule, we must look at the

facts as they exist at the time of their occurrence, not aided

or enlightened by those which subsequently take place; for it

is an obvious truth that a wisdom developed after an event, and

having it and its consequences as a source, is a standard no
man should be judged by.” 53 Am. Jur. 257, sec. 32%.

But, as has been amply shown, his action was justified by subsequent
developments proving beyond question the soundness of his judgment.

As it happened, the first commercially productive well in Seminole
County was brought in on March 17, 1923, a month and a half after the
delinquent payments were made and about three miles from the tract, but
to say that that fact would have justified a reasonable belief that the
Emahaka tract would have brought at public auction a price in excess of
the $11,280 already received for the mineral rights is pure speculation.

On March lh, l92h drilling was started on the Emahaka tract and

I

completed on August 26, 192k, at a depth of @359 feet and plugged as a

dry hole. (Def. Exs. 51-1, 51-2, also 1.18). While this well was drilling
and on August 1, 192%, the Seminole objected to the confirmation of the
sale and to the issuance of the deed. Had the Secretary acceded to the
Seminole demands of August l, l92h, and readvertised the property for
sale, on thirty days notice, the sale would have been made after the

dry well was brought in on kugust 26, 192%. It is too plain for argu 

ment that there,would hare been little or no oil and gas value considered
by a purchaser at a sale subsequent to August 26, 192k. (Trans. p. llh).

As I View the real issues in this case the cnly factual question

:
involved is whether the Secretary acted with care, diligence and prudence
in concluding the sale as he did. The question before him was whether
he should accept the bid which included the $11,280 for oil and gas
possibilities, or speculate on the chance that because of the excitement

in the area caused by drilling operations, he could get much more. The

°n1Y evidence depended upon by the claimant is that the mineral value

h 9

("1

L’.

of the land increased between the sale and the time title passed on
December 22, 1923. Obviously, the duty of the Secretary was to weigh
the facts as they existed and determine whether they were such as to
Justify setting aside a firm bid of $11,280 for the oil value and
speculate on the chance that a higher bid could be obtained. To my
mind he acted with the prudence and care that would guide any man in
the circumstances, for his action was based upon sound and undisputed
facts, not more conjecture, as was the basis for the objections made by
the individual Seminole Indians.
The Commission has decided in effect that the value of the land

is the criterion for determining liability, and has relied upon prices
paid for mineral rights of land in the vicinity of the tract. pInci—
dentally, no oil or gas in commercial amounts was developed on any of
these lands. Plainly, it seems to me, the question before the Commission was what the Emahaka tract would have sold for at public auction
on a resale, if the question of value is to be considered, for that is
the only way the tract could have been disposed of. (Def. Ex. 13-L).
To summarize: considering the period between the date of the sale
and February 3, 1923, when the full purchase price was paid, with

accrued interest, I find nothing in the evidence that would justify any
reasonable belief that a resale would bring more for the mineral rights
than had been bid. And considering the period between February 3, 1923,
and December 22, 192k, when patent issued, the evidence shows that the
first well in Seminole County was brought in on March 17, 1923, some three

miles from the tract. A year later a well was started on the Emahaka

tract and completed on August 26, 192k, as a dry hole. Perhaps the
drilling of this well would have given the mineral rights a speculative
value but the amount is more conjecture. Anyway, the Secretary would
have been justified in awaiting the completion of this well before
cancelling the sale. Had the well produced oil or gas he still had

an opportunity to cancel the sale, as the Seminole demanded on August 1,
192M, for patent had not then issued.

Since, however, the well was DOD?

productive, he properly issued the patent.

Louis J. 0'I~1arr
Associate Commissioner

