 ..-....-a-.-;

' 1 Ind. c1. Comm. 178

‘smear tens nmmx CLAII-ES comzxssxon

EARGUERITEE J . UIIDL-IE1'.'}'O0D , on the
Relation of an Identifiable Group
of Choctau'and Chickasaw Petitioners,

178

)

)

)

et al., )
)

Plaintiffs, 3'

V50 ; DOC3{et E300 

UIIITED series or AI-ERICA, )
. )

Defendant. )

Marguerite J.'Underwood for herself
and other Choctaw and Chickasaw
Petitioners, et al., Plaintiffs.

Apgearances:

Ralph.A. Barney and Julius Kartin II,
with whom was Hr. Assistant.Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech, attorneys
for Defendant.

ocr 2 8 1949

OPIHIOK OF THE COEKISSICH

hnjijl-#2

   

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

This claim is presented be Karguerite'Uniersood on the relation of

U

375 persons alleged to be Chickasas Indians by blooa, which Indians are

allegea to be an identifiable group and the descendants of

Steuart.Eolier and Bledso Holder.

Elizabeth

C
f"%‘l'

The petition sets out a lengthy history of the efforts of claimants

‘-1

to secure enrollment as nenbers of he Chickasaw Tribe ané

3

thereby, to

. 1 Ind. C1. Comm. 178 % _ 179

...2.....

secure individual allotments of land and other benefits grovided 3 the
Congress for enrolled members of the Chickasaw Tribe. It is unnecessary
in this opinion to describe these efforts. It is sufficient to say that

the basis of petitioners! claim is the contention that they were wrong,‘§ _J°

fully denied enrollment and thereby the rights and benefits provided by

the Congress to enrollei members of the Chi kasan Tribe.

1

Plaintiffs pray for a judgment in tne amount of (a) "$1 0#l.28 for

3

ts tie aggraised value of 320 acres of
Nallotable land niich was allotted to each n nber of the Choctaw and

Chickasaw Tribe'under an Act of J.ly l, 1902 (32 Stat. 6H1)"; (b) "$l,O75,00

.0 - - '- - '3, ..L..x. .._ .9 4:. .. AL.‘
lor each nlaintiff“ as seine tne total an.ant cl naynents nade to tn

-mg‘ _
L) __

Choctad and Chickasaw Iniians since l90¥ wi h interest; (0) $310.00 for

3

each plaintiff, "being tne share of each" in $S:5G0,000 alleged as being

or to be agnropriated to the Choctaw and Chickasaw Indians for the gur-,

1...!

chase of coal and asphalt bands from then by the United States under Public

The resgondenu has filed its notion to dismiss the netition on the

do

0

main ground the the Connzssion lacks jurisdiction for the reason that

J5 O

petition asserts claims 0; individuals and not "claims aaainst the United

tates on the behalf of .n; Iniian tribe, band, or other identifiable

group," as contemplated and required by Section 2, Zniian Claims Connission

Act, apgjroveci A-c.g~..:. 4;. 13, 19-:-6.

The respondent's nosition is that,'under the allegations of the

,1 Ind. c1. Comm. 17S_ - 130

-3petition, the recoveries sought are amounts which it is claimed petitioners are severally entitled to receive by reason of their claim of
right to enrollment as members of the Chickasaw Tribe, and, by reason
thereof, their rights and benefits as allottees.

This question resolves itself into whether the claims asserted
herein are those of a group with common rights, which common or group
rights are alleged to have been violated; or is the claim one of separate and individual claimants whose individual rights are alleged to
have been violated, who have joined their individual claims in a common
suit. t is agparent from the allegations of the petition that the claims
are on behalf of only those members of the Chi hasaw Tribe who have failed
to secure enrollment and by reason thereof have failed to receive, as individuals, the allotments and other benefits they would have received as
individuals had they been enrolled.

iIt is also'urged by resgondent that the allegations in the petition
and the litigation there described show that the question of whether or
not petitioners are entitled to enrollment has been determined adversely
to claimants by the Act of July 2, 1902 (32 Stat. 621) and the opinion of
the Supreme Court sustaining same. (Wallace v, Adams, 1%} Fed. 716; 20%
U.s. hi5).

It is obvions that under the allegations of the petition this Come
mission would have to determine the right of each individual clairént to

enrollment and if so entitled then the amount each is entitled to receive

3

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 178 V . 131%

_ u _ 6 ' _

by reason thereof. This clearly shows that the claims asserted are the

personal, iniiviiual claims of each claimant and that the claim is, in
fact, not one common to the group, but is simply a common suit for indiviouei claims, ,   . _ 0 ., ,

no question raised by motion of the respondent in this case is the
same as that _aisea in the case of Greek ?reednen.Association v. nited
States of'Aaerica, Docket E0. 25, ana what was said in the opinion in
that case agplies to this case and neeé not be repeated.

In View of our determination that the claims being asserted here are
iniiviéual claims

not common group claims, but, instead, ire indepcni nt,

w ioh this Commission ices not have jurisiiction to entertaixunier the
Iniian Glaims Commission Act, it becomes unnecessary to decide whether
or not these claimants constitute an identifiable group, as conten;laued
by the.Act, or whether or not the richts of claimants to citisenshiy have

been heretofore finally ietermined.

The notion of the respondent to dismiss must be sustained.

Connissioaers oiuarr ana Bolt concur in the above opinion.

