8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 $85

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE cormzonnqrno TRIBBS or ‘rm h: an )
SPRINGS RESERVATION on OREGON, )
Petitioner, 3
V. ; Docket No. 198
THE UNITED STATES or MERICA, ;
Defendant. i

Decided: June 10, 1960

Appearance 5 :

-Frank E.,Nash, with eheh were
I Mark C. I“IcClanahan, T. Leland

Brown and Sam Van Factor,
Attorneys for Petitioner.

falter A. Rochotz, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
iPerry' ‘.4. Norton, Attorneys for
Defendant.

 

U opnuorr or net cohhzsslom ,
Watkins, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Conmission.

The petitioner, The Confederated Tribes and Bands of the Warm
Springs Reservation of Oregon, brings this action to recover additional

compensation for certain lands in north central Oregon ceded to the United

S States on June 25, 1855, by Indian parties who were referred to in the

cession treaty as confederated tribes or bands. The petitioner presents
a claim of recognized title to a..l the ceded area and contends that a

portion of that area was also held by original Indian title.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 I 583

It-is conceded the petitioner is entitled to present its claim inpa
representative capacity on behalf of the tribes, bands or groups who
were parties to the 1855 treaty of cession, but petitioner also asserts
that it is a new entity created by that treaty through merger or confederation of original entities, and that as such it is a successor in
nterest and thus entiiled to present this action in its own right. Its
position in this respect has been challenged by defendant.

..'we have for determination then the nature of petitioner‘s capacity
to sue, whether defendant has recognized petitioner's title to the area
ceded June 25, 1855, and if not, then the area ti» 1-tzhich petitioner has
established original Indian title.

The first question for consideration is petiticner‘s capacitr to sue
in its own right as successor in interest_te the_Indian entities signatory to the June 25, 1855, treaty of cession upon which the present causes
of action are'based. Petitioner's Constitution discloses that its membership extends to every person whose name appears upon the allotment roll
of the'Warm Springs Reservation'of Oregon, to every child of at least
1/L Indian‘blood born to an.Indian residing upon that reservation and to
any'chi1d of lkd or more Indian'blood born to a member or former member

of the organization who has been adopted into the Confcderated Tribes of

the'Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon. Qualificiations for enrollment

2

upon the allotment roll do not appear. About l8?o a number of Paiute

T.-..

Indians took up residence upon the'Warm Springs neservation and pctitioncri

says they are "largely intermarried" with petitioner's members. There

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 587

are presently enrolled as members of petitioner organization 207 Indians
of whole or mixed Pa‘;;ite Indian blood.

It is not apparent that each member of the several entities signing the treaty of June 2S, 1855, went upon the Warm Springs Reservation.

The Report of the Subcommittee of the House Committee on Public Lands

published June l3, I950, discloses that Wasco Indians were then residing

_ upon the Yakima Indian Reservation (p. 551) , _so it seems that Petitioner's

membership does not include all the "descendants of the original entities.
Furthermore, the treaty entities became known as the Confederated Tribes
and Bands of Middle Oregon; later suit was instituted in the Court of
Claims by the occupants of the warm Springs Reservation as The 1rIa.rm
Springs Tribe. of Indians of Oregon. The present corporation may or

may not include aJJ. members of t .e former named groups. While petitioner
may sue in a representative capacity we do not think that its right to do
so as a successor in interest has been established. Certainly the benefits of any recovery by petitioner as successor in interest would flow
to all its members, including Paiutes of the whole blood, a circumstance
clearly beyond the intent of Comress when it r-sated the Indian Claims
Commission.‘

Petitioner asserts a claim of recognized Indian title to all the
land described in the June 25,. 1855', treaty because the Organic Act of
l8h8 and the Indian Intercc-arse Act which was eactended to Oregon in 1830
each protected the Indians‘ rights of person and property, and it is the
petitioner's position that such protective provisions recognized the

Indian title to lands which subsequent treaties of cession identified.

:3 Ind. 01. com. 557 S88

Petitioner points out that cxtinguislzment of Indian title west of the
Cascade range was authorized in 1850 and the public land there was
authorized to be sold on ‘February 14, 1853; that treaties of cession of
land east of the Cascades were authorised July 31, 1851:, and public land
1.-mls were extended to that region on May 29, 1858. Petitioner says this
dif.ferentiation between land east and land 1.-zest of the Cascade Range

I

was "to protect only one thing - the Indian title," that an adminis" trative interpretation (Attorney General‘s Opinion, Aug. 2, 18511, and

June 22, .1855’; General Land Office Opinion, Nov. 23, 1858; Pet. E325.

Nos. 11:1, 165, 265) that the public land lass applied only where Indian
title had been extinguished must be pre sura-ed to have been known to the
Congress, and Congress ratified the treaty of 1855 so that legal settlements could be made upon the ceded land. Petitioner says: "The effect

of the ratificationof the treaties of £1859  then to define the lands
of the val’-ions tribes, the title to which hadbeen previously recognized.“

_In other words, the Intercourse and Organic Acts are said to have
recognized title, and the treaty. of cession is said to have identified the
land to which such title applied.

We  petitioner has misconstrued the Acts relied upon. The
Principle of recognized title is the-right to hold land permanently as
distinguished from. only a permissive occupancy. It was only this permissivo occupancy, subject to the dictates ofdcongroes, nhieh our Inuarican
Indians hold, and ‘v:hich the Organic Act and the Intercourse Act preserved
to them. Both these Acts were worded similar to the }'IOl‘t11:v.'£33t Ordinance

M ‘W35’ 13: 1938, so far as the preservation oi‘ Indian rights are‘con5 Ind. Cl. Comm. S5? , S89

corned, and that act has never been interpreted as a Congressional intent

to recosnize Indian title when coupled with a later treaty of cession for

L.)

identification purposes. Quanaw Tribe vs. United States, Dkt. lh, l Ind.

1

 

Chm.Cmmnl£9,6Mu

Nor do we think the official correspondence, the instructions to
the treaty commissioners or other documents and transactions culminating
in and the circumstances surrounding the negotiations and ratification of
the June 25, 1855: treaty disclose any intent to give to that treaty any
‘greater effect than that of the usual treaty of cession of whatever interest

the signatory Indian parties might hold or claim. Quanaw Tribe vs. United

 

States, Supra. The treaty makes this abundantly clear in the wording

preceding the description of the tract ceded, that is: "The countny

V

claimed by them and included in the following boundaries."

 

_Petitioner places much reliance upon.the Haller map of l8Sh which

‘was submitted with Agent Thompson's response to Superintendent Palmer‘s
instructions that he ascertain the location, number, condition and means
of subsistence of the Indians within his District. Thompson forwarded
that map as an aid in forming a correct idea of the "locality" of the
Indians, some of whom.he had not yet contacted, and it was only the
topographical accurancy of the map that he commended (Pet. Ex. 305).

The variance between the description of the ceded area and the tracts
assigned the Indians upon this map, as well as the question of when and

by whom additional data was imposed upon the map as disclosed by three

photostatic copies which are in evidence, Pet. Exs. 73(1), 73(2), 1&8;

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 _ 590

Def .-Ex. E-3, all argue effectively against giving much consideration to
the Heller map as evidence that the subsequent treaty was meant to be a
recognition of Indian title. A subsequent letter by Heller, written while
a flaptain in the U. 8. Army stationed at The Dallas, contains a statement by
him to the effect that the Cayuse Indians owned the country west to the
Cascades, and further rrilitates against assioning much weight to this
earlier map (Pet. Ex. 172).

The government's policy was'not to recognize title to land to rest
in the Indians of the western coastal region (Pet. Ex. 311), and there is
no evidence that Congress when ratifying this 1855 treaty possessed any
information or had any knowledge that anything more than the ratification of
the usual Indian treaty of cesision was involved. The treaty commissioner's
comment in his forwarding letter respecting a possible conflict between
this and a prior cession obtained by him from the Cayuse Indians discloses
his indifference to the actual territorial limits of the ceding Indians
(Pet. Ex. 163), and the record is void of any evidence that any effort was
made to learn the actual territorial claims of the various Indian entities
confederated under the June 25, 1855 treaty, either before ,- during or after
that treaty council. We thinlt, also, that the treaty reference to a reservation cannot be interpreted as recognizing original Indian title to
the reservation tra-.:.t but that it shows instead a grant to the treaty
entities by the government of land fortheir use as a reservation thereafter. This must be so for original title land could be reserved only
131/ the entity holding such title. The Wasco chief, I-1ar‘:<, stated during

tho council that the reservation land was u.n}<.no'=.-:n to him and that he had

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 557 591

never seen it, nor is there evidence of the'Wasco coming this far south
for any purpose so the wasco can scarcely be said to have held the reservation tract under original Indian title. It does not appear that any
one or more of the several entities executing the 1855 treaty received
any consideration for agreeing to share with the others a tract of

land reserved by them from the cession area, and it appears to be a
logical conclusion that none of them believed they were reserving a
tract to which they held original Indian title but upon whibh the other
entities would reside with.thsm thereafter.

A study of the treaty language convinces us that the Indians ceded
all the interest they'onned or claimed in the entire ceded area, and
that the reservation was a granting or a setting aside by the government
of a tract for their use as an.Indian reservation rather than a reservation by the Indians of a small tract within.the cession.

Since we have found no sound reason in fact or in.law sustaining
petitioner's claim.of recognized title, and since we believe that the
evidence clearly'discloses there was no intent to recognize Indian title
to any of the land within.the ceded area, we conclude the petitioner’s
claim.of recognized Indian title is not supported by a nreponderance
of the evidence and have found against it in this respect.

The remaining questions are: What was the nature of the land-using

units signing the cession of June 25, 1855, and what portion, if any, of

the claimed area was held by original Indian title by either of such entities upon that date? The area so claimed is described in Petitioner‘s Proposed

Finding of Fact No. 20 and is outlined in red upon its Exhibit No. hoi.

8 Ind. C1. Com2n.‘§S7 ' . S92

The evidence discloses that the Indians signing the 1855 treaty
were divided into two wholly separate linguistic groups. The Wasco
Indians who were divided into three groups known by the geographic names

of Cascades Uasco, Dog (Hood) River Wasco, and Dalles Wasco, spoke a Chi'nookan dialect and the Wayaunpum Indians consisting of four separate divisions known as the Tonino, E-Iyam, Tygh, and John Day River Indians, spoke
the Walla Walla dialect: of the Sahaptin linguistic family. The two groups
were friendly and had a similar culture, mutually intelligible languages
and a common living pattern except that the Na raznpum occupied well constructed dwellings in villages near their fisheries and wintered in
nearby more sheltered areas in less well constructed buildings, whereas

the Wasco groups appear to have wintered in their principal villages

 their main fishing stations. Both practiced exogamy and. polygamy.

Their economy was linked to the streams from which they obtained a
variety of fish but principally the salmon which was their primary item _
of food and, in dried form, their medium of barter in the extensive trade
they earried on at their villages along the Columbia river with Indians
of other tribes and nations visiting there during the fishing season.
Their fishing stations were individually owned and passed by inheritance,
but ownership involved a sort of stewardship of the right to exploit the
fishery under an established order of prececlence, i.e. , the immediate
family, the village group, the ethnic group and then :f.‘riondly Indians.

Visiting Indians paid tribute for fishing privileges (Pet. Ex. 8, p. 95).

Both Wasco and Hayajnptzrn supplemented their diet with wild game, berries

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 55? S93

and roots which they obtained in dried form through trade with other
Indians and for which they went inland each spring and fall. Some members
appear to have , ho:-:e'*.'er, remained at the Villages during these foraging

trips. (Pet. BX. 382).

\

Petitioner clams that each of the three Wasco entities were separate
tribes. The defendant maintains that they possessed an autonomous village
status. The petitioner claims that the four Wayampum entities each
enjoyed complete local antonomyvbnt that there was an over—all political
unity formed by a chief from each of the four I-Iayampum entities serving
upon an over-a]_1 comcil which, however, was without power to enforce
its decisions and which no individual or village was bound to obey.

This ineffectual advisory council petitioner contends bound the Wayampum
into a tribal entity. Defendant's position is that separate, independent,
autonomous dual villages without any political unity are the only landholding entities shown to have existed among the Wayampum.

Petitioner's p=:asition is bottomed upon the testimony of its expert
witness, Dr. Verne F. Ray, both with respect to the land using entities
of the I-Iayampum  Wasco and with respect to the area it is said each
held under originaltitle . Accordingly we have examined with care Dr.
Ray's testimony given before this Commission and his earlier publications.
of. Ray testified that his field work among the Plateau Indians, including
the Wayampum, was done between 1928 and 191:0 (Trans. p. 50), and -I-,1-13%;, he
has done ethnohistorical wor‘.«: since 1953, all historical data relied upon

by him being in evidence-in this docket (Trans. p. 213). Dr. Ray‘s first

hunting

8 Ind. Cl. Comrn... 55'; 59h

publication reflects field work among the Plateau Indians while he was an
undergraduate. Based upon that work and about 2% to 3 months work among
the Wayampum in l93S (Trans. 232-2&0), Dr. Rar published other articles
during l938, l939 and l9h2. He participated in a large—scale culture
element study conducted by Dr. A. L. Kroeber during l936~7, Working

with petitioner Indians among others, and in l95h CO-authored an article
with Nancy Oestreich Lurio discussing the Lewis and Clark Journals of 180bl806. Additional field work during 1935 to l9LO is not reflected in his
publications, but is, he testified, the basis of his testimony before this
Commission (Trans. p. 277). This must, however, exclude the culture
element study since he testified his report thereon was based upon the
research he performed for that specific work.

(a) In his "Native Villages and Groupings of the Columbia Basin?
which was published in l936,'Dr; Roy said the Columbia Basin is north of
the Blue Mountains in Oregon and between the Cascades and Rocky Mountains.
He said he found "notorious unreliability of native verbal traditions when
they(the Indians) refer to history a few generations or more removed;" that
“political affiliations of any kind between one and another village of
any of the social and geographical units here treated was entirely lacking.

n other words, the political unit was the village itself, any political
entity Of greater embrace being wholly unknown.” He cited with approval
Dr. Leslie Spier's observation that local communities within this
region and particularly among the'wishram were usua ly autonomous and
added that intermarriage between the villages was common; that common

0, berrying and root gathering grounds were used by several villages

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 g 595

at which time village affiliations were largely forgotten; that:

"Boundaries between groups of the Columbia Basin varied
greatly in cxaotitude, as might be anticipated under the
conditions outlined above. Almost all villages were located
on waterways, resulting in boundaries being most definite at
points where streams or rivers were crossed. The greater the
distance from population centers the more vague the lines of
demarcation grew. Thus, far back in.the hunting territory or
far out in dessert root digging ground, boundaries sometimes
faded completely out. e s % But during the gathering of this
material every group in the Basin was visited and the maps_
were first drawn in the presence of informants as information’
was given, bit by bit, inclgging village locations as well as
lines of boundary. This procedure pe mitted a degree of
accura and completeness which could not have been achieved
through reconstruction from notes." Underscoring suppliedj

   

           

       

     

 

   

 

In.the accompanying sketch on page ll9 of that publication the eastern
boundary claimed for the'Hayampum is represented by a line.shown as running
south a short distance west of the John.Day River.

(13) In 1938 Dr. Ray published his "Tribal Distributions in Eastern
Oregon.and.Adjacent.Regions," based upon field work completed around 1936,
including a.few weeks with the‘Wayampum, in refutation of claims advanced
by Joel Y. Berreman, James M. Teit and Leslie Spier respecting an early
northern.movement of Shoshonean people within Oregon (Trans. p} 227-232).
In discussing a‘wayampum~Umatilla division line, Dr. Ray then wrote:

I

“In.Oregon a.much greater area was held, reaching south
to the John Day River. % % % Umatilla families sometimes
camped as far west as the John Day River; reciprocally the
Weyampum or Tenino enjoyed free movement eastward to Willow
Creek. IEven.on the Columbia River, where lines of demarcation
were usually very definite, several villages were jointly
occupied.by Umatilla and Tenino."

On page 386 of this publicction Dr. Ray platted the Wayampum-Uaatilla
division line as running south between John.Day River and'Willow Creek
drainage. He wrote that the tribal territories outlined by him at that

time had persisted without material change since time immemorial, that the

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 P 595

southcrn1’Fayanpurn boundary was indefinite, that his Umatilla-Wayampum

line was a division by him of overlapping use areas. Referring to the

liayampum collectively, he said the Tenino had a "rigid village composition."
(c) Dr. Ray's thesis for a.Doctor of Philosophy degree from Yale

University in 1937 was published during 1939 as "Cultural Relations in

the Plateau of Iiiorthwestern Amedca.“ In it he quoted George Peter Murdoch's

1938 publication concerning the Wayampum (Ray‘s Tenino) having been

divided "into four sub-tribes or rather pairs of villages ," and cemented:

This unique arrangement of pairs of villages illustrates the
depth of the village concept and indicates a persistent
village allegiance.

and continued to say that many significant units of larger compass such

AH 93-: a-s1;-.1-54--P on-1 nun:-3 o-awn‘?-3-saunas‘? l'PQ"|4I\Ir§q!-.JIII= -r .u---u-u -pa-..s-u--.4-3 T-so-..-L -L1-.-.-L N-LL...-.. -no-no-----J--5 -1

.q..a—- ‘u.-......u...-....._-...a--u-----u..—. Luann.-p 1-Qunu.-wan.-.n.—-u   o\...n¢i.o.t 4—\r3.A'...LL\-A Linus» v4&\.nV ‘LIL!-ii‘ \;Il-l|.uiIu-l&l-Iu!«&..Lau¢L

point is that the larger unit is invariably ethnic or social, or linguistic
in nature, never political." He wrote that the typical Plateau organization
had highly specific territorial segmentation along river courses which

was determined with regard to fishing rights, but the hunting territory

was invariably used in common; that the political attitude toward hunting
and fishing territorial rights differed essentia...ly; that if he was a
member of an ethnic group a man was only exercising his rights when he

made use oi‘ any part oi‘ that group's hunting territory.

((1) During 1936 Dr. Ray did field work in connection with a culture
element study directed by Dr. A. L. Kroeber. During July, l93?, he
extended that wor}: to the Coeur d‘.i.lene, Umatilla and ':~,-‘ayanp*.:..':1. His
rmport appears as Chapter }'.XII of "Culture Elements Distributions," published in 19142. For this work Dr. Pia ‘s principal '.fayar::pun ir..for.r:ant

G

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 55’? 3'97

was a Tenino Indian who had been born during 1896 and who consulted with
more aged'Wayampum during Ray's i.terviews with him. The resultant report
recites that prior to reservation days the Wayampum had a village autonomy
but no tribal organization and no unit larger than the village; that
each village ordinarily had one leader, known as a chief, who appointed
temporary assistants and whose functions were those of an arbiter or
adviser; that an accomplished warrior was chosen for military functions;
and that there were village and individual territorial rights'but no
recognized tribal rights among the Wayampum.

(e) Dr; Ray testified that his research subsequent to 1935 has
caused him to reverse his former conclusions of rigid village composition
among the Wayempum or Tenino; that he now considers it a high probability

but not a certainty (Trans. p. 283), that the'wayampum.placed great

 

emphasis on a hierarchial arrangement under which each sub-tribe had

two capital villages and perhaps others, each possessing complete local
antonomy'bu. each having one or more chiefs and.with one chief from each
village forming a tribal council having an over-allj political unity;
although he testified that individual Indians or separate villages could
refuse to be governed by that council's decisions (Trans. p. 152). He
said.the bulk of the people rotated between winter and summer villages
but that individuals might go to any village within the ethnic group at
Will, and that all territory was tribally owned.

Dr. Ray testified also that he now believes the ‘.-Easco fomed
three separate tribes in.pro—reservation times; that they had a bi-lateral

system of government; that relatives of a tribal chief had a great deal

8 Ind. Cl. Conan. SS7 598

of influence but that each t3.":3.be had o&:;' one chief 3 that they had no
over-all political unity or tribal council; that by l8S§ they possessed a
sense of Upper Chinool-zan unity but still retained their early territorial
boundaries (Trans. p. llO-ll5); that each of the three tribes used and
exclusively controlled an area as outlined in red by him upon Petitioner‘s
Exhibit No. hOl; that the broken lines on said exhibit represented prewhite trails; that each of the three'Wasco tribes and the'Wayumpum entity
exclusively used and occupied their separate areas in such manner as to
constitute original Indian title thereto.
we think the most dependable accounts by Indians of their prereservation land-using entities and subsistence areas are those taken

from Tnrii ans 'H1r"im= as near +.“m=s 53*?-9 '5“ o1_1e?*.-5.0“ as “'_‘.‘=°T‘_".??..€=' "?.“:‘.“.2 “*9

) 5......-.

possibility of error increases in ratio to the number of intervening

generations. Pitt River Indians of California vs. United States. Dkt.

: 

   

21173 7 Ind. Clms. Comm. 815': 856. We find st:ppo& in Dr. Erminie WheelerVoegelin's statement in “The Northern Paiute of Central Oregon" that "by
l9hS the possibility of doing ‘memory ethnographies‘ of so-called aboriginal
North.American.cultures was generally recognised as a thing of the pastg"

in a comment bg'Messrs. Leslie Spier and Edward Sapir in "Wishram Ethnography“ that early political and territorial units within the present area
were not sharp1y'defined in 1930 (Def. Ex. 61), and James M. Teit's remark
that in 1909 he found his informants from this region were “rather vague"
about territorial boundaries (Def. Ex. 6?}.

There is substantial evidence ident‘fyin*

.._J

J‘\_ _ Qhfl ‘_ ‘ I‘ _\ I. I__ _Q\ III;
.112: s-.¢L.-A-L: db d. ‘L..!‘.LD3..L

unit Within the sense of that word as used in the Indian Claims Commission

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 i 599

mi

Act, and we are persuaded this is the rightful indentification. .Lf1E3 Wasco
were geographically separaeed from all other Chinoo‘e:an Indians by either
the Cascade Range or the Columbia River. They possessed a common culture,
a common economy and except for a slight ‘inflection in the speech of the
Cascade Wasco, they had a common language. They occupied separate independent villages, but recognized close ties of kinship between the
inhabitants of such villages, and individuals moved freely from one village
to any other tithin the entire Wasco group. Hunting and food gathering
areas were available to all without regard to village affiliation. Only
‘their fishing sites were privately owned, yet each such site was nevertheless available to all, private ownership being only a right to regulate
the order of use. They had separate chiefs within the several villages
and retained separate chiefs even after goino upon the Warm Springs
Reservation and following the election of a head chief for the confederated
Indian entities as provided by the 1855 treaty. A sense of over-all

Wasco unity is disclosed in the testimony given before a Congressional
Committee on February 18, l89l, by various Indians who attended the l8SS
treaty council and who each referred toithe Wasco as a tribe. The specific
word ‘tribe’ was undoubtedly adopted from the English, but we find it
significant that the reference is to the weeee as a unit (Pet. BX. 389).

The same is true with respect to testimony before the Court of Claims in

-’a.I'm Springs Tribe of Indians of Oregon vs. United States, 95' Ct. Clms. 23,

   

by residents of the Warm Springs Reservation, given at a time when
aboriginal tribal status was not a matter of concern (Pot.  379-B .

The record contains a number of references to the three E-Iasco groupings

85 Ind. 01. com. 557 — 600

from which it may be inferred they were considering to be independent
entities but we think the predominating documentary evidence indicates
they were considered one people, one lndian entity or tribe, by many of
the government officials and other whites coming in early Contact with
them. Travelers such as Thomas J. Farnham (l8h3) called them all

Chinooks (Pet. Ex.l2); George Gibbs referred to them as the “Tsinuk“
nation (Pet. ex. 15); Gustavus Hines called them wnsco Indians (Pet. EL. 21).
James Mooney in his "Ghost'Dance Religion” (1896) wrote the name'Wasco

was sometimes used for cognate groups near The Dalles and the Cascades

of the Columbia and indicated there was only one'Wasco entity within this
region on_his map of l89h (Pet. Exs. 30a, p. Yhl; 81). Official references
to the'Wasco as a unit include Captain Pleasenten's map of August, 1859,
prepared from maps of Father“DeSmet, and showing only Wa1la'Walla and
'Wasco Indians west of'willow Creek and south of the Columbia River (Pet.
Ex; 68); Major G. O. Haller's map-of l85b showing only Wasco Indians west
of the‘DesQhutes (Pet. Exs. 73, et al.); the Orogon.Military Departmental
map of 1855 showing only wasco.lndians west of the John Day hirer (Pet.
ER. 3?); Superintendent Palmer's recomendation.of July 8, 1853; that
treaties be negotiated with the "wascopans“, the Caguse, the Nez Perce and
others (Pet. Ex. 12h); Palmer's letter of April 5, 1855, referring to
Agent R. Ra Thompson's district as containing John Day,'DesChutes and
masses Indians (Pet. Ex. 15b), and his report of July 6, 1855, thathe had
treated with the John Days, all bands on the Deschutes River, and the
'Wascopams or Dalles Indians (Pet. Ex. 16?); Agent Thompson's report during

November, 1855, that there were hO3‘Wasco Indiana, 150 of them tomporaril,

_.__.-.-u_..-. —.n. -8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 _ 601

on Dog River and 250 near his own residence (Pet.  E-O),’at encampments
designated for friendly Hasco treaty Indians by Superintendent Palmer (Pet.
Ex. 17?); and Agent Thcmpson*s report on March 2, 1856, that the T.-Iasco
treaty bands had gone to the Warm Springs Reservation (Pet. Ex. 193),

We believe in View of the facts that (a) the Wasco were geographically
separated from other Chinook, (b) that their villages were confined to
a space only about he miles long along the banks of the Columbia River ,
and (c) that Indians speaking another basic language were both south C
and east of them, it was a natural reaction for the Wasco to regard themselves as one people. Joint usage of hunting and gathering areas, a
ready interchange of members between villages, and the later references
to the Wasco as a tribe by individuals living on the Warm Springs Reservation all indicate a recognized over-all unity. Defendant has introduced
excerpts from Edward 5. Curtis‘ article concerning Chinoolcs wherein
Curtis said they lacked tribal instinct to a remarkable degree. We

believe the peculiar circumstance surrounding the Wasco reduces the

-efficacy of this statement as to them, although it may be quite applicable

to Chinookan tribes to the northwest. So we have concluded that the Wasco
at the time of the l8S5 cession were and had been for ‘some years thereto fore a group of autonomous village Indians having sufficient unity to
qualify as a tribe within the intent of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

It-Iuckleshoot Tribe vs. United States, '2 Ind. Clea. Com. h2L:..

ua'...a'I-II‘ ‘'''''V
C

 
   

with respect to the Irfayampum, Dr. Ray's earlier position that there

8 Ind.Cl. Comm. SS? 602

existed separate, autonomous villages among all the tayampum groups
finds support among the writings of other soientists and observers. Dr.
James Mooney, writing in l893, referred to the Wayampum as independent
tribes (Def. Ex. M3). Defendant‘s witness, Mr. Suphan, who did field
work for six months among petitioner and other Indians and spent another
six months in literary research preparatory to testifying heroin, said
his Indian informants concurred that each Uayampum group was independent of
the other; that no paramount tribal entity existed among them prior to
reservation times (Def. Ex. 17, and Trans.). Dr. George Peter Murdock whose
research among Indians on the'Warm Springs reservation was conducted
during l93h-1935, called them "originally independent sub-divisions” or
uh tribes and "pairs of rillages~ \uc4. ea. pa}. Plateau Indians oi
whom they were a part, were usually’independent autonomous village Indians
according to Ruth Murray Underhill, author'of “Red Han‘s.America."
Wayampum dual-village groups appear to have acted singly and in
concert in attacking and defending themselves from the Snake Indians.
Their villages were much farther apart than those of the'wasco, thus
encouraging independent action. . The John.Day River Indians were also closely
associated with other'Walla Walla speaking Sahagtin Indians to the east
and they went north of the Columbia to Mt. Adams for berries. The Tygh,
Tenino and'Wyam.went'berrying to Mt. Hood, but all four hunted together
in the area sough of their villages.
The minutes of the l8SS treaty council disclose the Kayampum divisions

or groups were treated with as independent tribes or bands; they did not

8 Ind. -cl;-com. 557 503

act in concert but the treaty was signed by Tenino and 'I“_r;gh one day and by
the John Day and ‘rfyarrz on another date. Thereafter a few John Day River
Indians went upon the reservation, but a band of than living about Clarno,
Oregon, did not do so until 1878. Other documentary references to their
independent status include the January 29, 1851;,‘ report of Major G. J .
Raines, corrmanding the hth Infantzjr at Fort Dalles, that the Indians

near by. were the DesChute,s and Hasco. _ He. did not mention.Tenino, John Day
River "or Wayampum Indians. Governor Stevens‘ report of IBSL mentions John
Day River and Deschutes River Indians. Pleasenten's map of 1859 lists
only "wa]_la‘.-IaILla;" Heller's map shows the De schutes Indians along that
river; the Tygh, and the John Day River Indians; James I-Iooney's 1891; map
shows.."'Waiam” on the Deschutes River, "Tuckspush" on the John Day River,
and -”TE.-Iiaq" in the region of Tygh Creek. Agent A. P. Dennison on August
13 1.557, advised the Superintendent of Indian Affairs that the Deschutes
had former];-I "occupied that section of country between the Dalles and the
Ty-ich Rivergg that the Ty-ich "formerly occupied the Ty-ich valley and

the country in its vicinity, which lies about thirty miles south of Fort '

_ Da.'Lles;" and that the John Day River Indians "0Cc':.1p;.r' the country in the

 

immediate vicinity of the river bearing that name."

The same witness before the Court of Claims in Warm Springs Tribe of

$56.1-IJQ-I-I X

 

Indians of 0regoEs.=:United States, supra, and before the Subcommittee
of the House Committee on Public Lands referred to hereinbefore, i-zhen

referring to all the Wasco divisions as the Wasco tribe, referred to the

8 Ind. Cl._Comm. 557 50h

Wayampum as several separate entities, the Tygh, the Lower De schutes and
the Upper Deschutes. These statements are illustrative of the manner in
which the Indians themselves regarded their relationship. It is true the

references omit the John Day River Indians, yet there is nothing to equate

the John Day Rivers with any one of the other three’ I-Iayampum divisions; _,_.

their actual existence cannot be denied; and they were considered by
persons familiar‘ with them, both before and after the treaty date, as a
separate division of the Wayampum.

We think the weight of the evidence supports our finding that in

' pre-re servation days the four Nayampmn groupings were autonomous village

Indians, having no over-all political unity; that the large st land-holding
unit was the dual-village within each separate grouping, and that such
unit exclusively held, used and occupied  area 1-:ithin the immediate
vicinity of the villages; that beyond such restricted area the land was
exploited by all the Wayampum entities without respect to village affiliation. Within these areas of joint user by separate land-using ‘entities
no aboriginal Indian title could develop, the necessary ingredient of
exclusive use being absent.

Defendant urges that original title cannot be found for land used by
the Tygh Indians because such title requires exclusive occupancy from
time immemorial whereas Tygh occupancy of the region about Tygh valley
and Shrear‘s Bridge on the Deschutes River originated about l820. George
Peter I-Iurdocl-:‘s Tenino informant who was born in 1559 reported to Professor

Murdock that his grandfather told him of participating in the expulsion

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 557 505

of the Molala from this region when a lad of l9 or 20 years of age (Def.

Ex. 52, p. 398). James M. Teit also found evidence of this later expulsion
(Def. Ex. 67, P. 107), and we have accordingly found that Tygh occupancy
of .this section solid_'_’F'ied during the first decade of the 19th century,
long before defendant‘ s sovereignty was indisputably extended over

Oregon territory by the treaty with Great Britain in 18h6.

This Commission said in Citizen Band of Potawatomi Indians vs. United

 

States, 6 Ind. Clms. Comm. 1161, that it was a present right of exclusive use,

 

occupancy and possession which had continued over thirty-five years that the
Government intended to and did acquire by the treaty involved in" that case;
that the additional time could not have more completely aubjected the land
to the dominion of the Ottawa and Potawatomi Indians, and that their possession
and right of occupancy was as sacred, as complete and as valuable as
though their original V arrival in the country was lost behind the veil of
antiquity, which would, of course, have given them occupancy since time
immemorial. We think a like situation prevailed in the present instance,
and that  the lygh can show exclusive use, occupancy and possession of an
area about Tygh Valley and Sh:-ear's Bridge continuing fromtheir expulsion
of the Molala until their cession in 1855 it may be said such occupancy
constitutes original Indian title and is a basis for a claim involving such
title within the scope of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

The Commission is faced with the difficult task of fixing territorial
boundaries for the several separate land using entities with but little

more than the locations of ‘various villages to guide it in many areas.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 505

Furthermore since sovereignty of the United States indisputably attached
to this territory in 181:6, the question of original Indian title must be

approached in the light of conditions existing in l8h6 inasmuch as the

land-using entities could not increase their aboriginal territorial limits

as aganst the interest of the United States after sovereignty had

once attached to the land. Iowa Tribe et al. , us. United States, 6 Ind.

 

Clbns Comm. 1:611, 502.

 

The evidence before us as well as that of which we take judicial

notice discloses that the I-Iasco and the three Wayampum entities were ancient

enemies of the Snake Indians of southern Oregon, who were identified as

part of the Northern Points in Dkt. 8?, Faiute Indians vs. United States ,_

 

_7 Ind. Clrns. Comm. 322. Dr. Omer C. Stewart‘s map introduced therein as

 

C1. Ex. No. 9112 shone the early boundary of these Shoshonean speaking people
as running north in Oregon to Mt. Wilson in the Cascade Range, thence’
eastward across the DesChutes River and then north along the eastern side of
that river to about the Willamette Base Line 3 thence east across the John
Day River andtfnn south _to the 1450 of latitude; thence eastward. Dr.
Stewart testified in that case that by 1820 the Shoshonean speaking people
were pushed south of a line drawn from Mt. Jefferson in the Cascade knge
northeasterly a‘;.;::e the Warm Springs river to the 15° of latitude. Dr.
Julian H. Steuardtsaid he had found only a few sources indicating the

Paiute were west of the Desshutes River and assignecl the Snal-res an area

(last of that river as far north as Crooked Eliyer, then east along the John
Day and its northern fork. (Def.  136, p. 177-1335’, ext. 87).

Other evidence discloses the Snakes once extended far north into

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. SS7 507

I the claimed area and that they were gradually driven south by the Wayampum

and'Wasco, assisted by their relatives, the Skeen and'Uishram from north

of the Columbia River. It is evident this expulsion was in progress when
Lewis and Clar: visited the region in l80h-1805, and that it mas accomplished
through the exertion of a superior force against the rehisting Snakes.

So the problem becomes one not so much concerning ancient territiorial
boundaries as determining what part of the claimed area has been shown

to have been wrested from the Snakes and subjected to such exclusive
occupancy and use by petitioner Indians prior to l8h6 as may be sufficient
to create an original Indian title.

The'Wasco
It is conclusively established that the Hasco used and occupied the

land about their several villages and fishing stations along the southern
bank of the Columbia River from the Cascades in that river up stream to Big
Eddy; 0regon,‘with but four miles of river bank'betseen their easternmost
village and.the Tenino's western village, and that they were there within
the first decade of the 19th century. There is no suggestion in the record
thatrany'other Indians came into this region.immediately'east of the summit
of the Cascades with claims of territorial right. But a common boundary
between.the'Wasco and the Tenino and.Tygh adjacent to them.on the south and
east is indefinite. Documentary evidence is restricted to remarks that the
Wasco went inland, to the interior or to the northern slopes of Mt. Hood for

hunting and food gathering. The Tygh, Tenino, and Wyam also went berrying

on the slopes of Mt. Hood, and during the 1855 treaty coucil the'Wasco

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 ‘ 605

Chief Mark claimed the land south to Tygh Creek (Def. E32. 5). Dr. Ray

has given the Wasco an east and south line co::monci11g on the Columbia near

. their easternmost. village and thence southerly to and along the drainage

divide between Mill Creek and Five Mile Creek to the d1~ainag'e divide of

Hood River and along that divide to Mt. Hood. Mr. Suphan adopts substantially
the same line except that he states there were areas of joint user south of
Mt. Hood, in the region about Dufur, Oregon, and in the courses of Zigzag

and Salmon Rivers which are outside the claimed area, to the west of the

 of the Cascades. There is no use indicated of the upper slopes

of Mt. Hood, much of which is covered with glaciers. Petitioner's exhibit

1405 indicates a line drawn south from a point on the Columbia River two miles
east of Big Eddy, Oregon, to the Fifteen I-Iile Cfeek, down that creek to a

'point'hal1‘c-ray between its mouth and the mouth of Five Mile Creek, thence

.southwe st by the‘ shortest line to the drainage divide between Five Mile

Creek and Mill Creek, and thence southwest along saiddivide to the eastern
1'.'Lmits of Hood River drainage will terminate nearly east of Mt. Hood.

3)? extending that line we stwardtto the Range line between Ranged 9 and 10
East , thence north along said Range line to the Township line between
Townships 1 and 2 south to the summit of the Cascade Range would, we think,
bound the area e-:‘.' exclusive use of the Wasco and enclose the lower slopes

of Mt. Hood. We have accordingly fixed this line as the east and South

-Wasco boundaries. Wasco territorial claims and I-Iasco usage may have extended farther south and southeast, but under the evidence, which we believe is the best obtainable at this date, we cannot in good conscience fix

an original title ‘ooundary line farther east or. south than this.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 609

The Wayamoum

The Tenino, Wyam and John Day River Indians‘ fisheries and Ifillages
were principally concentrated along the Columbia between a point L: miles
east of Big Eddy, Oregon, and the mouth of John Day River, with the John
Day having residences near Clarno, Oregon, about treatyotime. There were
other fishing sites farther up the Columbia, and Dr. Ray testified the
Wayampum owned the country -eastward to the drainage divide between John
Day River and Willow Creek. In his 1938 publication he said the country
between tie se streams was jointly used by Wayampun and Umatilla; that there
were jointly occupied villages there, and he divided the 'area between them.
Major Alvord in 1853 said Willow Creek was the northeastern limits of Wayampum
territory (Pet. Ex. 383), and Governor Stevens so sketched it in l8SS (Pet.
Ebcs. 87, 88). Heller's map of 1851; shows "Scattering Bands Inds.“ on Willow
Creek (Def. Ex. 80; Pet. Ex. 73), and that same year Superintendent Palmer
said the Cayuse were immediately east of a line drawn south from the mouth
of Willow Creek to the headwaters of John Day River (Pet. Ex. 135) .

"Melville Jacobs gaye'Eillow Creek to the Unatilla (Def. Exs. 22; nu,
p‘. 62), but Professor I-Iurdock said the Umatilla -- John Day River territorial
boundaries met at Arlington, Oregon (Def. Ex. 52, p. 397). Edward S. Curtis
placed the Cayuse-John Day division line on the John Day River (Def. Ex. 21L)
and Charles Wilkes‘ 181:1 map shows Cayuse on that river (Def. Ex. 75). Ethnologist John R. Swanton said the Ceyuse county extended west to the Deschutes
River (Def. Ex. 66, p. 1:15); Captain John Fremont found a Cayuse camp on the
Deschutes in 181:3, and the next day met a few Snakes and some Nez Perce Indians

(Def. Ex. 108). Agent A. P. Dennison at the Wane Springs reservation during

1857 said John Day Indians formerly lived in the immediate vicinity of the

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 510

John Day River (Def. Ex. 15). Def0ndant‘s witness, Robert Suphan, said
the John Day Indians used the river valley without indicating whether he
meant the immediate valley or the river drainage.

Dr. P.ay‘s map of nearly 80 Wayampum village sites (Pet. Ex. 1103) shows
Wayampum villages several miles east of the John Day River, one being near

Arlington, Oregon. It appears to us that the number of Wayampum Indians

' ‘between 1830 and 1855, their economic dependence upon fish for food , the

abundance of fish all along the Columbia and its major branches, the trade
feud between petitioner Indians and the Snake Indians to the east and south,
casts considerable doubt upon Ray‘s village sites ; some of which are in what
would have been quite exposed locations, particularly since Ray gives no date
or length of occupancy for them but testified that if the I-.'ayampum were able
to go into a. country, set ‘up campfor a few days or a week and then return
safely home, they then considered they owned the country, that it belonged
to them (Trans. P. 296). While such a brief occupancy denotes a degree of
usage, it omits the element of exclusiveness essential to create original
title.
We are of the opinion the evidence will not support a finding that

the John Day River Indians, who were the most eastern of the Wayampum group,

exclusively used and occupied the county east of the immediate ‘vicinity of
that river. We have found their eastern limits a short distance east of the

John Day, having adopted straight lines in ‘bounding what we believe to be

their use area for the sake of ease in description and computation of acreage.~

From an exhaustive study of the entire record we conclude petitioner has

not shown exclusive use and occupancy of the southern portion of the claimed

s Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 511

-twact by any one of the Hayampum bands. The record discloses about 1820

the snake and'Hayampum were fighting along%§he'warm Springs and Metolius
Rivers; that by l8h8 “Des Chutes" Indians (whether Upper, Lower, or both
not being disclosed) were residing in‘Warm Springs River valley and grazing
their horses there (Pet. Ex. 3, p. 361); that about that time a number of
Indians who had been fishing in Metolius River were through to be'Wayampum
because they were observed traveling north from that river. There are also ,
references to‘walla Walla hunters north of the Metolius River, but for the
reasons set out later, it is impossible to say if these were'wayampum Indians.
It is said the'Wayampum had pushed the Snakes out from the'Warm Springs reservation area by 1855 and were sending their foraging parties far south to the
Three Sisters peaks and Cultus Lake region.

There is in evidence, however, the transcript of testimony given in
the Court of Claims on.August l2, 1931, by Indians of the'Warm.Springs reservation as witnesses in warm Springs Tribe of Indians of Oregon vs. United States,
95 Ct. Clms. 23. Albert Kuckup testified he had been present at the 1855 treaty

 

council; that his father was a Tenino chief who executed that treaty; that the
land ceded by the Tenino extended from the Columbia River south to'Waupinitia
Ridge (which is the highlands north of Mutton Hountain - Def. Ex. l3, p. 31);
and that his people had not fished the Upper Deschutes river until after they
went on.the warm Springs reservation to live (Pet. Ex. 379—B, p. 66). A‘hasho
Indian, John Skam-mauhe, also testified in that case that the‘Warm Springs
reservation Indians used the land east of the Deschutes and south of Metolius
Rivers from the time of the Palmer treaty until the Huntington treaty (1855

L0 1555), the inference being they had not done so before 1855 (Pet. Ex. 379b,

J

'1}. I c an an 4- (‘Ho . ‘ V ,
2 182). None of the witnesses testified to exclusite use of tnis southern

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 I i 612

region either before or after establishment of the'warm Springs Reservation.

The record discloses the Nos Perce, Cayuso and Snake Indians were
frequently fishing and hunting along the John Day and Crooked Rivers, and
were seen on the Metolius and south of the reservation area. A map in
the Lewis and Clark Journals of l80h—06 shows Snake villages about the
mouth of Crooked River, and these explorers reported Snakes were on the
heads of the John Day, Umatilla,'Walla‘walla.and Des Chutes Rivers; that the
Columbia River Indians went to war against them h days march away, and
had recently returned from such an excursion; that the Snakes were most
'abundantly* at the falls of the DesChutes River for fishing purposes (Def.
Exs. b0, hl, h2). Peter Skene Ogden complained during 1825 while trapping .
the JohnZDayhDesChutes River region that Nez Perce had destroyed the beaver
on.both forks of the John Day River, "on the border of Snake Country."

He recorded meeting'Walla'Walla Indians on that river and the following

rspring counted a hundred lodges on Crooked River where Snake Indians had

'wintered. Proceeding south from the DesChutes River he came to a.Klamath
Village. The inhabitants expressed regret at seeing him, saying they had

seen the Cayuse and.Nez Perce hunting their villages to destroy them.and

’now‘those Indians might follow Odgen's trail. (Def. Exs. 27, p. 339; 28)

.An old Klamath trail to The Dalles, however, ran along the west side of

Deschutes River*(Def. Ex. 63): and explorers through the reservation area

followed it.
In l3h3 Captain John C. Fremont found Cayuse camps at the main
falls of Deschutes River, met a Nez Perce village and a few Snake Indians

on the middle fork of'DesChutes River south of Bend, Oregon, and saw a

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 557 613

Nez Perce family fishing in the Metolius River (Pet. Ex. 13; Def. BX. 108
Trans. p. hso). Lewis and Clark‘s reference to Snakes in abundance

.--I--I

at the main falls of the DeeChutes permits doubt as to its exact location,
but Fremont‘s reference is to a more southern site and probably applies
to Cline Falls on the Deschutes River about lh miles north of Bend,
Oregon (Pet. Exs. U02, HOS; Def. Ex. 17, P. 55).

‘Nathaniel J.'Wyeth met eight Snake Indians west of the DesChutes
River between it and douaw Creek, during December, l83h (Def. Exs. 63;

17, p. 53), thus definitely placing Snake Indians west of that river.

In 1855 Lt. Henry L. Abbott passed through the reservation area. These
four, Ogden, Fremont,'Wyeth and Abbott, made no reference to village sites
or permanent residences south of or in the southern portion of the reservation; there are references to hunting camps of unidentified Indians and
Wyeth referred to twelye‘Walla‘Walla lodges of hunters just north of the
hetolius River. It is impossible to identiry these as‘wyam, Tenino, Tygh
or John Day River Indians from this reference, or, since the'Walla‘Walla
language was spoken by Nez Perce, Umatilla and Cayuse, to completelyp
exclude them from possible consideration. Lt. Abbott saw Indians traveling
north with fish presurhably caught in the Metolius. He failed to identify
them. However, from the direction of their march it may be presumed they
were'Wayampum, but it cannot be said to which band they belonged. In addition
to the above, Major H. A. G. Lee, in February 18h8, reported that the
DesChutes Indians were sending horses and cattle to the hot spring country

(Pet. Ex. 3, p. 361) where_some of the Indians resided all the time, this

8 Ind. :21. Comm. 557 an

seemingly having reference to the warm Springs River country within the
reservation area.

Messrs, James I-I. Teit, Robert Suphan, Dr. Vorne Ray and Professor
Murdock each did research among Indians on the warm Springs Reservation.
Based on research performed between 1928 and 19110 Dr. Ray assigned the
four Wayampum bands the territory outlined on Petitioner's Exhibit 1101.
Suphan did research during 1953  on Defendant's Exhibit .17-A he has
indicated a Ifayanpum area of exclusive occupancy which extends south of

O

‘the Columbia to a rough are which starts at Mt. Jefferson, runs east

- through Simnasho, Oregon, over I-1uttonI~Iountain to North Junction, Oregon,

on the DeSChutes River, and then to Shaniko, Oregon , and terminates near

the John Day River slightly southeast of Clarno, Oregon. He said the

'Northern Paiute occupied the Warm Springs reservation until 1855 and used

the country from Mutton Mountain to Seelcseekt-Ia Creek along with petitioner
Indians (Def. B. 17; Trans. p. 376', 1390), and on pages 51 to 53,
inclusive, of his report he set out in condensed form ‘statements to this
effect made  Harxn Springs Iieservation Indians. I-Iurdoc‘.-c, whose research
was done about 1938, said his Tenino informant was born about 181?; that

the informanant said the Snakes once owned the country about Ollalie Butte

..a.nd I-it. Jefferson md occupied Seekseefma Creek, and Ham and Hot Springs’

and dug roots about Shaniko, all within the reservation limits , but by
reservation time they had been driven as far south as the great band in the

John Day River and the Tenino (1r.’aya:.;pu.m) had taken over the country named

O last above. In.t‘or;::..:==.nt told of hearing his father tell of battles between

the 1-Iayazapum and the Snakes along 1'IaI*m Springs and I-Iotolius Rivers shortly

615

before informnnt's Firth Def. E.. 52g p. 398). Teit, tho worked with

.-x

Nasco;'Vishram and other Sahaptin informants during l§oo, found them

“rather vague" about boundaries but he concluded the lasso owned the country
west of a direct line from Mt. Hood to the Dalles, the Snake lived south

of the Warm.Springs River and that the Molala had held the northern reservation area (Def. Ex. 67).

.Other reports by scientists based upon research among neighboring
Indians touched upon this area.‘ Beatrice Blyth Hhiting in 1938 (Def.-Ex.
52, p. hO2) reported Juniper Deer Eaters of the Northern Paiute wintered
east of the DesChutes between Prineville, Gateway and Bend, Onsgon, and
hunted about Mt. Jefferson. Cora DuBois divided the Snake and'Wayampum
territory by a line running from the great bend of the John.Day River west
to Metolius River. Omer C. Stewart said Snakes were on the John Day River
up as far as its great bend; that their westernrlimits “closely coincide
with edges of the physiographic province“ of the Great Basin.(Def. Ex. 52
p. HOS). In 1939 he wrote (Def. Ex. 65) the Hunipuitoka or'Nalpapi Snake
extended north from.Pauline Mountain or'Twin Buttes; in DesChutcs county
to the southern boundary of'wasco County in Oregon: and then east to the
John Day River and.up that river to its fork. Ju;ian.H. Steward said the
Snake country extended.west to the DesChutes River and that Columbia River
Indians and.Snake Indians both used the country around the mouth of Crooked
River (Def. Ex. 10?; Pet. Ex. so—c). Dr. Steward testified before the
Commission during May, 195b, in connection with the Northern Paiuto vs.
United States case Docket 87, 7 Ind. Clms. Comm. 322, trat by 1820 the

*7; -r.-.:~
. 

Snake had been pushed south of a line extending from m..

 

fsrson north

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. SS7 i 615

of'Warm Springs River to the hSO of latitude. (See Cl. E3. 9h2, Def. Ex.
136, p. 177-185, Dkt. 57). It was not necessary under the facts developed
in that docket that this Commission find a northern boundary for the Snake
or Paiute in this area.

The record shows the Snakes occupied the country east and south of the
reservation after its activation. Petitioner says this was the result of
them moving into a vacuum created when petitioner Indians were restricted
to the reservation. This contention is without foundation. The 1855 treaty
pernitted the Indians to fish, hunt and graze their horses in their usual
manner and places, so no vacuum was created. The Snakes were adept at the
stealthy approach and evasion of persuit, had only bows and arrows and no
horses, yet they so fiercely resisted the establishment of the reservation’
that troops were required to protect the workers while constructing the
necessary buildings and to preserve life and proptety thereafter. Their
activities indicate they yet claimed and perhaps used this area although it
is definitely established that John Day Indians were residing about Clarno,
Oregon, until 1375. Agency andihilitary personnel reported concerning these
Snake activities over the years, stating the agency was at the edge of Snake
country and in 1860 Superintendent Edward Geary reported to Brig. General
Harney that Snake hostility was due to the fact that (Def. Ex.lOl):

. sea-by some strange oversight this reservation %%%
lies within the limits of the territory not only
claimed by the Snakes themselves, but admitted by
the Indians, parties to the treaty (of lc;j,, to
belong to them.%%%

Captain'Wallen in 1859 on returning from a reconnaissance against the Snakes

said they had camps on Crooked River and fr-m the headwaters of the John Day

8 Ind. Cl.Comm. 557 517

River as far south as Two Buttes or Mt. Pauline in DesChutcs headwater 3

that most of their caips were south of the rcservati: area (Pct. Ex.

280), although petitioners SR" they fished and hunted in this region.

Snake presence there is substantiated by Superintendent Huntington

having captured the wife of the Snake Chief Pauline at the mouth of Mill-ke-kc
Creek in 1867, and being told by her that the main Snake camp was but 15

miles to the east (Def. Ex. 106).

"Q .

A disinterested account which shows Snake were still disputing use

of the country east and southeast of the reservation twelve years after

its establishment is Colonel William Thompscn‘s report of Snake Indians
having burnt the buildings at Burnt Ranch on the confluence of Cherry

Creek and the John Day River, of pursuing them east to Trout creek, of

"meeting Indians from the reservation there hunting in what is described

in  ..

as "neutral country," of the Thompson party and tiese Indians pursuing

 

" and attacking the Snakes on McKay Creek "near Snake country." So it
appears that as late as 1867 the‘Wayampum had managed to reduce Snake
~ occupancy of this land immediately southeast of the reservation only to
the'extent of creating a "neutral country;"
From the record it appears that Snake usage of the area south of
the reservation continued after 1855, that hex ?erce and Cayuse were also
in this region.prior thereto. It is evident the southern portion of the
reservation area was being hunted over; but there is no means by which
the Commission can identify the Indians seen in this region either generally
aS'Wayampum or with respect to which separate Wayampun entity they belonged.

Original Indian title must rest on more than conjecture.

8 Ind. Cl.Comm. 557 g ' 618

There are, however, areas about the villages of the four'Wayampum
entities which such separate entities may be said to have occupied exclusively, and following the precedent of Muckleshoot Tribe vs. United States,

 

2 End. Clms. Comm. h2h, 3 Ind. Clms. Comm. 655, approved in Unoer Chehalis

   

l92, the Commission has

Tribe, et al., vs. United States, 1&0 Ct. ,lEs.

attempted to assign such areas, making use of straight lines and known

points of reference in an attempt to simplify identification and computation
of acreages within the various separate areas. As outlined in our

Findings of Fact Nos. he and h7, this day entered, the areas do not include
all of the subsistence land of the several separate entities but allows

to each only areas of exclusive use. There is excluded an area nf joint

use about Dufur, Oregon, the unused summit and areas of joint use about

Mt. Hood, and between the immediate river valleys of the John Day and
Deschutes Rivers. We have also excluded land east of the immediate

vicinity of the John.Day'River and the southern portion of the reservation
area.wherein petitioner has failed to show an exclusive use by any one

of the several'Wayampum entities{

The parties may now proceed with the submission of evidence respecting the acreages of the several separate tracts bounded in Findings
of Fact Nos. he and b7, less such portions thereof as may lie within the

limits of the'Warm Springs Indian Reservation, the value of said several

8 Ind. 3:. com. '55:» _ 519

%?acts of land as of March 3, i?79, the date of C025 ?+~tion of the June

23, 1855 treaty 0. cessien, ari the offsets and credizs, if any, which
defendant may Show itself entitled to when arriving at the consideration

paid for said tracts. It will be so ordered.

Arthur E. Uatkins
*-$w 

Associate ?:mmissiOner

 

We concur:

Edgar E.'Witt

K-J-.-C%'U.-T-u--n

Chief Commissioner'

   

‘W3. M} Holt
Associate Commlseioner

‘Q

