"._.:-«J
Lo
0.‘)

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 300
BEFORE THE IRTDIAN CLELIIIES COi~iI~TJISSIO}~I

CHARLES E. WIIIIAES, JOSEPH REDTHUNDER
and HARRY OWHI, as Representatives of
THE NEE PERCE TRIBE,

Petitioners,

V. Docket No. 180-A

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\——/‘~u-"\..¢/‘~——/\_../\..a/‘\.../‘\_./\.../\...a’\~_,/

Defendant.
Decided: December 31, 1959

Appearances:

David Cobb, with whom were

I. S. Weissbrodt, Abe weissbrodt
and Donald C. Gormley,

Attorneys for Petitioners.

John D. Sullivan. with whom.was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry“W.‘Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.
OPIHION_9§ THE COMMISSION

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petitioners herein are individual members of the Nez Perce
Tribe who bring this action in behalf of the tribe. The claims presented by petitioners stem from the intrusion of white trespassers upon

the Nez Perce Reservation during the period l860—l867 following the

discovery of gold upon said reservation and while the Nez Perce Tribe

4had the right to the exclusive possession of the lands from which the

gold was taken by said trespassers.

--‘ -u _»-‘I
r
4 \_' \...ll

5 lnd. Cl. Com‘

In a previous
one Commission made
the Commission, with Chief Cormissioner Hitt concurring in part and
disagreeing in part, held that the United States would be liable in
damages for whatever land occupancy uses of the reservation by white
intruders might be proved by petitioners since defendant's failure to
prevent such trespasses as required by Article 2 of the freety of June ll,
1855, 12 Stat. 957, and the unratified Agreement of April 10, 1861, and
the failure to protect the rig ts and property of the Nez Perce by
securing compensation for the tribe for the uses made of the reservation,
did not conform with the standard of fair and honcvable dealings. The
Commission further held that the United States would be liable for the
value of whatever gold petitioners might prove was acquired by defendant

ltits mint or any of its branches which petitioners could show originated

in the Nez Perce Reservationo the

The Commission at that time held that
proof then before the Commission was insufficient to sustain any claim
for gold taken from the Nez Perce Reservation and acquired by defendant.
Because the Commission believed there was a strong indication that some
gold acquired at the mint cane from the reservation, this Commission
was reluctant to dismiss the “conversion” claim because of failure of
proof. The Commission found that although the evidence showed that
many areas of the reservation were occupied by white intruders for
various purposes, the record did not} however, show the parts of the

reservation so occupied and used except in the vaguest way; with

respect to such land oocuoancv the Commission indie; rd

(11
C?"
(D
C

‘.2 J
K 2.)
‘ -D

8 Ind. Clo COTE.  

as to the occupied areas and proof of value of the use of the occupied
areas would have to be supplied by petitioners.

After the rendition of said findings of fact and opinion by the
Commission, petitioners moved for leave to amend their complaint to
conform to the evidence by including a new paragraph, 22A, in order to
clarify their position that the original allegations were intended to
include gold mining uses of the reservation. The Commission, ouer defendant's objections, issued an order on March 6, l9S6, permitting petitioners to so amend their petition.

A further hearing has now been held for the purpose of giving petitioners an opportunity to attempt to prove damages resulting from the
uses made of the Nez Perce Reservation by white intruders and also to
try to prove the amount of Nez Perce gold acquired by the United States
in its mint or branches. Petitioners contend that in order for the tribe
to have been compensated for the mining and other related uses of the
reservation during the period 1860-1867 a reasonable royalty agreement
based on the amount of gold taken from the reservation could have and
should have been negotiated by defendant with the miners for the benefit
of the tribe. In support of this contention petitioners have introduced
documentary evidence and presented expert witnesses to prose what petitioners believe was a reasonable approximation of the amount of gold
produced on the reservation, the cost of producing said gold, the net
profit realized by the miners and what they considered would be a fair_
and reasonable royalty based on a percentage of the gold removed by the

miners. Petitioners contend that the dollar value of the gold removed

J. ..
L»}.."C3

6&7, II Kapp. 8&3, became operative and the United States acquired
gold lands, was $26,000,000.00. The net profit realized from the gold
after production costs, according to petitioners, use $l6,800,000.00.
Petitioners urge that a royalty of 50 per cent of the not profit, that
is $8,h00,000.00, could have been negotiated for the tribe and would
have afforded a fair and equitable arrangement to conponratc the Hez
Perce Indians for the removal of the gold from its reservation. Potitioners further urge that the proof shows $2,l78,53h.9l of Net Perce
gold was acquired by the United States by deposits in its San Francisco
Branch Mint. Petitioners contend that the tribe should be allowed to
TECOVBT $2,l78,53h, being the value of the gold allegedly converted by

the defendant. This sum of $2,l78,53h according to petitioners should

ithen be deducted from the $26,000,000 (the alleged total value of the

gold removed from the reservation) and on the balance, that is $23,82l,h65.00,

the tribe should be allowed a_royalty of 50% On the net profit therefrom.

The royalty asked by petitioners is $7,7hl,976.hS ehich added to the
$2,1?8,53h for conversion mkes a total recovery sought by petitioners
of $9,920,51o.h§.

Defendant, while not waiving any of its leeal defenses which will

C.»

be discussed hereinafter, introduced evidence and expert testimony which

0

counsel for the Government stated would Show at least t- a fair degree
of accuracy how much gold was mined within the reservation as bounded by
the Commission, the cost of producing the gold and that royalty would

have been expected on the net profit. Defendant made but the requested

‘ most of the area from which gold was removed.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 300

findings of fact with respect to these matters and these requested
findings are ultimate in nature and to the effect that on the evidence
available no reasona‘le approximation can be made at this date of the
gold removed and that by reason of the absence of a definable eastern
boundary it is impossible to arrive at such an approximation.

Defendant strongly urges that the claim of trespass presented by
petitioner is barred on the basis of res judicata, citing 95 C. Cls. 1.
It is defendantis position also that the amount of gold taken from the
reservation, if any, cannot be determined. In support of this View
defendant urges that the eastern boundary of the reservation which was
never surveyed can not be reasonably established and therefore the
amount of gold taken from the reservation, if any, could not be reasonably
approximated. with respect to the eastern boundary, defendant states that
the placing of the east line a few miles to the west would have excluded
Defendant also contends
that even if the east line could be n_;.:-.:..~"_~;..~;r:,h certainty the amount of
loss to the Nez Perce Indians is so yague and uncertain that no reason~
able determination of its amount can be made and defendant states this
is evident when one takes into consideration the ultimate conclusions
of the experts in this case. Defendant's position with respect to the
conversion claim need not be discussed for reasons stated hereinafter.

The defendant has persistently argued from the commencement of

I

this long and complicated action that the doctrine of res adjudicate
applies to the trespass claim herein presented by petitioners.

Commission has already held that the former jadrncrt in 95 C. Cls. l

3&2

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 333

2 Ind. Cl.

is not a bar to the prosecution of this claim. Conn. l93,

L99, 200 and 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 586-538. ‘With respect to defendant's
contentions concerning the eastern boundary of the reservation this
571, §?8, 5??) that a

Commission found (Finding 1? 3 Ind. Cl. Comm.

determination of the eastern boundary could be made and so fixed said
boundary line. Whether or not a reasonable determination of the amount
of loss suffered by the Nez Perce Indians may be made depends upon a
consideration of the methods used by the experts for the parties to
fix such damages and the evidence relied upon by these experts in
reaching their conclusions. Granting that the eastern line of the reservation is drawn as determined by the Commission there is agreement
among the witnesses that at least to a fair degree of accuracy there

is evidence to show how much gold was taken from the reservation. The

gstermination of the amount so extracted necessarily involves the initerpretation placed upon the evidence relied upon by the expert witnesses

for the parties since they used substantially the same evidence, that is
contemporary newspaper accounts of gold mining (which are the principal

source of information used), official reports and other sources.

GOLD PRODUCTION

 

The expert witnesses appearing for petitioners were Mr. Philip J.
Shenon and Mr. Roy P. Full, mining geologists, of the firm of Shenon
and Full, Salt Lake City, Utah. Mr. Sherwin M. Barton of the firm of
Barton, Stoddard and Hilhollin, consulting engineers, Boise, Idaho;

f‘ 1'5

Mr. Ernest Oberbillig, formerly an associate Professor or mining at the

3h

‘*1

Q

8 Ind. C1. COR. 300

University of Idaho; and Dr. Merle William wells, Associate Professor
of History at Alliance College, Pennsylvania, testified as expert witnesses for defendant. The mining experts for both parties, apparently
independently, arrived at the same method for evaluating the amount of
gold produced during the trespass period.

They took into consideration,

where the data was available, for each of the mining districts and each

of the mining seasons in the period under consideration (l) the average
daily yield per miner, (2) the average number of miners working per day,
and (3) the number of days worked in the season, and by multiplying these
three estimated factors, obtained an estimated total gold production for

the district and season. The mining experts also submitted written

reports.
The results of their studies for each of the mining districts for
each of the mining seasons in the period 1861-1867 are set forth in
detail in the findings of fact made and will not be reiterated herein.
Shenon and Full, for petitioners, estimated the dollar value of the gold
removed from the reservation prior to April 17, l867, was $2S,9l3,6ll.OO.
Defendant's mining experts estimated the gold production to have amounted
to $l5,l33,778.00. The data, as previously stated, upon which these
experts for both parties relied in forming their estimates consists
principally of contemporaty newspaper accounts of the average number of
men in the different mining districts, their average daily yield and
the length of the mining seasons.

The large discrepancy between the

experts‘ estimates of the amount of gold produced results from their

Bhh

8 Ind. Cl. Com. ?3G

..~

different interpretati n: of the source material available for study

with respect to the factors considered an‘ to a Ziffcrence of opinion
regarding the amount of gold produced that siould be credited to the
reservation where mining districts were located but partially within

the reservation. For example, in the "Keg Perce Mines," a mining district
including the Pierce City - Oro Fino - Bald Mountain areas, petitioners‘
experts estimated that in 1861 there was an average of 1250 miners, a
working season of 170 days and an average daily yield of $12 per miner.
Defendant*s experts for the same year estimated an average of 1000
miners, a 125 day working season and an average daily yield of $8 per
miner. For the year 1861, Shenon and Full for rctitioners computed an
estimated $2,550,000.00 worth of gold produced while the Barton, Stoddard

and Milhollin firm estimated gold production for that mining district in

861 at $1,000,000.00. As to mining districts located only partly within

“the reservation the experts differ greatly as to the amount of gold production that should be considered Nee Perce gold such as in the "South
Fork Mines,“ a mining district including Elk City, Orogrande, Newsome

1

and Clearwater Station areas. In that mining district petitioners‘ experts found the gold production to be $5,510,000.00 and estimated the
production within the reservation at $2,005,000.00 while defendant's
mining experts estimated production at $h,0?0,000.00 and attributed
$1,180,000.00 to the reservation. In the “harren~Secesh" mining district
Shenon and Full estimated production at $5,915,000.00 and credited

4‘ -~ -- ' as 3 :¢5h8,000.00 to the reservation E3118 deiendant‘s experts estimated pro»

duction to be $7,176,000.00 and allocated $350,000.00 to the reservation

éincs” area Shcnon and Full estimated 6l.6

(0
D7
“U
(D
H
0
(0

area.
per cent of the total production came from within the reservation and

the mining experts for defendant considered that 80 per cent of the

area worked lay within the reservation.

For certain areas such as the "Dixie District“ located mostly outside the reservation and "Other Districts in Reservation" estimates were
made by Shenon and Full although contemporary data concerning these
mining areas was extremely limited. Shenon and Full estimated $100,000.00
as the total production for the "Dixie District” within the reservation
and defendant's experts allocated but $20,000.00 to the reservation.
For the "Other Districts in Reservation" such as the mining done on the

bars of the Snake River, Shanon and Full estimated $500,000.00 as the

gold production. The consideration of these districts, in view of the

limited evidence relied upon in making a final estimate of gold produced
on the reservation, is believed to be of doubtful value.
The reports and testimony of the mining experts for both parties

conclusively show that a large amount of gold was produced in the period

1861-1867 within the boundaries of the Nez Perce Reservation as determined by the Commission. It is true that the estimates made by the

experts are based mostly on estimates with respect to the average number

of miners, the average daily yield and length of working seasons as set

forth in contemporary newspaper accounts. Such a method of estimating

production with due allowance being made for the tendency of miners and
ver-exaggerate is better eviother interested parties at the time to

dense than the published estimates made years later by mining engineers

or geologists which were heavily relied on in the previoti hearing before
this Commission.

The experts for the parties believed that the date upon which they
relied for estimating gold production was the best evidence available
and they concluded that from it a reasonable evaluation of gold production
could be made at this time. "While the difference between their estimates
is great this is due to the interpretation placed on the contemporary
accounts by these experts and their conclusions as to what extent certain
of the mining districts were located within the reservation. Any sub»
stantial change in any one of the factors considered in making the estimates would bring a resulting increase or decrease in the final estimate

for the mining districts.

The Commission in finding the total dollar value of the gold protfduced from.the Nez Perce Reservation has taken into consideration and

made due allowance for the tendency of overnexaggeration in the source
material upon which the experts relied in the estimates which were made.
The fact that only parts of some of the mining districts were within the
reservation was considered by the Commission and allowance made based
on the belief that a smaller percentage of the gold produced in these
Due consideration was

districts should be allocated to the reservation.

ost season production

vi,
Prj

also given to the fact that there was some pre and
which does not appear to have been considered bv defendant‘s experts
and to_the fact that petitioners‘ eroerts estimated large gold production for certain districts for which there was limited

Taking into consideration the findings of fact herein nri~

\A.‘

8 Ind. Cl, Como 300

as a whole, and in view of the above observations the Commission concludes that a fair and reasonable estimate of the dollar value of the
gold produced from the Nez Perce Reservation would be $20,000,000.00.
PRODUCTION COSTS

The mining experts appearing for the parties differ substantially
as to what items should be considered in estimating the cost of pro—_
duction of the gold removed in order that a net profit from the gold
operations might be estimated also. Shenon and Full for petitioners were
of the opinion that the wages paid the miners, measured either by actual
wages paid or a cost measured by a standard maximum wage of $5 per day,
would reasonably reflect the total production cost. In allowing only
the wages to be the measurement of production costs dhenon and Full
assumed that the wages paid to miners in these placer camps during the
boom periods were higher than the labor cost which could appropriately
be considered as an equivalent for the mining services and that this
amounted to an element of profit sharing. The main reason for such an
assumption appears to be based on a comparison with wages paid in the
coal mines of the eastern states during the same time. For this reason
these experts believed that in establishing cost by using only the
average wage of the mining districts there was represented sufficient
expenditures to take care of any labor charge plus any minor charge for
equipment. On the basis of the Shenon and Full study petitioners urge
that the estimated net profit on the production of gold from the reservation would be reasonably represented by the sum of $l6,800,000.00.

3L8

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 300

The fiT$ Of Barton) Stoddard & Kilhollin in its production cost
study for defendant considered many other cost iters in addition to wages
such as food and lodging, travel cost, tools, opening the claim, quicksilver and marketing. These mining experts concluded that the estin:ted
total cost of production for their_estimated $15,l33,75C»0O Wofih 05 E015
removed from the reservation would amount to $l3,308,S20vOO, leaving an
estimated net profit of $l,82S;?60.00o

In considering what type of a reasonable royalty agreement could
and should have been negotiated to compensate the hes Perce Indians for
the mining and related uses of their reservation in the 1561-1867 period,

it is believed that such an agreement would have permitted the mining

operator, or operators, to use the timber and water resources on the lands

and to build ferries and establish town sites. ‘Bhilc the cost of dejeloping, opening and operating the mines would therefore be somewhat
reduced there would still be other cost items involved in building the
water ditches, dams, sluices and flumes necessary for the operation of

the mines. iCarpenters and laborers other than miners would have to be

paid. Tools necessary to construct these things and to mine the gold

would have to be provided. The high wages paid in these mines would be

sufficient to take care of travel and food for the miners and these do

not appear to be proper cost itemso The high sages prevailing in the

area, however, seem to have resulted more from the remoteness and

rigorous life of the mining the Civil

«~ss

camps, the high cost of livin"

War, the shortness of the mining season, and the constant drifting of

minors to new mining fields than to any element of profit sharing.

4

There

\s

would be the expense of constructing at least some temporary shelters on

or near the claims for the miners especially at the beginning of operations.
There was considerable expense in opening and developing the claims in

these mining districts according to contemporary reports. There would

also be the cost of marketing the gold, that is transporting it safely

to where it could be assayed and refined and some cost of transporting
equipment and supplies to the mines.

While wages would reflect a large part of the production cost the
items discussed above would add materially to the total cost. The
Commission concludes that 70 percent of the dollar value of the gold
removed from the reservation would represent production cost. The net
profit which could have been realized on the $20,000,000.00 worth of
gold found to have been removed from the reservation may reasonably be
approximated at $6,000,000.00.

ROYALTY

 

Petitioners contend that a royalty agreement could and should have
been negotiated which would have afforded a fair and equitable arrange"
ment to the Nez Perce Tribe for the removal of the gold from its reservation. Royalty agreements have been used in the development of
mineral lands in this country from early in its history. The record
contains no evidence of a royalty agreement which would be comparable
to the leasing of a large mining area as is involved in this case for
mining and other related uses. The royalty agreements placed in evidence
involve only small claims. ‘One covers three small mining claims in the

Florence district of the reservation and is dated in 1869. This provided

1 1
..

the owners of the claims would receive one-half of the FQU proceeds
The other two agreements cover small placer claims in 185?

and 1860 in California, one providing the owner would receive one-half
of the net proceeds and the other arranged for the owner to receive onefourth of the gross. Defendant contends that there is no evidence of
a royalty arrangement which would be comparable to the situation involved in this case and that it was not customary during the period involved for miners to pay a royalty.

The mining experts for petitioners were of the opinion that a
royalty of 25 per cent of the gross product, or 50 per cent of the not
profit, would have been fair and equitable and stated that in view of
conditions on the reservation a royalty agreement cf 25 per cent of the
gross would be the most desirable agreement since such would give the

lhssee full right to occupation of the reservation as necessary for

exploitation of the mineral resources.
concluded that the range of possible royalty would be between 6 and 8

per cent of the gold produced on the reservation.

tThe method of determining what the Nez Perce Tribe should have received for the mining and related uses of the reservation during the
1860-1867 period by estimating what a reasonable royalty on the gold removed from.the reservation in that period would be, is believed to be one
which would afford a fair and equi‘able measure of damages. In determining the per cent of the royalty consideration has been given to the

type of mining involved, to-the fact that an agreement could and should

have been made which would permit the lessee occupation rights which

-xrr’
H:
:71

.-g

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 300

would provide timber, water, supply depots, ferry rights, etc., and to
the fact that such a large operation would also be beneficial to the
Indians in providing markets for their produce and cattle. Giving due
consideration to these factors and to the record as a whole the Commission concludes that a royalty agreement providing for the Nez Perce
Tribe to receive 50 per cent of the net profit realized from the gold
removed from the reservation during the trespass period could and should
have been negotiated for the benefit of the tribe by the defendant. The
Nez Perce Tribe is entitled therefore to recover from defendant 50 per
cent of the net profit (which has been reasonably approximated to have
amounted to $6,000,000.00), or $3,000,000.00, less such offsets, if any,
to be later determined by this Commission.

As previously pointed out petitioners contend that in addition to
recovering for the mining and other related uses on the basis of a
royalty agreement the tribe should be allowed to recover $2,l?8,S3h.00 _
being the amount of Nez Perce gold allegedly acquired by the United
States through the Mint. To avoid double recovery by the tribe for the

same gold for which compensation is sought_for conversion petitioners

.state the $2,178,§3h.O0 should be deducted from the total amount of gold

found to have been removed from the reservation and a royalty allowed
only on the balance. This procedure requested by petitioners of seeking
recovery from defendant on the basis of alleged conversion is inconsistent
with the demand by petitioners that the defendant be found liable on

the grounds that a fair and reasonable royalty agreement could and should

have been negotiated for the tribe. If such an agreement had been made

lhen certainly petitioners could not eve advanced etch a
alleged conversion nor have recovered on such a claim subsequently. To
allow petitioners to recover for the alleged conversion would be finding
the United States liable not only for what it did net do but also for
something it allegedly did do in receiving gold in its mint and thus

would permit double liability and double recovery f0? the Same alleéed

wrong, that is failure to protect the property of the Nez Perce Tribe.

Wm. H. Holt

—.-—ggn_._-:5-pa-u-u --.-..--n-:1...-.. -v--.---u-..

Assoeiete Commissioner

Concurring:

Edgar E. Witt

 

éhief Conuissioner

Commissioner Watkins took no part in the consideration or decision of this

Case.

