353

BEFOYE THE INDIAN CI&IMS COKXISSION

TILLAMOOK BAED O? TIIlnHCOKS, RAA EM
(Ne--he.-lum) 3.9.2.-.-*1)  ‘l‘ILIez¥-.I.It’JOIa<IS.

CLATSO? $3133, KATHLnEET EnHD OF
oH111oo1<:s, 1nJo—qU1s_ '..tZ».,-‘SH-‘;‘.f£3--}~.: ‘CK

'I'RIEE, the COZ€I<"3?3D1b3E1.-’i’.EE»3D 5."RI}T:'iiJS OF

SILETZ I1sm1.t.11s, COZ?E‘EDER;*1£?liD TRIBES

OF THE GRAND ROKDB COHKUEITY, OREGON,
and portions and descendants of all such
tribes and bands,

Plaintiffs,

v. Docket No.‘ 2110

Tszs UNITED s-mess,

Defendant,

Decided: June 10, 1955
Appearances:
Garland S, Ferguson, III,
with whom were E, L.
Crawford, and Joseph W.

Creagh,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

halter A. Rochow, with whom
see Mr. Assistant Attorney
General, Perry W, Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
QE§§ION OF THE CCHMISSION
WITT, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
The plaintiffs oleim.thet they had aboriginal title, that is, Indian
title, to the lands they ceded to the defendant by unratified treaties
dated August 6, 1851 and of August 7, 1851; that the consideration of

$21,000 later received for said lends was grossly inadequate and.unr

oonsoionable and that they are entitled under subdivisions 3 and 5 of

3 53M

Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission.Act to the difference in the
value at the time of the cessions of said lands and the consideration
as aforesaid that_they received therefor.

The defendant contends (1) that "original Indian title" is not
compensable; (2) that plaintiffs are not such an identifiable group
as required by the Indian Claims Commission Act to entitle them to
maintain this action; (3) that plaintiffs do not constitute an aboriginal entity capable of acquiring "original Indian title"; (N) that
plaintiffs have not established that they exclusively used and occupied
a definable area; (5) that all or part of the lands claimed were taken
by defendant; and (6) that plaintiffs have not established a right of
action presently vested in them.

Although the amended petition in this case includes as plaintiffs
the Clatsop Tribe, the Kathlamet Band of Chinooks and the Nuc~quee—clah—
we-muck Tribe, no evidence has been submitted in support of any claim
by the Plaintiffs above-named and consequently this action is dismissed
as to the three above-named plaintiffs; and is considered as being
prosecuted only by descendants of the Nehalem Band and Tillamook Band
of Tillamook Indians.

_ Plaintiffs claim that the ancestors of the Tillamook Band were
Parties to a treaty dated.August T, 1851 (nhich was never ratified),
by the terms of which said'band ceded to defendant the lands described
in Finding 3, and that the Naalem Band of Tillamooks by treaty dated
.August 6, 1851; (which was never ratified) ceded to defendant its lands

as described in Finding M.

-- .- —- — -— —-—-~—--—--—.. --—..——-~............_.._......_...._... ._ -._.- .... ....._........-..-._...._..._........ .._-.... ..,. .. .. .. ..,._..._.._..-......... ..-._. . - ........_--.-.---.....  -. .- .. _.. .-.--.— ---.— —- .-- -.——.---—-—.-...—__--.—.—-—-—.-—.v-—z—-v--1.--.-.---mu--. -r--I-_---'-I-vv:'-v!"'¢r"'|’O"'_IiI‘?f' - While plaintiffs contend that they have made proof of exclusive
occupancy in the respective bands to the respective tracts claimed,
they at the same time contend that the claims of the Naalem Band of
Tillamooks to the lands claimed to have been owned by them was recognized
by act of Congress of June 7, 1897, which act provided payment therefor
(which plaintiffs contend was unconscionable); and that Congress by act
of August 2M, 1912, recognized the ownership by the Tillamook Band of
Tillanooks of the lands for which they make claim and made provision .
for the payment thereof, which said payment it is contended was unconscionable,

The unratified treaties to which reference is made were negotiated
by.Anson Dart, Snperintendent of Indian Affairs, and others representing
the United States, and signed by various Indians purporting to be chiefs
and headren of the Xaalen Band of Tillamooks and the Tillamook Tribe
of Indians.

Said treaties were among a number of treaties entered into by
the said Dart and others on the part of the Government with tribes of
Indians occupying ands lying nest of the Cascade Mountains in the
Territory of Oregon. These treaties were negotiated and executed pursuant to act of Congress dated June 5, 1850 (9 Stat. H37) under the
terms of saich the President was authorized to appoint Commissioners
to negotiate treaties with the Indian tribes in the Territory of Oregon
“for the extinguishnent of their claims to lands lying west of the
Cascade Mountains."

Thirteen (13) Indian treaties negotiated in 1851 pursuant to the

said act of Congress were forwarded to the Commissioner of Indian

3 53

Affairs by said.Anson-Dart, and accompanying the same he addressed a
communication to said Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated November 7,
l851. Said letter of transmittal states that the thirteen treaties
ceded to the United States more than 6,000,000 acres of land —- that
said treaties_were concluded at Tansey-Point near the mouth of the
Columbia River and cover a tract of over 100 miles on the Pacific
running back along the Co1umbia.River about 60 miles. Mr. Dart states
in this communication that this land "was owned" by small tribes of
Indians. The letter further refers to the conduct of the negotiations,
the reluctance of some of the Indians to agree to removal elsewhere
because of having to leave their home country where their ancestors
were buried, etc., etc,

It is significant that in this Communication Mr, Dart refers
to the fact that he concluded treaties with “thirteen tribes" and
that at each treaty concluded "the entire band was present."

It is also significant that each treaty ceded a different tract
of land which indicates separate occupancy and separate claims to
the two tracts by the respective bands ceding the same.

The Commission finds that satisfactory proof has been made of the
exclusive use and occupancy by the plaintiffs of lands within the area
ceded by the two unratified treaties to which reference has been made;
the difficulty has been the determination of the extent of this occur
pancy but, in keeping with the findings of fact in reference thereto

as made by this Commission, and which are made a part of this opinion,

us hold that the plaintiffs used, occupied and controlled, to the

3 536

...-. ., ..»—. -» -— -— -»---u--_- r-m-r 

exclusion of other Indians the area described in Finding 8(b).

In view of the finding as to use and occupancy, it is unnecessary
to determine whether or not there was recognition by the Government of
Indian ownership of lands by the plaintiffs; however, it is significant
that among the treaties negotiated by Anson Dart in pursuance of the
act of Congress of June 5, 1850 (as were the unratified treaties involved herein) was the treaty dated August 11, 1855, (which was not
ratified) which became the basis for the suit entitled Alcea Band of
Tillamooks vs. United States reported in the Court of Claims in 103
C. C.s. U99 and affirmed by the Supreme Court in 329 U. S. 1.

The evidence herein, the viewpoint of Congress with reference
thereto when appropriations by the acts of 1897 and 1912 were made to
the Indians because of said treaties, and the acceptance of proof by
the Court of Claims in the Aleea case as to the title of the Indians
to the lands involved therein, is thought to establish the fact that
the plaintiffs are entitled to a finding, that they were the possessors

of Indian title to lands, which were included in the tracts for which

they bring suit for compensation. If the payments made in 1897 and 1912

for said lands were unconscionable of course the releases secured thereby

do not estop the plaintiffs from prosecuting this case.

The Iindinas of Feet and Opinion of the Court of Claims in the
Alcea Band of Tillamooks case reported in 103 C. Cls., ppt MQM-553
should in our opinion be given great consideration in determining the
issues involved in the instant case. The unratified treaty in the

.Alcea case as hereinbefore mentioned was negotiated in pursuance of

3 53]

the act of Congress of June 5, 1850, just as were the unratified“
treaties involved in the instant case. The provisions of the act of
June 5, 1850, authorized the negotiation of the treaties with the
Several tribes of Indians in the Territory of Oregon for the ex»
tinguishment of their claims to land lying west of the Cascade Mountains,
and, if practicable, for the removal of these Indians east of said
mountains. It was evidently in contemplation that treaties_should be
negotiated with all the Indian tribes in said Oregon territory who made
claims to lands west of the Cascade Mountains. Maps and other evidence
of occupancy of the lands to the west of the Cascade Mountains were;in
evidence in the case of the Alcea Band of Tillamooks and same show the
occupancy by tribes fronting the entire Pacific coast from the State of
Washington to the California line, that is, of all the Indian tribes in
the Territory of Oregon occupying lands west of the Cascade Mountains.

The finding by the Court of Claims in the Alcoa case that the bands of
Indians there involved, occupied to the exclusion of other tribes the
several tracts of land therein claimed in accordance with the descriptions
as found and the treaties there involved, is persuasive of the contention
that the representatives of the Government negotiating these treaties

knew what lands were occupied by the several tribes. This knowledge of
the location of these several tribes and the lands occupied by them
would reasonably be expected to apply to the tribes involved in the
instant case and the lands occupied by them.

The viewpoint of Congress as expressed in the acts of 1897 and 1912,

and the reports of the Committees of Congress in connection pith said

3 533

acts, together with other facts as established by our findings of fact
make us conclude that plaintiffs are entitled to be recognized as‘
successors in interest to the original owners and occupants of a portion
of the lands involved. L

The defendant makes other contentions in the may of defense to the
Claims asserted but the Commission does not think they are well taken
and in view of our findings, we think that it is unnecessary to here
discuss or make findings as to other defenses.

From the above, and the findings herein made, it is our conclusion
that the plaintiffs had original Indian title to the lands as described
in Finding 8(b); and that the Government treated the lands in the unratified treaties as public lands, open to settlement by whites from
the dates of the treaties; and that, therefore, the plaintiffs are entitled to recover the difference betneen the value of said lands described
in Finding 8(b) as of the date of the unrotified treaties, less the
amount that has heretofore been received by them for said lands, and less

whatever offsets, if any, defendant might be able to establish.

Edgar E. Wi tt
Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

Louis J, O‘harr

Associate Commissioner

 

Wmo hie  I
Associate Commissioner

 

