BEFORE THE INDIAN CIAIHS COEHISSIOE

THE SKOKOHISH TRIBE OF INDIANS,

Petitioner

vs. Docket No. 296

IO 00 IO 00 Cl C.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant. :

Decided: Mar. 6, l9S8
Appearances:

David Cobb, Attorney for
Petitioner.

Donald R. Marshall, with whom
‘was Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry'H. Morton,
Attorneys for De£endant;k
OPINION OF THE COMMISSION
‘Witt, Chief Commissioner,<ielivered the opinion of the Commission.
The petitioner tribe asserts herein a claim.for the value of an.
undetermined anount of land located in.the northwest Puget Sound region
of the State of'Washington. The extent of petitioner's claim is adequately set out in Finding 2, and comprises an area included entirely
within the described boundaries of the lands ceded under the Point No
Point Treaty of 1855.’
The petitioner tribe was a party signatory to the Point No Point
Treaty entered into at Point Ho Point, Washington Territory, January

26, 1855, ratified by the Senate on.March 8, 1859, and proclaimed

April 29, l8S9. (12 Stat. 933). The petitioner claims that under the

treaty provisions it relinquished to the defendant 1‘ or an unconscion3

able consideration all right ,title , and interest to all lands it held I

under aboriginal title. In accordance with the treaty terms the petitioner tribe removed its members to the reservation set aside within
the ceded area for its purposes, and since the date of said removal,
the petitioner claims it has continuously maintained the Skokomish
reservation as its permanent residence even untlofboday.

In l938 the petitioner sought and obtained official tribal status pursuant to the Indian reorganization Act of 1931+, (48 Stat. 981.),
and acting in this capacity brings suit under the Indian Claims Commission Act as the rightful and proper representative and successor in
interest to the aboriginal tribal group who participated in the Point
Io Point Treaty negotiations.

Under a stipulation entered into between the parties the issues to
be determined in the current proceedings are limited to the capacity
of the petitioners to bring this action, and whether petitioner held
Indian title to the claimed area ceded under the provisions of the
Point No Point Treaty.

Besides denying petitioner's capacity to bring suit and }:etit:§_on-—«
er's exclusive occupancy of the area claimed in the petition, defend-»
ant in opposition asserts the defense of "res judicata" in that the
present claim is ‘barred by the judgment rendered in the case of .‘I_h§_

Duwamish Tribe V. United States, 79 C. Cls. 530. Needless to say this

 

same defense has been raised on other occasions against claimants who
were party litigants in the Duwamish case, and who brought subsequent

suits under the Indian Claims Commission Act. In each instance where

615

'2
J

appropriate, the Commission has consistently rejected the plea of
"res juclicata” as barring the clam asserted. The Suouamish Tribe
V. United States, 5 Ind. ‘Cl. Com. I58, The“Snokonii'sh"Tribe v.
United States; J. Ind. Cl. Comm. 549, The I-Euckleshoot Tribe V.
United States ? 2 Ind. Cl. Com. 1421;, The Nooksack Tribe v. United
States, 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 124. Because of the reasons set forth

in those prior cases; and the similarity of the claim asserted
herein, the Commission rejects the defense of ”res judicata" and
finds that the judgment rendered against the Skokonish Tribe in
the Duwaznish case is not a bar to the present claim.

The earliest recorded contact by white men with the Skokomisl
Indians occurred in 1792 when famed explorer George Vancover traversed the entire length or the Hood Canal in the State of Washington.
Hood Canal is a principal salt water inlet lying west of the Puget
Sound and emptying into Admiralty Inlet. It extends approichrately
1+5 miles in a general south-southwest direction before turning
sharply andstretching east-northeast an additional l5 miles or so
to its head. 'I'he Olympic mountain range parallels the western
shore of the main arm of the Canal for a distance of ten miles and
frequently less. The principal streams emptying into the Canal
flow east from the Olympic drainage area. Surrounding the Canal
are thick wooded sections. To the east lies relatively flat fertile lands with little elevation. This general Hood Canal and
Puget Sound region forms a huge watershed between the Olympic range
on the west and the Cascades to the east.

While Vancouver failed to identify by name the Indian groups he

encountered, Charles‘Nilkes in 1841 reported in his survey of the Hood
Canal that the"Toandos" tribe range along the northernmost section of

the Canal, while at the_southern end were the "skokbmishv who bore marked resemblance to the Toandos. As early as l8h9 an official government Indian report grouped the "Twanoh" and Skokomish as the totality

of Indians who live along the Hood Canal and numbering about 200.

In l85h, George Gibbs, who'was a member of Governor Isaac Stevens‘
treaty comndssion and actively participated in the Point Ho Point
Treaty negotiations of l855, classified the ”Toonhoock” with the
Skokomish, and placed the total number of these Indians around 465.

On January 25, 1855, Governor Isaac Stevens concluded the Point
No Point Treaty at Point No Point, Washington, with the Skallam,

O‘-d'|1-llluil-I-Ib':dI|III1A ‘T’ 4... 1.-.;-...-..-.1.-. g-.-.4-3 nLsrIuiiIA'?1-Iii-U! T\l'\f:-:l'\~'|1'! WA snI'5dI-II».-\n.rq4'-nlq 1-V\":Vq11“"('\4-Q
4_ _

F A 3
LJfL\JJ.a.\../11.1-d-I-v4.1.3 \J'\.J'—'LTa-;.t'-'45!-I\.I‘i-9&4 I’.-A-A4'.\.A ""a'J.\.I&I.--'-‘Ll-nun. -I-J.-o'-4.-I-C.au.4n.JQ 4--as-an J. wusla. -u-I.‘-rs.-.. .-—---u.A.Uhv-.p

of the treaty commission show that the treaty officials on this occasion were dealing with the Skokomish g§_To-anrhooch tribes, and
that as a practical matter only three distinct Indian.tribes were involved.

Thus it is apparent from the evidence that during the years critical to the issues in this case, just prior to and at the time of the
Point ho Point Treaty, defendant's Indian officials made no real dis“
tinction between "Too-an-hoock", "Toandos" and "Skokomish" Indians.
Indeed the evidence shows,.and the Commission has found as set out in
Findings 3, A and 5, that for our purposes under the Indian Claims
Commission Act, the Skokomish, Toandos, Tooanhooch, Twanoh, or Twana
are interchangeable and each properly identifies one group of Indians

who lived along the entire length and on both sides of Hood Canal.

Upon the e__xecution of the Point No Point Treaty, the S1-:o1~:om:Lsh or
Twana Indians ‘for the most part removed themselves to the Skokomish reservation which was set aside for their purposes as provided in the
Treaty. Indian agents, missionaries, writers and otherindividuals had
almost daily contact with these Indians during. the years that followed.
As reflected in the reports and writings of these persons, the Skokomish
or Twana were not only considered one group of Indians but were the only
group who througqgreat personal effort made permanent their residence
there. Accordimly, in the absence of any substantial evidence to the
contrary, the Commission has determined that the present day members of
the Skokomish tribe who live on the reservation and in the adjacent
north:-zest area of Washington State are the descendants and successors
in interest of the aboriginal Skokomish or TL-rana lndians which inhabited the Hood Canal area.

Turning to the question of Indian title, the Commission finds that
the evidence does not justifythe extent of petitioner‘s claim to land
held aboriginally and in 1859. The evidence shows quite clearly that
petitioner‘s ancestors enjoyed the typically confining fish eating
economy which on other occasions the Commission has found to prevail among the northwest coat and Puget Sound Indians of Washington State.
Because of their extreme dependence upon sea food and other water game,
these Indians centered the more stable aspect of their lives around
permanent well defined village sites. These they built purposely along

the shores of Hood Canal and at the confluence of the principal tri'c=..1--~tary streams which empty into the Canal waters. Apart from berry picking

and root gathering, agriculture was unknown, and whatever hunting was
done inland along the Olympic range was generated by other considerations than the prime need of subsistence. For the most part hunting
in the interior was sporadic and became the lot of the more adventuresome Indian brave. The periodic migration of thevlndian family
away from the permanent village site, instead of moving off into the
interior, generally kept pace along the shores of the canal with the

variations in the heavy salmon run, and in pursuit of the seasonal

, water products.

Topographical and population factors must be corsidered in a

. proper valuation of the extent of petitioner Is claim of aboriginal

title. The main mass of the Olympic range with its rugged peaks
traversing over  feet crowd the western shore of Hood Canal.
Thick: 5-I71‘p enetrable forests coupled with choking underbrush discourages extensive forages into the interior. Those tributary
streams, which afford some means of ingress, are relatively short
and difficult to navigate with even the shallowest of canoes. At
the time of the Point No Point Treaty the best estimates place the
combined Skokomish and Twana population at hardly more than 465 men,
women, and children. Other estimates range as low as 200.
Considering all the factors as set out in Findings 6, 7, and 8,
and without engaging in undue speculation, the Commission finds that
the petitioner has proven original Indian title to the permanent vilage sites  immediate surrounding area extending along the entire

length of the Hood Canal.

As to the interior regions of the Olympic range, the evidence ofi”:::s:'i=;,'

only isolated instances of Skokomish or Twana penetration. For the
most part these single occurrences were individual hunting efforts as
contrasted with any persistent and concerted tribal effort aimed at
demonstrating ownership and possession of this vast area to the exr
clusion of the neighboring tribes. While there may'haNe been recognition prior to 1859 of petitioner's right to exercise some degree of
sovereignty over the lands it ceded under the Point No Point Treaty;
the evidence does not justify an extension in like manner of the concept of exclusive possession and control over the entire area as claims
ed herein.

It is the conclusion of the Commission that in 1855, petitioner's '
ancestors held aboriginal title to the lands as set out in Finding 9,
and on March 8; 1859; the effective date of the Point No Point Treaty;
the defendant acquired by purchase said Indian title to these lanis.
Further hearings will be required on.the questions of the adequacy of
the consideration paid, the acreage and value of said lands ani the

rights retained in:3aid lands by petitioner's ancestors.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

we concur:

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

xqnl Q Ii I H O 
Associate Commissioner

 

Kp. .

OJ

