,MINNESOTA CHIPPENA TRIBE,-WHITE EARTH

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 331 781
' sasoas Ina IKDIAN CLAIMS coaazssloa

BAND, LEECH LAKE BAND, MILLS LAC same,
so w1LsOn, JAMES Davis, Joan coaaox,
WILLIAM MORELL, iAROLD aaaasOa,.JOsspa
Moaatson, OLE saw, aonnos SKINANAX,
sucans REYNOLDS, FRANK LA Ross, JOSEPH
MONROE, ARCHIE'LIBBY AND JOHN SQUIRREL,

Plaintifts,
Docket No. 18-3

VS.

barren STATES OF AEERICA,

\uu’N—a’\-l\uv"\....l‘5q-/\~..l\-./\./\..I\_/\./\~.J\../\-I

Defendant.

Decided: June 28, 1960

FINDINGS _C_)_§ F3‘-.CT

 

1. lhe Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, named as a petitioner, is a
Wheeler—Howard Act Indian corporation duly organized pursuant to the
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) under a constitution and by-laws approved by the Secretary of the Interior on
July 24,‘l936. Its nembership includes all Chippewa Indians duly
registered on the approved rolls of the white Earth, Leech Lake, Fond
5“ Lac: 3015 Fort (Nett Lake) and Grand Portage heservations and the
non-removal Mille Lac Band of Chippewa Indians (Constitution of’the
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, Article II, Sections 1 and 2). The Minnesota
Chippewa Tribe is not the successor in interest to the claim presented

under Docket No. 18-8 out is entitled to maintain this action in a

representative °3Pa9itY on behalf of all descendants of those Chionowa

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 782

Indians who were parties to the Treaty of February 22. 1855 (10 Stat. 1165)
and have an interest in the claim arising under that treaty.

2. The individual Indians named as petitioners are descendants
of the original members of the Mississippi, Pillagcr and Lake Winnibigoshish bands, and as such are also entitled to maintain this action
on behalf of themselves and in a representative capacity for all dascendants of the former bands similarly situated.

3. Petitioners‘ claim now under consideration in the matter of

,Docket No. 18-8 involves the land ceded to the United States by the

Treaty of February 22, 1855 (10 Stat. 1165). This cession is shown by

O

Royce on his Minnesota Map I in the 18th annual Report of the Bureau
of American Ethnology (Part 11) Indian Land Cessions, as Area 357,
and the ceded tract will hereinafter be referred to as Royce Area 357.

The land involved extends across north—centra1 Minnesota including
the headwaters of the Mississippi River with a triangular shaped portion
reaching the Canadian border. The acreage of the lands included within
Royce area 357, which excludes seven reservations not included in the
1855 cession, is about l0.l million acres.

The external boundaries of Royce area 357 are described in

Article 1 of the 1855 Treaty as follows:

Beginning at a point where the east branch of Snake River
crosses the southern boundary-line of the Chippewa country,
east of the Mississippi River, as established by the treaty
of July tyenty-ninth, one thousand eight hundred and thirtyseven, running thence, up the said branch, to its source;
thence, nearly north in a straight line, to the mouth of
East Savannah River; thence, up the St. Louis River, to the
mouth of East Swan River; thence, up said river, to its
source; thence, in a straight line, to the most westwardly
bend of Vermillion River; thence northwastwardly, in a

8 Ind, Cl. Comm. 781 783

straight line, to the first and most considerable bend in

the Big Fork River; thence, down said river, to its month;
thence, down Rainy Lake River, to the mouth of Black River;
thance, up that river, to its source; thence, in a straight
line, to the northern extremity of Turtle Lake; thence, in

a straight line, to the mouth of wild Rice River; thence, up
Red River of the North, to the mouth of Buffalo River; thence,
in a straight line, to the southwestern extremity of OtterTail Lake; thence, through said lake, to the source of Leaf
River; thence down said river to its junction with Crow wing
River; thence down Crow wing River, to its junction with the
Mississippi River; thence to the commencement on said river
of the southern boundary-line of the Chippewa country, as
established by the treaty of July twenty-ninth, one thousand
eight hundred and thirty~seven; and thence, along said line,
to the place o£ beginning.

It is this area, less seven reservations, to which petitioners seek to

establish title as of February 22, 1855. The reservations, as set forth

in Article 2 were:

For the Mississippi bands of Chippewa Indians:

Mille Lacs

Rabbit Lake

Gull Lake

Pokegama Lake

Sandy and Rice Lakes

UI&~Uen:»a
0 I

For the Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands:
6. Leech Lake

7. Lake Winnibigoshish ' "
8. Cass Lake

I’

4. .Area 357 first fell within the domain of the French during the
latter part of the 17th century. In 1762 that part of Royce area 357
west of the Mississippi River was ceded by France to Spain. That portion
of Royce area 357 east of the Eississippi River was transferred by France
to Great Britain in 1763. In 1776 the thirteen ori inal colonies declared their independence, and the United States, by virture 0’ the Treaty

0; Hence of September 3, 1783, succeeded to all the “' caption rights of

8 led. C1. Comm. 781 784

Great Britain to the lands described in Article II ot the treaty. A
portion of Royce area 357 north of tae headwaters of the hississippi V
River remained in dispute until the Convention of 1818 with England
whereby the forty-ninth parallel of north latitude from the Lake of
the Woods to the Rocky Mountains was adopted as the boundary between the
United States and Canada.

That portion of Royce area 357 west of the Mississippi River was
included in the territory which Spain receded to France in 1801 and
two years later was purchased by the United States from France under

the Louisiana lurchase of 1805.

5. The Chippewas were one of the larger groups of Indians of the
Algonquin linguistic stock located in the northern section of the United
States. When first contacted by white explorers in the seventeenth
century, the Chippewas were in the area around Lakes Huron and Superior.
Beginning in the early part of the eighteenth century, they started

pushing their way westward across Minnesota, gradually displacing thee

J

Sioux and driving them across the Mississippi and south to the Minnesota
River. By the end of the century they had extended their occupation
through northern Minneosta and across the Red River into northeastern
North Dakota. They had a large number of villages, bands, and local

divisions scattered over a region extending a thousand miles from east

t° West. and many of these bands or groups came to be known by the name
of the village, lake, or riverrmxnrwhich they resided .

6. The Mississippi bands of Chippewas and the rillager and Lake

Winnibigoshish bands of Chipoewas were the two grouse which peti+iQqer5

8 Ind. Cl. Co=.'.‘.:_*. 781 785

allege had original Indian title to all of Hcycc area 327 at the time
of the 1855 cession and for many years prior thereto. While it is not
possible to pinpoint the exact year when these Chippewa bands had
succeeded in replacing the Sioux in the various locations within Royce
area357, the evidence does establish that it occurred prior to the
United States’ acquisition of the area.

7. Historial Uilliam Ehipple Warren in his account of the Chippewa
military actions against the dioux told of the Chippewa taking of Sandy
Lake (in the southeast portion of Royce area Bil) about the year 1730.
However, Warren's accounts were based on the stories of the old men and
Chief of the Chippewa and warren himself recognized the difficulty of
dating.the events in view of the uncertain manner by which the Indians
counted time. Following the conquest of sandy Lake the Chippewas,
according to warren, continued to replace the Sioux at Cass and Ninnipeg

' .
(winnibigoshish) Lakes, both in the central part of Royce area 55?. The
Sioux then regrouped at Leech Lake, also in the central part of “oyce
area 357, which they kept in their possession for several years_until

finally forced to evacuate that territory, Warren also told of a fierce

battle about 1768 at the confluence of the Crow wing and Hississippi River,

on the southern border of Royce area 357, when the Sioux were badly

beaten by the Chippewa and, as warren stated, paid dearly for the temerity

that led them to proceed so far into the territory claimed by the

Chippewa. Warren reported that in

first became known by the hare "Eilla;ers.“ (History or the Usibeavs,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 785

8. Edward Duifield Neill, a Protestant cleric and historian of
the Minnesota Indians, estimated that the Chippewa advance into Royce
area 357 began after 1736. In his narrative of his expedition to the
sources of the Hississippi River in 1805-1806, LL. Zebulon Pike recorded a statement by a Red Lake Chippewa chief, "a venerable old man,"
that the Sioux had occupied Leech Lake when he-“was a made man, and
began to hunt; that they occupied it the year that the French missionaries
were killed, at the river Pacagama" (Def. Ex. 108, p. 58). It was in
1756 that 21 Frenchmen were massacred by the Sioux at Lake of the Woods.
9. Jonathan Carver in 1766-1767 explored the Mississippi and
some of its tributaries as far north as the Falls of St. Anthony (now
Minneapolis, Minnesota). He prepared a map to illustrate his travels
showing thereon the regions of Indian occupation. The lands which he
attributed to the Chippewas included a small portion in the eastern part
of Royce area 357. The western boundary of Chippewa territory was a
straight line drawn from near the mouth of the St. Croix River to the
western edge of Rainy Lake. The area to the west, including most of
Royce area 357, he designated as "all Country's not possessed by any
one Nation where War Parties are often passing is called by them the
Road of War" (Def. Ex. 129).
10. Alexander Henry reported in 1765 that fifty Chippewa families

were located at Chequamegon (Wisconsin) and‘that they hunted around the

sources of the Mississippi (100 leagues from Chequamegon via Fond du Lac

and the St. Louis River).

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 787

11. Peter Pond, a trader among the Sioux, reported in 1774-1775
on efforts of traders to assemble Sioux and Chippewa to decide intertrihal boundaries and make peace. He reported on traders coming from
near the headwaters of the Mississippi with Chippewa chiefs. According
to Pond, the Chippewas and Sioux met at Mackinac and agreed to make
peace. The leading stipulation was that the Sioux agreed not to hunt
east of the Mississippi on Chippewa lands, and that the Chippewas were
not to hunt west of the Mississippi on Sioux lands.

12. In the summer of 1775 Alexander Henry, on a trading expedition
northwest of Lake superior, found Chippewa villages at Lake Nequaquon
gjust east of Rainy Lake, which is on the United States—Canada border),
on Rainy River near its junction with the Little Fork River, and on
Rainy River at its entrance into Lake of the Woods. On Winnipeg River,
between Lake of the Woods and Lake Winnipeg, Henry met "several canoes

of Indians, who all begged for run; but, they were known to belong to

the band of Pilleurs (Pi11agers), also called rogues, and were on that

 

account refused" (Def. Ex. 131, p. 244). Defendant's expert historian,
Dr. Harold Hickerson, considers these Pillagers to have been the forerunners of the Leech Lake Pillagers.

13. Jean Baptiste Cardotte, a trader among the Chippewas, reported

in June; 1783, that "all the Indians from Fond du Lac, Rainy Lake, Sandy

Lake, and surrounding places are dead from smallpox" (emphasis supplied)

(Def. Ex. 113).
Jean Baptiste Periault, a French trader, also mentioned in 17841785 that smallpox had attacked the Leech Lake Chippawas:nx3yaar3

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 ’ i 788

before. Perrault in his narrative report of his activities from 1784 to
1800, told of trading with Chippewa bands at Sandy Lake, Pine River,
Leech Lake, Bowstring Lake, Swan Lake, Crow Wing River, Cass Lake,i
Lake Winnibigoshish, Kabekona Lake, Gull Lake and Trout Lake, and other
localities in the immediate vicinity of these sites all in the eastern
and central portion of Royce area 357. In 1785 Perrault wrote that the
Pillagers of Leech Lake were returning from the prairies and that they
traded buffalo skins and furs. Defendant's expert, Dr. Hickerson, concluded that "the presence of buffalo hides in their returns indicates
that the Pillagers had gone some distance in a westerly direction to
get to the open buffalo prairies" (bet. Ex. 106, pp. 78, 79). This
would have been in the western portion of Royce area 357. Again in
1789-1790 Perrault mentioned that the Leech Lakcrs were hunting toward

the prairies.

14. In July of 1787 the British government arranged a treaty of
peace signed by the Sioux, Chippewa and Winnebago. Among the Chippewa
bands signing the treaty were those from Sandy Lake, Lake Winnibigoshish
and Leech Lake. In connection with those treaty councils the "Committee
of Merchants of Montreal" had written in 1786 of the Chippewas that "a
very numerous tribe of them occupy the sources of the Mississippi with
all the Country on the East side of that famous River, so low as the
River of the Chipeways" (Def. Ex. 120, p. 435).

15. Following the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 the United States
began exploration of the general area. In 1805-1806 Lt. Zebulon Pike,
who had been commissioned to explore the upper Mississippi, traveled

through Royce area 357. He reported on the presence of Chippewas in

that portion of the area through which he passed. Pike did not travel

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 789

through the northern and western portions of Royce area 357. He entered
the area at the mouth of the Crow wing River and traveled up that river
to beyond Oine River, went overland to Cedar Lake, thence overland to
Sandy Lake, Leech Lake, Cass Lake, back to Leech Lake to Whitefish Lake,
to Cedar Lake, and back down the Mississippi. Lt. Pike stated that:

"The only personal knowledge which I have of the Chipeway
nation, is restricted to the tribes on the south side of
‘Lake Superior, head waters of the Chipeway river and the St.
Croix:'and those who reside at Sandy Lake, Leech Lake, Rainy
Lake, Red Lake, and the head of the rivers Rouge, Mississippi
and De Corbeau /Crow wing7. They are divided into many bands

(like the Sioux) the names of seven of which I am only acquainted with.....Those of Sandy Lake are headed by a chief
called Catawabata (or De Breche) /Eroken Tooth/. They hunt
on the Mille Lacs, Red Lake, and the east bank of the §ississippi, from Rum river up to the river Des Corbeau £Crow
Wingg and from thence on both sides of the Mississippi to
Pine River; on that river also, up the Mississippi to Lake
De Sable, and about 100 miles above that lake. Those of ,_
‘Leech Lake hunt on its streams, Lake Winipie /§innibigoshish/p
Upper Red Cedar Lake, the Otter Tail Lake, (Pike identifiesOtter Tail Lake as the body of water adjoining Leech Lake on
its southwest, Pet. Ex. 8l7 head of the river De Corbeau,

and the upper part of Loser Red River. Their chief is Le
"Gieulle Platte (or Eskibugeckoge) /Flat Mouth7" (Def. Ex.
108, p. 53 of Appendix to Part, 1)."

In his oral testimony petitioner's expert anthropologist, Dr. Omar
C. Stewart, in commenting on the above ducted description by Pike, stated
that Pike had distinguished three groups in the area, the Sandy Lake
group, the Leech Lake group and the Red Lake group. Dr. Stewart testified that the Sandy Lake group would correspond to the Mississippi Band
in this Case (Tr; 44). Dr. Stewart iurther testified that by Red Lake,
in the above quoted section, Lt. Pike had probably meant Red Cedar Lake

(i.e., Lower Red Cedar Lake near Sandy Lake) (Tr. 45}. Dr. Stewart

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 _ 790

identified Pike's Leech Lake group with the Pillagers in this action
(Tr. 47).

Pike reported that the Sandy Lake Chippewas, under Chief Broken
Teeth, had a total of 345 souls and 24 "lodges of the roving bands.§
The Leech Lake Chippewas reportedly had 1120 souls and 65 lodges.
He found five North West Company posts in Royce area 557 at Sandy
Lake, Cedar Lake, Cass Lake, and two at Leech Lake. He defined the
Sioux country, to the south of Royce area 357, commencing at Prairie
du Chien and up the Mississippi River to the River de Corbeau,(Crow
River). up that river to its source, then to the source of the Minnesota
River at Lake Traverse and then west. This approximates the SiouxChippewa boundary as later defined in the August 19, 1825, Prairie du
Chien Treaty (7 Stat. 272).

16. In 1806-1807 George Henry Monk, a British trader at Leech
Lake, mentioned three Chippewa residence sites within Royce area 357
at Sandy Lake, Leech Lake, and Round Lake (north of Lake Winnibigoshish).

17. In the summer of 1820 the Lewis Cass“expedition explored the
sources of the Mississippi River. The expedition, which included Henry R.
Schoolcraft and James Duane Doty, entered Royce area 357 on the east
near Duluth, Minnesota, and traveled as far north and west as Cass Lake
returning by way of the Mississippi River.

Both Schoolcraft and Doty noted five Chippewa settlements. They
were at Leech Lake, Cass Lake, Grand Rapids (Pokegama Falls). Sandy Lake,
and Rice Lake. Of these Indians Doty wrote:

"The chief of the Leech Lake Indians is Es-kee—buc—ec-ose,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 791

of Flat Mouth; the regular chief of those at Sandy Lake, the
Bras Casse, or Broken Arm.

'k'k‘k

"The Sandy Lake tribe of Indians is second in size. It has
eighty-five men, two hundred and forty-three women and children,
besides thirty-five half breeds. They are divided into three
parties, one resides about half way from Sandy Lake to Leech
Lake, at a place called Pac-an-gum—aw, on a small lake through
which the Mississippi runs, and near the boundary between these
and the Leech Lake Indians. These Indians hunt north to Vermillion Lake, the head waters of the Fond du Lac River, and on
which the Northwest Company has an establishment; west to Pancqua-gun-aw_Z§rand Rapids? above mentioned; east to Fond du
Lac River /St. Louis/and down it to the Portage de la Prairie
‘ésavanna F3rtage7} and south to the borders of the Sioux country,
or near Elk R192: /Little Elk River7 which falls into the Mississippi." (Pet. Ex. 96, p. 438)i"

Doty also reported that the men at Sandy Lake annually, in March,
"go to the borders of the Sioux country, and as far beyond as their fears.

will permit them" to hunt beaver. In September they go to Rice Lake
(reported by Doty as twenty to twenty-five miles south of Sandy Lake) to
gather rice (Pet. Ex. 96, pp. 439, 440).

Of the Leech Lake Chippewas Doty wrote:

"At Leech Lake there are more than two hundred men, at

least three hundred and fifty women married to them, and
tabout eleven hundred boys and girls. Their hunting ground

is around the Lake, and extends north to Round Lake, west to"
the Red River, south to the Sioux, and east until they meet
the Indians of Sandy Lake" (Pet. Ex. 96, p. 436).

In'his narrative account of the expedition Schoolcraft wrote:

_ ."The Sandy Lake bank (sic) of Indians consists at present
of one hundred and twenty souls, but it appears to have been
much larger, at a former period....The principal chief is
Bookoosainge-gon, r broken Arm....Their hunting grounds extend east to the Fond du Lac band at the Head of Lake Superior,
north to the Rainy Lakes, west to the Leech Lake tribe, and
south to the Mississippi prairies of the Sioux countries (Pet.
x. 96, p. 152).

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 . 792

Of the Leech Lake Chippewas Schoolcraft wrote:

"The principal chiefs are Eskibugeckoga, or, Flat—Mouth,
Obiguette, or the chief of the Land, and Oole, or the Burnt
.....Their neighbours are the Assenniboins, Ca revolted band
of Sioux,) on the west,--the Upper Red Cedar, and Red Lake
tribes of Chippeways, on the north,--and the Sandy Lake
Indians on the east and south.? (Pet. Ex. 96, p. 165)

18. In 1823 explorers Giacomo Constantine Beltrami and Major Stephen

H. Long were in Royce area 357. Beltrami reported Chippewas at Cass Lake
and numerous "plunderers" (Pi11agers) at Leech Lakel William H. Keating,
who accompanied the Long expedition to the sources of the Mississippi,
described the peripheral boundaries of both the Sioux and Chippewa Tribes
in Minnesota. As defined by Keating the Sioux country was to the south
of Royce area 357. The country of the Chippewa was described:

"From the Sault de St. Marie I§ichigan7 by a slightly
curved line running somewhat south of west, to the Chippewa
river of Lake Pepin; thenge, in a direction west of north,
to Spirit Lake /Mille Lac/ , and thence to the head of the
river Aile de Corbeau /Eeaning the Leaf River as the west
fork q; the Crow‘Win§7? thence to Red River near the Red
Fork éjunction of the Red and Red Lake rivers7; thence to
the confluence of Mouse, (or La Souris,) andfassiniboin
rivers; thence to a point on the Saskatchewan, about one
hundred and twnety miles above its mouth; thence to the
Riviera des Brochets; thence to the Riviera de Sang (Red
River); and thence to the Sault de St. Marie" (Pet. Ex. 89,
Vol. II, p. 152).

The area thus described would eliminate a small portion of the western
Part Of Royce area 357. That portion would be part of the prairies
between Bois des Sioux and the Wild Rice River to the east and the
Turtle River to the west of Red River which Keating called a debatable

land claimed by both Sioux and Chippewa and upon which both frequently

hunted.

8 ind. Cl. Comm, 781 793

19. By the Act of March 3, 1825 (4 Stat. 92, 93) funds were appropriated
I
for the expenses of "holding treaties with the Sioux, Chippenays,
Menomences, Sauks, Foxes, etc....for the purpose of establishing boundaries'and promoting peace, etc. between said tribes."

In August, 1825, a council was held at Prairie du Chien at which

‘over 150 Chippewas were present, including chiefs from Sandy Lake, Leech

Lake Mille Lac and Rice Lake. General William Clark opened the council

by telling the Indians that the United States did not ask anything

from them but rather wished to establish boundaries between the tribes.

' General Clark stated, "We therefore propose to you to make peace together

and to agree upon fixed boundaries for your Country within which each
tribe should hunt & over which, others shall not pass without their
consent." (Pet. Ex. 106, p. 10)

Thereafter various chiefs set forth the limits of the areas claimed
by their respective tribes or bands. sDuring this preliminary discussion,
hau ta we be tea or Broken Tooth, a Sandy Lage chief, described the

claimed lands as commencing "at Rum River, thence to the South fork of

Crow River up it to its source, thence to the fork of Red River, thence

ito Cheyne River & Thence to Devils Lake" (Pet. Ex. 106, p. 15). This

territory would have included all of Royce area 357.

One Sioux chief claimed the Crow Wing River to its source, to -M
Otter Tail Lake. Defendant's expert, Dr. Hickerson, considered that
the Sioux chief probably meant the source of the Leaf River rather than
Crou Wing River. Another Sioux chief claimed from Otter Tail Lake north

t0  ' "" r3 n r ' r. 4'- -- A-. *""' ‘ 1, ' * 3 Lake and th-n-e b3 Pin- Ri¢et LO lhlcn wood River which empt_es

8_Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 794

into Red giver. The only portion of Royce area 357 claimed by the Sioux
was in the southwest corner of the area in the Otter Tail-Pine Lake
region.

After extended negotiations the Sioux and Chippewa finally agreed

on a partial boundary line between their respective territories. The

I‘)

compromise agreement was written into Article 5 of the treaty, which

was signed August 19, 1825, and proclaimed by the President on February 6,
1826 (7 Stat. 272). The treaty, referred to as the Prairie du Chien
Treaty recited in its preamble that its purpose was "to promote peace
among these tribes, and to establish boundaries among them and the

other tribes who live in their vicinity." Article 10 of the treaty
provided that "the United States agree to, and recognize, the preceding
boundaries...." Article 13 stated that "It is understood by all the

tribes, parties hereto, that no tribe shall hunt within the acknowledged

limits of any other without their assent, but it being the sole object

of this arrangement to perpetuate a peace among them, and amicable relations being new restored, the Chiefs of all the tribes have expressed
a determination, cheerfully to allow a reciprocal right of hunting on

the lands of one another, permission being first asked and obtained, as

before provided for."

The line dividing the Chippewa and Sioux territories, as fixed in
Article 5 of the treaty, extended west across Wisconsin to the point on
the eastern border of Minnesota called "Standing Cedar", and then in a
northwesterly direction across Minnesota to Otter Tail Lake (on the

sauthwest border of Royce area 357) and down through the middle of Otter

8 Ind. Cl. Coats. 78]. 795

Tail Lake and "thence in a direct line, so as to strike Buffalo river
half way from its source to its mouth, and down the said river to Red
River,thence descending the Red River to the mouth of Outard or Goose
Creek" which enters the Red River from the west.

The government officials believed that to make the Prairie due,
Chien Treaty binding on all Chippewas, it would be necessary to obtain
the confirmation of the Lake Superior Chippewas, not present at the
treaty negotiations. Article 12 of the treaty therefore provided that
such additional Chippewas as might be thought proper were to be assembled
in 1826 for the purpose of explaining the Objects and advantages of
the Prairie du Chien Treaty and in order that the stipulations thereof

would be observed by the warriors.

The 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty was signed, among others, by

.eight Sandy Lake Chippewas and seven Leech Lake Chippewas.

20. At Fond du Lac,, the Treaty of August 5, 1826 (7 Stat. 290)
was signed with Chippewas from the country between Sault Ste. Marie and
Sandy Lake. By the terms of the treaty, those Chippewas assented to
the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty.

21. On.Aueust 11, 1827 (7 Stat. 303) a treaty was concluded at
Butte des Morts, in the Territory of‘Michigan between the United States
and the Chippewa, Menomonie and winebago Tribes of Indians. Article 1
of the treaty recited that the southern boundary of the Chippewa country,
from Plover Portage of the Wisconsin easterly, had been leFt undefined
by the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty. Therefore, the line as described

in Article 1 was agreed among the Parties to constitute the southerr

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 781 795

boundary of the Chippewa country in that area.

22. (a) In the summer of 1832 Schoolcraft led an expedition to
the sources of the Mississippi River. ‘The expedition found Chippewa
residence sites at Sandy, Leech, Cass and Bowstring Lakes, and Pokegama
River.

Cb) Schoolcraft was accompanied on his expedition by Lt. J. Allen
and a Protestant missionary, WiIliam.I. Boutwell, both of whom left
accounts of the trip referring to the Indian occupation of the area.

Boutwell 1181161 the following Indian populations:

 

Cass Lake 150
Leech Lake 706
Sandy Lake 280
' Ibtal 1,136

Allen listed population figures as follows:

‘ . Leech Lake 836
Sandy Lake 280

Cass Lake 14s

Total 1,264

Schoolcraft's population figures were:

Sandy Lake 315
Pine River and
Cedar Lake 78
Grand Rapids 24
Lake Winnibigoshish 89
Turtle Lake 99
Cass Lake 168
Leech Lake 832
Tbtal 1,605

In his tables of villages and population figures (Def. Ex. 14?, p. 221)
Schoolcraft listed, in his_geographic district from Old Grand Portage to

the Lake of the Woods (American side) four Chippewa villages:

__.__ _ __ _..___ __ _..,__.__._.._._._.__...__.._.____ _._.._._..__._.. __,,___.___.._______ .. __. .._.__ _ ____ .—

797

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781

Old Grand Portage 50
Rainy Lake 159
Vermillion Lake 132
Lake of the Woods 135

(c) In his explorations of the sources of the Mississippi River
Schoolcraft had as his guide a Chippewa from Cass Lake, Yellow Head.
Schoolcraft reported that "The hunting grounds of Yellow Head's band,
embrace the extreme sources of the Mississippi, and his village is the
last fixed location in the assent. Part of them go to Lac Travers,
‘zgemidji Lake? and encamp there, for the purpose of making the winter
hunt. And from this point, they ascend southerly, which carries them
still further into the red deer and stag and hind country of (the absolute head of the Mississippi) Itasca Lake" (Def. Ex. 147, pp. 34, 35).
The principal residence of the Cass Lake band was on a large island
(Grand Island or Colcaspi) where they grew garden vegetables. While
Schoolcra£t's party was at Cass Lake, he learned that several warriors
of that band had gone on an excursion against the Sioux with Leech lake
Indians and under the Leech Lake chiefs.

Cd) Returning to Leech Lake Schoolcraft held a council with the

chief Guelle Plat (Flat Mouth). During the day a number of Indians
arrived from neighboring places including "a part of nine Rainy Lake
Indians under the leadership of a man named'Wai‘Wizhzhi Geezhig, or the
Hole in the Sky. He represented himself and party as part of a small

6-bow-string

band residing at Springinc Lake, in the middle ground between
Lake Winnipec and Rainy Lake" (Def. Ex. 1&7, p. 84).
Concerning this northernmost portion of Royce area 357, defendant°s

expert historian, Dr. Hickerson, wrote, "Again, this band which seemed

8 Ind. c1. Coram. 781 L 798

to come and go in the region between the Mississippi and Rainy River

drainages appears. In this instance, Schoolcraft mentions specifically

‘that they were affiliated with Rainy Lake. That this was a band of the

Rois Forte Chippewa with no stable residence in Area 357 there can be
no doubt" (Def. Ex. 106, p. 166, En. 314).
ES. _The French scientist, I. N. Nicollet, made an exploratory

expedition to Lake Itasca in the summer of 1836. He reported that

his Chippewa guide was well acquainted with the country he visited since
he was in the habit of hunting over it. West of Bemidji Lake he encountered.ten.canoes filled with Chippewas from Lahe Winnibigoshish who
were on their way to the upland lakes to gather wild rice. Defendant's p
expert historian, Dr. Hickerson, considers these lakes to have been Rice
and Upper Rice Lakes, about the sources of the Wild Rice River. Nicollet
reported that Chief Flat Mouth had returned to Leech Lake from a visit

of three months to the British trading posts (apparently at Rainy Lake)

to obtain ammunition for use in warfare against the Sioux. The Missionary

-Boutwell also reported in May, 1836, that Big Cloud had been to the

British post at Rainy Lake obtaining liquor.

24. The 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty did not entirely achieve its
purpose of assuring peace between the Sioux and Chippewa for there are
numerous accounts of outbreaks of hostility between various bands of
those tribes. Chippewa war parties raided south and west into the Sioux
country while Sioux parties also invaded Chippewa country. ‘While there
was no general outbreak, the small raiding parties made it an uneasy

"peace" which prevailed in the area in the 1830's. Eoutwell on December 21,

8 Ind. Cl. Comrn. 781 799

1834, reported in his journal that the Sioux were reported ready to attack
the Chippewa if they approached Swan Lake (southwest of Royce area 357, but

north of the Article 5, Prairie du Chien line). In June, 183%, Edward F.

iE1y reported that seven Chippewas from Gull Lake and one Sioux were killed

in an action. Taliaferro recorded in his journal on March 1, 1835,
that Chief Hole in the Day told him the battle took place on Sioux
ground half a day march from Otter Tail River and involved Sandy Lake
and Croh Island Chippewas.

25. In 1835 the Prairie du Chien Treaty line was surveyed as far
as Otter Tail Lake. It was thought that by marking the boundary line
between the Sioux and Chippewa the recurring hostilities might be ended.

26. In 1836 Nicollet reported that Flat_Mouth had been obtaining
ammunition from the British for use in warfare against the Sioux. In
the winter of 1836 Boutwell reported that Sioux had stolen provisions
from a Chippewa hunter's camp and in 1837 he reported that Sioux fired
upon a Chippewa lodge at Leech Lake killing one.

27. In 1848 a geologist, David Dale Owen, was in the Crow Wing
River and Otter Tail Lake-Red River areas in the south and extreme west
of Royce area 357. He met a small party of Pillagers on the upper waters
05 Red River (Otter Tail River).in search oi fish. Upon returning to
Cass Lake, Owen reported that there were gardens of corn and potatoes
cultivated by the Indians above the mouth of Turtle River. Farther up,
he reported, the river would through rice fields amounting in all to
several hundred acres of which the produce of scarcely an acre was

gathered by the Indians.

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 800

28. Major Samuel Wood, in his report of a military expedition in
l8&9, reported meeting a war party of Pillager Chippewas at Elbow Lake
(south of Royce area 357). He stated the Fillagers were well pleased
with their home on Otter-tail Lake and were friendly with the Mississippi
Chippewas and Winnebagos (Def. Ex. 162).

29. By letter dated June 4, 1847, Messrs. Verplank and Mix were
appointed Commissioners to negotiate treaties with the Chippewa Indians
of Lake Superior and the Upper Mississippi. The instructions in that
letter from William Nedill, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, stated that
much of the territory both east and west of the Mississippi was almost,

if not entirely, unoccupied by the Indians. Medill went on to write

that:

"So far as I am aware it has been the impression that all
the unceded lands of the Chippewas of Lake Superior and the
Upper Mississippi as well as those east as those west of
that river, were the common property of the whole, but, as
you are aware, it has recently been represented that this
is not the case, and that different bands claim exclusive
title to different portions of it .... The enclosed copy
of a memorandum furnished by Mr. Rice, in which it is represented that there are three divisions or parties of the
Chippewas, each composed of different bands, and each
claiming a separate and exclusive interest in different
portions of the lands —-contains the only information on
the subject, in the possession of the Dept. other than
what may be derived from the treaties and the manner in
which the annuities have been paid .... If possible to
avoid it, as it is a leading object with the Department
to consider the Chippewas, and to have them think themselves one united people, with possessionsand interest
in common, especially for the future." (Pet. Ex. 31)

50. In a letter dated February 12, 1848, Henry M. Rice wrote the

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, William Medill, that "the Chippewas that

801

do not receive annuities are divided into bands and each band owns land
separate, and are very tenacious of their boundaries, The Pillagers

number 280 men. Vermillion Lake Band 80 men, Rainy Lake (South of the

7 Line) 75 men, Lake Winnepie band 73 men, Cass Lake 35, Red Lake Band 123

men--the Band on Red river about 60 men," (Def. Ex. 158)
31. In l8A7 Schoolcraft, in a census report of the Algonquin group,

listed the following divisions under the heading "Chippewas of the

Upper Mississippi":

Sandy Lake 267 souls
Milles Lac 250 "
_ Lower Red Cedar Lake 72 "
Crow Wing River and
Otter Tail Lake 233 "
Gull Lake 204 "
Leech Lake 800 "
Upper Red Cedar Lake
and Itasca Lake 180 ' "
Puckaguma Falls 100 "
Little Lake Winnipec 200 ".
Red Lake £00 "
Total 2,706 "

He listed the geographical position of the Red Lake as "West Height of

Land" while the other localities were listed as "Upper Mississippi."
(Def. E21. 138, p. 458).

- 32. Trading posts were established in Royce area 357 to take advantage of the fur trade and many of the Indian centers of population
existed about the posts; Under date of November 19, 1836, the Superintendent of Indian Agency for the Territory of Hisconsin granted a trading

license to William a. aitken with posts at:

Leech Lake
Gull Lake

8 Ind. Cl. COEn. 781 802

Upper Red Cedar Lake (Cass Lake)
Red Lake (not in Royce area 357)
Rum River (not in Royce area 357)
Fond du Lac (not in Royce area 357)
Swan River

Rum Riber

Sandy Lake

Mills Lacs

Sur Lac Winnepie (Winnibigoshish)
Lac Platt (Flat Lake)

These localities were also covered by a license which had been granted
to Aitken on July 31, 1835. Also under date of March 16, 1838, licenses
were granted to Aitken for posts at:

Sandy Lake and its dependencies
Leech Lake

Red Lake (not in Royce area 357)
Lake Winnipec (Winnibigoshish)
Swan Lake (not in Royce area 357)
Gull Lake

Taliaferro in his Journal entry for January 18, 1828, listed, among others,
a post located at Leaf River and an unlicensed post at Whorttleberry Lake
(Wild Rice Lake).

A report of licenses granted within the La Pointe subagency during
the year ending September 30, 1840, included posts at Leech Lake, Gull

Lake, Sandy Lake, Lake Winnepeg, Red Cedar Lake and Mille Lac (Def. Ex.

157).

‘ . .

33. According to a report by Governor Alexander Ramsey in 1850 the.

Chippewa in the general area were divided into three groups:
(1) Mississippi Chippewa -1100 souls
Principal residences at Sandy, Gull and
Mille Lac Lakes and Rabbit River

(2) The Pillagers p 1050 souls

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 803

Principal residences at Leech and Otter
Tail Lakes

(3) The Northern or Red Lake Division - 1200 souls
Principal residences at Pembina and at Red,
Cass and Winnibigoshish Lakes

Governor Ramsey commented that this last division "embraced all the remaining bands, dwelling in the United States, which have descended from
the main trunk of that tribe, who .... spread along the south shore
of Lake Superior, and from La Pointe scattered over the country of their
present occupancy by way of the St. Louis river and Sandy lake.
"The fact of their receiving no annuities draws a distinct line
of demarcation between this and the other divisions of the Ojibwa
zChippewé7." (Def. Ex. 142, p. 647). Governor Ramsey also went on to
group generally the Red Lake and Pembina groups, which he stated derived
their subsistence chiefly from agriculture and winter buffalo hunts west
of the Red River. He described the Cass and Rinnepeg‘Z§innigiboshish7
Lake bands, which he estimated 500, as living mostly by fishing
and hunting. Governor Ramsey noted that the Pillager head chief, Flat
Mouth, had influence over these groups and their chiefs had agreed to
abide by his experience and advice.
In describing the Pillagers, Governor Ramsey stated that only in
their distinctive name did they differ from the Chippewa of the Mississippi
qand Lake Superior. They "spring from the same stock, speak in every
respect the same language." (Def. Ex. 142, p. 646).
A fourth division of the Chippewa was described by Gov. Ramsey as

the Sug—wun—dug—ah—win-in-e—wag which inhabited the north coast of Lake

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 804

Superior, within the lines of Minnesota. This group was the "Men who
live amongst the thick fir woods”, the ”Bois Fort" or "Hard Woods." He
listed their number at 800, with villages at Rainy and Vermilion Lakes.
Their hunting ground, according to Gov. Ramsey, stretched from the Lake
of the Woods to the mouth of Pigeon River.

.Covernor Ramsey in a letter to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
wrote, on July 16, 1850, "The Pillager band of Chippewas are admitted
to be proprietors of all the Chippewa country lying west of a straight
line'drawn from the mouth of Long Prairie river to that point on the
Mississippi, marked on Nicol1et's map as ‘Eagle's Nest'" (Def. Ex. 174).
Eagle's Nest on Nicollet's Map (Def. Ex. 154) is about 22 miles east of
Leech Lake.

34. In 1850 there were farms run by the government farmers at
Gull Lake and Rabbit River, and another at Cass Lake run by the

missionaries. In 1853 Indian agent D. B. Harriman reported that there

.were farms on the Crow Wing River ten miles from its mouth and at Gull,

Sandy. and Mille Lac Lakes.

35. Petitioners‘ expert ethnologist, Dr. Stewart, listed the centers
of population for the Chippewas of Royce area 357 as of 1857. His 10calities, twenty-seven in number, were concentrated nainly in the central
and southern portions of the area. His northernmost localities were at
Turtle Lake and Lake Bowstring and his westernmost locations were at
Otter Tail Lake on the south border and Rice Lake to the north.

36. Beginning in 1785 and continuing until the policy of the United

States of making treaties with Indian tribes was ended by the Act of

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 805

March 3, 1871 (16 Stat. 566), Chippewa Indians were parties to some 44
treaties with the United States. Although the names "Chippewa Nation"

or "Chippewa Tribe" were used in some of the early treaties made with
Chippewa Indians, they were never organized as a single political entity
with a central authority to act for all Chippewas, but were divided into
various bands which in many instances were grouped under larger divisions
or sub—tribes occupying separate and distinct areas of land in the present
States of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota and North Dakota.

Following the Prairie du Chien Treaty of 1825, the United States dealt
with various Chippewa bands for cessions of territory north of the ChippewaSioux line which had been defined in Article 5 of that Treaty.

37. By the Treaty of July 29, 1837 (7 Stat. 536) the "Chippewa
Nation" ceded to the United States a large area in eastern Minnesota
and Central Wisconsin (Royce area 242, Minnesota I, Wisconsin I). The
gtreaty was signed by Indians representing bands from Leech Lake, Gull
Lake. Swan River, Mille Lac, Sandy Lake and Red Cedar Lake, among others.
The Prairie du Chien Sioux—Chippewa boundary formed a portion of the
southern boundary of the ceded area although the entire area extended
to the east and southeast beyond the eastern terminus of the Prairie du
Chien line. Royce area 242 adjoins the subject Royce area 357 on the
southeast and includes the southern half of Mille Lac.

38. The Treaty of October 4,1842 (7 Stat. 591) with the Chippewa
Indians of the Mississippi and Lake Superior provided for the cession to
the United States of territory in Hisconsin adjacent to and along the

South shore of Lake Superior, designated Royce area 251, Hisconsin I.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 805

Among the Indian signatories were Chippewas from Crow wing River, Sandy
Lake, Gull Lake, Red Cedar Lake, Pokegommaw and Nille Lac. Article III
of the treaty provided:

It is agreed by the parties to this treaty, that whenever

the Indians shall be required to remove from the ceded

district all the unceded lands belonging to the Indians of

Fond du Lac, Sandy Lake, and Mississippi bands. shall be the
common property and home of all the Indians, party to this

treaty. (7 Stat. 591).

59. The Treaty of August 2, 1847, (9 Stat.~904l was concluded
with the Chippewa Indians of the Mississippi and Lake Superior by which
they ceded to the United States an area south of Gull Lake in Royce area
357 extending from the mouth of the Crow Wing River and along the
Mississippi south to the Prairie du Chien Sioux-Chippewa boundary and
west to the Long Prairie River. That cession is Royce area 268,
Minnesota 1. Article 2 of that Treaty recited that the signatory
Chippewa Indians also ceded "all the interest and claim which the
Indians, parties to this treaty, have in a tract of land lying upon
andrprth of Long Prairie River, and called One'day's Hunt; but, as the
boundary-line between the Indians, parties to this treaty, and the
Chippewa Indians, commonly called 'Pi1lagers,' is indefinite, it is
agreed that before the United States use or occupy the said tract of
land north of Long Prairie River, the bonndary—line between the said
tract and the Pillager lands shall be defined and settled to the satisfaction of the Pillagers." (9 Stat. 904). The treaty was sighed by

Chippewa Indians from Gull Lake, Sandy Lake, Rice Lake, Crow Wing,

Pukaguno, and Red Cedar Lake, among others.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 807

40. By the Treaty of August 21, 1847 (9 Stat. 908), the Pillager
Band of Chippewa Indians'ceded to the United States a tract south of
Royce area 357 and adjoining Royce area 268 on the west. The area
extended from the Long Prairie River on the east and south to the Otter
Tail Lake on the west and1fm2Leaf River on the north. It is Royce
area 269, Minnesota I. The treaty was signed by Leech‘Lake Chippewas
twith Flat Nouth signing as first chief.

41. By the treaty of July 23, 1851 (10 Stat. 949) the Sisseton
and“Wahpeton Bands of Sioux ceded to the United States a large area
in South Dakota, Minnesota and Iowa, designated Royce area 289, North
Dakota and South Dakota 1, Einnesota I and Iowa I. ,This tract covered
all the country immediately south of Royce area 357 and the adjoining
1847 Chippewa cessions, Royce areas 268 and 269.

42. (a) On February 17, 1855, the President designated George W.

Manypenny, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, "to conduct the negotiations

for the extinguishment of the title of the Chippewa Indians to their

lands in Minnesota Territory, the State of Wisconsin" (Def. Ex. 3).

- (b) .A delegation of Kinnesota Chippewa Indians had already arrived

'in'Washington, D. C. and their first informal talk or interview with

Commissioner Manypenny was held on February 14, 1855. The spokesman
for the Indians was Hole-in-the—Day, who represented the Mississippi
bands of Chippewas.

(C) On February 15, 1955, a second interview was held with the

331
I00LI‘
(3
Q:
N
r---‘
('0
I

same delegates present as on the rrevious day and in edditio

gates of the Pill agar and Efinnepec Luanda, including C-'r__'7.r3.f F1at=1::;ut.'.i.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 _ 808

Flatmouth spoke as head chief of the Pillager baud while Hole~in—the

Day said the Pillagers being the parties addressed this evening, he did
not feel it incumbent upon his band to take any part in the discussion.
It was for the Pillagers to respond to the remarks of the Commissioner.

"The Commissioner said that his friend Hole-in—the—Day
was mistaken. He did not think the Chippewas had any
distinct interest, and he therefore addressed himself not

to the Pillagers alone, but to the Chippewa nation.

*'k'k

"The Commissioner said he was fully aware of the re.mote position of the Pillagers, but did not think there
existed any rival interest between the different bands
of the Chippewa nation . . .. He addressed them all together, because he could recognize among them no separate
or rival interests." (Def. Ex. 5, p. 52-53)

To this Flatmouth replied,

"There is truth father, in everything you have said.
We feel that it is all true. We should have no conflicting interest; but we are in this respect like the
white. We have separate and distinct interests. We know
our own possessions; we know what property we*own ....."

(Emphasis supplied) (Def. Ex. 5, p. 54).

 

Commissioner Manypenny told the delegation that he was aware of
their separate interests and did not wish to disturb them but the
"Pillage: and the Mississippi bands must determine the lines of their
boundaries. He had no desire to confoud their respective interests.

He wished them to define, among themselves, their boundaries, and to
say what quantity of land they wished reserved and where." (Def. Ex. 5,
P- 53).

(d) The next morning, February 17, 1855, Commissioner Manypenny

met with the Pillager and winnepec delegation. Chief Flatmouth requested

8 ind. C1. Comm. 781 309

reserves from the land to be ceded by them at Lake Winnepec, Cass Lake
and Leech Lake. .£latmouth declined Commissioner Eanypenny's offer of
a reserve at Otter Tail Lake.

at 2;30 P.E. on the same day the Mississippi band resumed its
interview and presented a map, drawn by Captain Eastman, showing the
country owned by them. (This map has never been located). After Commissioner Manypenny had presented the government's offer, Chief Hole-inthe-Dap said: "We will give a final answer on Monday next. I would like
to know how the Commissioner has got along with the Pillagers." (Def.
Ex. 5. p. 71).

At 7 o'clock that evening the Pillager and Winnepec bands resumed
their talks and presented a counter proposal which was accepted.

At the council sessions with the Mississippi band on February 19th
and 20th the Indians presented their demands and Commissioner Manypenny
took the matter under advisement. On February 21st both the Pillager
and Mississippi bands met, and a proposed treaty was read. Hole-in-the
'Day interposed certain objections concerning the apportionment of the
purchase price for pnrposes of hiring teachers, blacksmiths, laborers,
farmers, etc. The treaty was redrafted with "trifling verbal alterations" '
and read to the council of Pillager and Mississippi Chippewas at a
_meeting on Febrnary 22nd. Both bands agreed to the terms, and the
treaty was signed.

Ce) Hole4in-the-Day never specified the reserves which the
Mississippi band desired out of the area to be coded. However, Commissioner

Manypenny provided for five areas to be set apart for the permanent homes

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 . 810

of the Mississippi bands of Chippewa Indians. Those areas, as described

in Article 2 of the treaty were:

Mille Lacs (Royce Area 454)
Rabbit Lake (Royce Area 456)
Gull Lake (Royce Area 453)
Pokegama Lake (Royce Area 457)
Sandy and Rice Lakes (Royce Area 455)

By Article 2 of the treaty three reserves were set aside for the
use of the Pillager and Lake winnibigoshish bands. These reserves, which

were the areas requested by Flatmouth during the negotiations were:

Leech Lake (Royce Area 558)
Lake Winnibigoshish (Royce Area 359)
Cass Lake (Royce Area 360)

(f) The consideration set forth in Article 5 of the treaty was

divided between the Mississippi bands and the Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish hands.

a. The Mississippi bands were to receive:

$10,000 in goods
$50,000 "to adjust and settle their present
.engagements."

$20,000/year for 20 years

$ 5,000 for construction of a road from the mouth
C of Rum River to Mille Lac

and a quantity of land, not be exceeded 300 acres
to be ploughed.

b. The Pillage: and Lake Winniboghish bands to
receive:

$10,000 in goods
$40,000 "to adjust and settle their present
engagements."

$10,666.66/year for 30 years

$ 8,000 (in goods)/year for 30 years

$ 4,000 (for welfare)/year for 30 years

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 781 811

Not to exceed $3,000/year for 20 years for education
$ 300 (powder)/year for 5 years
$ 100 (shot and lead)/year for 5 years
$ 100 (gilling twine)/year for 5 years
$ 100 (tobacco)/year for 5 years
Hire of 3 laborers at Leech Lake, 2 laborers at
Lake Winnibigoshish and l laborer at Cass Lake —
. for five years

- Expense of 2 blacksmiths and supplies therefor
for 15 years
$ 200 in grubbing—hoes and tools
$15,000 for opening a road from Crow Wing to

' Leech Lake '

Plough 200 acres at Leech Lake reservation; 50
acres at Lake Winnibigoshish; 25 acres at Cass Lake
A saw mill with portable grist mill and expense of
operation therefor for 10 years.

In accordance with Hole-in-the Day's request,-the Mississippi bands
were permitted, by Article &, to employ their own farmers, mechanics and

teachers. By Article 5 it was provided that the annuities due the _

“Mississippi bands were to be distributed at one of their reservations

and the annuities due the Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands were to
be distributed at Leech Lake.
(g) The Treaty of February 22, 1855, was ratified on March 3,
1855, and proclaimed April 7, 1855 (10 Stat. 1165).
4i. After the ratification of the 1855 Treaty, the Chippewa

delegations met with Commissioner Manypenny for the purpose of adjusting
the Indians’ accounts with the traders and providing for paying those
obligations as provided in Article 3 of the treaty.‘ The Mississippi
bands met on March 8, 1855, and went over each of the traders‘ claims
against that band. On the afternoon of the same day the Pillager bands
likewise reviewed the list of claims against that band. On March 10,
1855, both bands met with Commissioner Manypenny to make requests concerning payment of the money due them. Flatmouth requested $10,000,

a Ind. c1. Comm. 781   812

5

to be placed in the hands of Agent Harriman,'Ujbuy goods and presents
for his people. Flatmouth stated, "We have faith in our agent .... He

can satisfy us —- I speak only for the Pillagers. I don't know what

the other bands want. They can speak for themselves" (Def. Ex. 5, p. 146).

44. Petitioners‘ expert ethnologist, Dr. Stewart, testified that

Indiana, the Mississippi bands and the Pillager bands. He stated, "there
are really two groups, the Pillagers and the Mississippis. Among the
Pillagers were the Otter Tail Pillagers, the Cass Lake Pillagers, the
Leech Lake Pillagers, and the Winnibigoshish Pillagers and others," and
that "In the Mississippi Band there were a number of such groups like
that." (Tr. 25)i

45. heEendant's expert historian, Dr. Hickerson, was of the opiniorx
that Royce area 357 was occupied, in aboriginal days, by three divisions
of Chippewas:

a. The Mississippi bands occupied the area designated sub-area
357a on his map 2, (facing p. 286, Def. Ex. 106),, He described their
main hunting territories to the southwest of Sandy Lake, around lakes
and streams on both sides of the Mississippi as far as the junction of
the Crow‘Wing River. He listed the chief Mississippi band locations at
Pine River, Whitefish Lake, Cedar Lake, Rabbit Lake and River, Gull Lake,
Crow Island, and Rice Lake with some use north of Sandy Lake as far as
Trout Lake, just east of Grand Rapids (Def, gx, 106, P, 237)_

b. The Pillagers, Dr. Hickerson reported, occupied sub—area

357b, on his map 2, with their main hunting area to the west and south8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 813

west of Leech Lake, extending to the woodland rim.in western Minnesota,and including the woodlands, lakes, and streams of the Mississippi and Red

River drainage areas between Otter Tail Lake, through Two Lakes, to the

Upper Wild Rice River. He located their chief villages on the shores of

Leech Lake and on Bear Island in the Lake with outposts at Leech Lake

River and Oak Point (just east of Eagles Nest) (Def. Ex. 106, pp. 288, 289).
c. The Northern bands, according to Dr. Hickerson, used and occupied the territory designated sub-area 357c on map 2. The members of this

Qhippewa division lived at Cass and winnibigoshish Lakes and hunted along '

the Mississippi to its sources and over the height of land to the head~waters of the Wild Rice River, including Rice Lake and Upper Rice Lake,

as well as around Bowstring and Round Lakes (Def. Ex. 106, p. 289).

46. The dommission finds that within Royce area 357 there were,
hi aboriginal times, two divisions or bands of Chippewa Indians each
of which held Indian title to a separate and distinct area of land.’
These two divisions or hands were (1) the Mississippi bands and (2) the
Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands.

47. The Commission finds that the defendant did not recognize title
in either theIMississippi bands or the Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish
bands to any portion of Royce area 357. b

48. The Commission finds that the Mississippi bands of ghippewas
Indians, from a time prior to the United States’ acquisition of the area
until ceded by the Treaty of February 22, 1855, held Indian title, through

exclusive use and occupation in Indian fashion, to an area of land within

Royce area 35? described as follows:

.814 _ _ ‘ _ _ . . o _‘_o » o
' ~:r:n3;sr .tt ‘nor T1W*'*1lOE? Cd? 11:: CYTKJ Vftngj ar.+ 521:: lSEul[W»l
_ “J . I

-+
\.

}3f*- _
’" “ K‘-C;-'.n§.3 River to the j11I‘.C“L.'i{‘I‘1 of thé.

I-13'v<';rs; ‘i?:-;:‘-('2: up ‘Lh-.': ere.-.
thence in a rorthcnstcrly

river with the Long lrairie River:
direction to the point where the Eississippi River and White
Oak Lake join, about 470 18’ N. latitude, 930 46‘ 30” W.
longitude; thence in an easterly direction to the town of
Marble, Minnesota; thcnce in a southeasterly direction to
the southeast corner of the tract coded by the Treaty of
February 22, 1855 (Royce area 357); and thence in a westerly
direction to the point of beginning.

&9. The Commission finds that the Pillngcr and Lake winnibigoshish
bands of Chippewa Indians, from a time prior to the United States‘ acquisition of the area until ceded by the Treaty of February 22, 1855,
held Indian title, through exclusive use and occupation in Indian fashion,
to an area of land within Royce area 357 described as follows:

Beginning at the junction of the Crow Wing and Long
““*‘“‘“ “’ Lheuce in a nortneasrerly direction to the

point where the Mississippi River and white Oak Lake join,
about 47° 18' N. latitude, 93° 46' 30" W. longitude; thence
in a north-northwesterly direction to the town of Big Fork,
Minnesota; thence in a westerly direction to the northern
extremity of Turtle Lake;_thence in a west-southwesterly
direction to the mouth of Wild Rice River; thence up Red .
River of the North, to the mouth of Buffalo River; thence
up said Buffalo River to a point half way between its
source and its mouth; thence in a southeasterly direction
to the southwestern extremity of Otter-Tail Lake; thence
.L;hrough said Lake, to thesonrcczaf Leaf River; thence
down said Leaf River to its junction with the Crow Wing
River; thence down said Crow wing river to the point of
beginning. a

50. The Commission finds that it has not been establishcd by substantial evidence that at the time of the 1855 Treaty either the
Mississippi bands or the Pillnger and Lake Winnibigoshish bands held
original Indian title to the remaining portions of ?ojce arca 357.

8/ B73:’‘‘-‘. 33. '1..'.T.TE°

un...-..—- ...a..;.....--.ua-g- --an.-.-..-.. up-__-1.-.-—.-q— ............___._..__..__,.__..___

. ¢ ._ 
' - .' ' -' 1"‘ . ' .' T’ ’
Cf‘..L.'.‘;. Lu." ‘: .x:.:_‘‘...-_?‘

_ l'9'I( g 153*‘: 95/ 12.1, 3‘... r...‘-...:.:_IJ’

1--v;-A--u-...¢--o .—cu—..- - 

Associate fcxxissioncr

