7 Ind. Cl. COn4o 725 739
BZEORE TE-IE II‘3DI}1.N CL.-’l.IE~IS COT:'=.MISSICE=I

THE DUEAMISH TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Petitioner,
v.  taetet Nte.C _'1'o9

THE UNITE STATES 0:: Armlci,

 _

Defendant.
Decided: July 6, 1959

Appearances:
Frederick tr. Post and

Malcolm S . Mel. eod
Attorneys for-Petitioner.

Donald.R. Marshall, with

whom was Mr. Assistant:

Attorney General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for.Defendant.

OPDTIOIJ OF THE C01*EI~i'ISS ION
Holt, Commissioner, deiivered the opinion oi‘ the Commission.

Bypa prior determination this Commission found.that petitioner, The
Duwamish Tribe, had.held Indian title to a certain area of land in what is
now the State of Washington and that said title in the Indians had been
extinguished.by the Treaty of January 22, 1855, 12 Stat. 92?, IE Kapp. 669,

wherein the lands were ceded to the United States (5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 117, 131).

7 Ind. Cl. Coma. 725 7110
 Cozmission further held therein that the effective date of said 3.855
treaty was March 8, 1859. This trial has been held to determine the value

of said lands as of March 8, 1:35 .

The boundaries of the lands found to have been exclusively used and
occupied by the Dunamish Indians are fully set forth in Finding 20 of our
prior findir"s of fact (5 —Ind. Cl. Comm. 117, 131). Generally speaking the
lands, which will hereinafter be referred to as the Dux-Iaraish tract, or the
subject tract, are located in what is now King County in the State of Washington.‘ The subject tract is bounded on the west by Puget Sound and on the east
by Lake Washington. Elliott Bay adjoms the tract and the Ci y of Seattle
now takes in a large amount of the lands of the tract. The Duna.mish River
flows north through the tract and its mouth is at iott Bay.

'Ihe Dunamish Tract consists of 514,790 acres of land. Of this total
acreage the tract has been classi_‘-"ied as containing 7,555 acres of bottom or potential agricultural land; 31,350 acres of accessible timberland;
114,525 acres of inaccessible tini'oerland3 and 1,360 acres of inland water.

The parties agree that as of March 8, l859, the highest and best use of
the subject tract was for timber production and that as of that date there
were no minerals of any importance known to be present on the tract.

The Puget Sound region was sparsely settled as of 1859. The first
American settlers in this region arrived in 18115, and in 1851 they established the first Puget Sound town, Tmrr.-zater, about 50 miles soouthz-zest
of the Du:—:am:1.sh tract. In l85l the first settlers arrived in the subject
tract. The plat of the town of Seattle was filed in 1.853 and King County

by 1660 had a population of 302. The slowness of settlement in the Puget

7 Ind. Cl. Cox?-:7‘-.. 725 7&1
Sound area prior to the l880‘s has been attributed to the inaccessibility
of the region and the lack of transportation facilities. As of l859 all

the settlements of western Washington were virtually dependent upon water
transportation there being few roads and no railroads. The Northern

Pacific Railroad was not completed until l883 and did not reach the Puget

Sound area until 188?.

.64Timber production was the main industry in the subject tract from
practically the first settlement therein. Henry L. Yesler built a steampowered sat-mill on the north shore of Elliott Bay in 1852. This mill had
a capacity of l0,000 to 15,000 board feet per day and for years furnished
employment to the local inhabitants. It was the only mill in King 0ounty
 1860. 00 Eparly timber operations were crude and for a long period the

timber first cut was that along the waters of the Sound  those streams

whichprpcouldpbe;pised to driire logs. Timber operators usually selected

"only the best stands of trees for a distance of only one to two miles

 Until. the coming of the railroad making transportation to the

.w...

t eastern’  of the country feasible and profitable and until ilunfoering

operations;  the __ Qreat Ipakes area and inpthe south  
rg1ar_ketf for Washington timber ‘HE-IaS_liIZ1ited to local derand and to far’
Oatiayimar!-cets"such as California, South 13.merica,.Hawaii and the Orient...
The only means of transporting the lurberf at thattime was by ship.

it The witnesses for the parties agree that as of the valuation date

there was no market for the subject tract. Fr. James A. Crutchfield,

a professor of economics, appeared as a witness for petitioner. 1%.

“'£i"¢3..5ii'-"S

'-..
'9':
' £"'

.

 

7 Ind. 01. Cornrn. 725’ _ 7&2

Crutchfield utilized two methods of valuing the tract and arrived at

an opinion of value under each method. In his first approach this

W

witness said the term."market valuation" referred.to the values which

‘could be imputed to the lands under commercial utilization of their

marketable products. In applying this method the witness states he

followed the procedure outlined in_the earlier cases (The Nooksack Tribe

 

V. United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 578; and Huckleshoot Tribe v. United

   

States, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 608). By the first approach he computed what

he considered to be the value of the timber on the subject tract based

on an average stand of lh,3GO'board ft. BM per acre valued at an assumed
valuation figure of $1.00 per 1000 BM in 1902 discounted to 1859 at 85%.
To this figure was added an additional 60 cents per acre representing

his opinion of a residual value of the Duramish tract for agriculture.
Combining the timber value and the agricultural value, Hr. Crutchfield
was of the opinion that the lands in the subiect tract were worth $S.h6
per acre. iThis Commission in the Nooksack and Muckleshoot cases, supra,
stated that tr. L Crutchi‘ie1d‘s opinion could not be given much weight
under this approach because "his method of evaluation is not in accordance
with legally’approved.standards but rather involves methods based on
Ccnjecture and speculaoion, which methods have been.specifically'rejected
by the courts and this Commission."' For the same reasons the Commission
Can give little weight to the witness‘ opinion of value in this case.

Petitioner's witness in his second method of evaluating the land

arrived at an.opinion based on a "subsistence valuation". By this

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 725 i 7h3

approach he was of the opinion that the net subsistence value of the
Duwanish Tract was $6Ch,OOC.OO. The Commission refused to give any
weight to an opinion of value based on such a method in the Nooksack
and.Huckleshoot cases, supra, and will not do so in this case since

the approach is entirely theoretical and is not based upon any judicially
accepted method of evaluating land. Hr. Crutchfield also would increase
the valuations by multiplying his appraisal figures by*a 2.? factor,

which, he claims, should be allowed to provide equal purchasing power

in terms of current dollars. Such a method of increasing the valuation

 

amount was denied in the Nocksack and Huckleshoot cases, supra, and is,

alsophereinpdenied.

@Mr. C. Marc Miller, a qualified appraiser, testified as an expert
witnesson'raluefor defendant. Mr. Miller also prepared a comprehensive
‘appraisalreport (Def. Ex. 205-A). Defendant's witness used the market

value approach to determine what in his opinion das the fair market_value

of the subject tract in 1859. Lacking conparable sales this witness

ptéotiiied the fair market value is arrived at by taking intopconsidera-p

tion all natters that a hypothetical purchaser and seller would have
in mind such as condition of the area, demand, population,—and settlement. F . Miller classified most of the subject tract as timberland,

r‘: "

accessible or inaccessible, a small portion as potential agricultural land and a small part as inland water. This witness took into consideration

the various elements to be studied in_evaluating land such as soil,

 

topography, transportation, climate, markets, demand, settlements and
highest and best use of the subject tract f r which it was then ada_tahle
or likely to be needed in the reasonably near future. Kr. iiller was
of the opinion that the hypotheti.al prospective purchaser of this tract
would realize that only through the resale or use of these lands could he
expect to recover his original.investment, taxes, fire protection, ade
ministrative costs and costs of resale and he would expect to realize
interest upon his investment for the period that the investment remained
unliquidated.

Defendant‘s appraiser felt that.a hypothetical prospective purchaser
would have totad that approximately 7535 of the subject tract, that is

the accessible timberland and the potential agricultural land, belonged.

in the most desirable category} Zhe purchaser, according to Mr. Miller,

rwould have expected to dispose of’the most desirable land'within‘l0 years,

or in an.average of 5 years, and dispose of the remaining 25% (the ine
accessible and least desirable) in 10 to 30 years, or an average of 20
YParS. Mr. Miller has of the opinion that the fair market value of the
Dusamish tract as of March 8, 1859, was $21,000.00 or apprdximataky

h0 cents per acre.

Defendant's expert witness in.arriving at his evaluation figure
concluded that the hypothetical willing seller and willing'buyer would
have recognized “that the price at which comparable government lands
could be secured would effectively establish a ceiling on the price the

buyer could hope to secure from the resale“ of the Duwamish lands, that

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 725 7hS

is, $1.25 per acre. Using this $1.25 per acre figure as a ceiling 1~‘;'r.
Miller calculated what in his opinion an investor ‘would have paid for

the subject tract. I*I':1£e the avai1abi_ity of Government lands and the
quantity subject to disposal in the area would be ‘taken into consideration
by a prospective purchaser it does not follow that the price setifor

such Government lands would result in a ceiling which one might expect

to apply to all lands in the area. There is evidence in this case of

some sales of select tirzberlands in excess of $1.25 per acre at or
reasonably new the time of valuation.

A prospective purchaser in 1859 would have recognized the fact that
the subject tract V.-bias favorably situated on and around Elliott Bay, said
to be the best ,‘ and best protected,‘ deep water harbor on Puget Sound;
that the Duvramish River flowed through the tract which with its tributaries, periodically gave access to a large interiorlregion; that along
the. Sound there was a great amount of other competitive accessible
timberland to supply the markets that than eicisted for the region; and

that there was no immediate value for the inaccessible timber. ”The ‘same

; prospective purchaser would also consider the fact that lumbering operations

had been in progress successfully on the tract smce 1853 sup-pl:;ing"thei
limited local demand and the rea 3:’ markets that then existed; that the

town of Seattle 1-Ihichhad been platted. in“l8S3 uas desirably located -on"
Elliott Bag: and could be expected to develop; and that prospects for the
subject tract, with 75,93 of it considered to belaccessible, were much better

than for many other areas in the Puget Sound region.

 

7 Ind. Cl. com. 725 ‘ » 7&6

The Comnission'based upon the findings of fact herein made and the
record as a whole and giving due consi’erotion to the size of the tract,
its location and accessibility, concludes that the fair market value of
the Duwamish tract on March 8, 1859, was $7h,OC0,00, or at the average
rate of approximately $1.35 per acre.

The case will now proceed to a determination of the consideration
paid to the Duwamish Indians, if any, under the provisions of the Treaty
of January 22, l855: supra; whether the consideration so paid, if any,
was unconscionable, and, if so, what offsets are chargeable against said

Indians under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission.Act.

/s/ I-E-I. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

 

/s/ smear: E. '.-JITT
Chief Commissioner

 

