LAIdS COMMISSIO

'7}

BEFORE THE INDIAN

THE CHOCTAW NATION,
Petitioner,
V. Docket No. 103
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

'\..../‘~../‘\./\../\./\../\.../\.../\.-/\./\./

Decided: March 8, 1954

Appearances:
W. F. Semple, with whom
was Wesley 3. Disney,
Attorneys for Petitioner

Ralph A. Barney and
Robert E. Fraley, with whom

1'was hr. Assistant Attorney

General Ferrv W. Morton,

J

ttorneys for Defendant.

 

O'Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

At the outset may we eomment on the findings of feet. We have set
forth therein rather extensively the proceedings in the former case,
both in the Court of Claims and the Supreme Cour , including the contentions of the parties. ?his seems to us necessary under a plea of
res judieata in View of the rule stated in Oklahoma V. Texa , 256 U. S,
80, 88; 65 L. Ed. 831, 835, which is:

I

“What was involved and determined in ;ho former
suit is to be tested by an examination of the record
and proceedings therein, including the pleadings, the
evidence submitted, the respective contentions of the

-—-—.-—«-._.1j—_.._._.......___.. .._ ._._.._. ..._.___.....__._:_..- ._._....... _...- .. _.....__-.—.—- .._. .. -- _..._ .. . . _ ._.. _.

.. .._...-....._......_..._.-.--_-..._._. .

"parties, and the findings and opinion of the
court; * * *" See cases cited by the court in

support of this rule.

The claim here asserted by the Choctaw is to recover from the
United States the value of 6,589,000 acres of land lying west of the
l00th meridian and extending between the Red and Canadian rivers to
the sources of such rivers which are located in eastern New Mexico,
the source of the Red River being some 225 miles west and that of the
Canadian being some 260 miles west of the 100th meridian. The Choctaw
base their claim upon the treaty of Doak's Stand, dated October 18,
1820, 7 Stat. 210, by which, the Choctaw contend, the defendant ceded
to them the area above described.

As a first and affirmative defense to the claim the defendant by

its answer pleaded in effect that the Supreme Court in the case, "United

States v. Choctaw,”l79 U. S. 494, determined the questions at issue

here and that the decision is res judicata. The parties understood

that the case referred to in the defendant‘s answer was the case brought
in the Court of Claims entitled, "The Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations v.
The United States and the Wichita and Affiliated Bands of Indians,"

No. 18932, 34 C. Cls. 17. In that case, on appeal, the Supreme Court

decided that the Choctaw acquired no rights in the territory west of

the 100th meridian, the land here involved, so the question we must
decide is whether the determination by the Supreme Court as to the ownership of that land is final and conclusive on the parties to this case in

so far as that court decided that the boundary of the Choctaw cession

did not extend west of the 100th meridian.

2 598

The former suit was brought in the Court of Claims by the Choctaw
and Chickasaw Nations v. United States and the Wichita and Affiliated
Bands. These bands will hereafter be referred to as Wichita.

Prior to 1891 the Wichita had acquired rights to 743,610 acres oi
land in the so-called "leased district." This district had been owned

by the Choctaw and Chickasaw and was located immediately east of the

In l89l, 28 Stat. 895,

100th meridian and as far as the 98th meridian.
the Wichita ceded their tract to defendant, reserving sufficient land
for allotments for the members of the Wichita and agreeing that the unallotted part should be disposed of under the homestead and townsite
laws of the United States, at $1.25 per acre, and it was also agreed
that lands reserved for schools, public buildings, etc., should be

paid for at the same'rate per acre.

The object of the suit was to impress a trust on the Wichita tract
and to require the proceeds from the sale of the unallotted lands be
paid to the Choctaw and Chickasaw, and that the latter receive the value
of the allotted and reserved lands. It will be seen from the above that
the title to the lands west of the "leased district,“ that is, the
Choctaw lands west of the 100th meridian, were not directly involved in
the claim.

It should perhaps be here stated that the Chickasaw never had or
claimed any interest in the territory west of the 108th meridian (see

Treaty of June 22, 1855, ll Stat. oll) as that country had been claimed

by the Choctaw at the time of the 1855 treaty.

2 600
Retyped

CHOCTAW AND CHICKASAW NATION V. UNITED
STATES AND WICHITA AND AFFILIATED BANDS

 

Before the Court of Claims, 34 C. Cls. 17.

The Court of Claims made no findings of fact (see p. 46 of opinion)
but the ownership of the lands west of the lOOth meridian was pressed
upon the court by the allegations of the petition (Finding 7) and the
defendant's brief (Finding 8). Such ownership was also raised by the
evidence offered by the Wichita by which they claimed aboriginal rights
to not only all of the leased district but to a vast area extending west
of the 100th meridian to the mountains in New Mexico and Colorado, including the area between the Red and Canadian rivers. The entire country
claimed by the Wichita was known as the Great Prairie. (pp. 52-53 of Op.)

The Court of Claims considered all these contentions, as its opinion
shows, and denied the Wichita claim of aboriginal rights but decided that
by the l82O treaty it was intended to grant the Choctaw the country west
of the lOOth meridian. (PP. 102, 103 of Op.)

The following summary of the proceedings before the Court of Claims
will be helpful:

Pursuant to the jurisdictional act, the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations
filed a petition (Finding 7) in the Court of Claims to have determined
what interest, if any, said petitioners had in a tract of land within the
so-called "leased district” ceded to the United States by the Wichita and
affiliated bands in 1891. The substance of petitioners‘ claim was that
the treaty of April 28, 1866, 14 Stat. 769, did not result in an absolute
cession of said leased district to the United States but rather continued

a trust established by the treaty of June 22, l855, whereby the lands

2 601

0

involved (which included the Wichita lands) were leased to the United
States for a specific purpose, the settlement of Indians.

The petitioners’ contention that the trust was continued by the
l866 treaty was based on not only an alleged ambiguity in that treaty
which had to be construed as a trust, but that said treaty had to be
construed taking into consideration certain other circumstances occurring
prior to, at the time of, and after the execution of said treaty.

One of the circumstances which petitioners believed would shed light

on the intention of the parties in executing the treaty of 1866 was the

amount of consideration paid to the Choctaws and Chickasaws under the
treaties of l855 and 1866. Petitioners alleged in their petition (Finding 7) that the $800,000 paid under the provisions of the treaty of

1855 could be considered payment only for their relinquishment of a
claim to lands west of the l00th meridian and that therefore they received but $300,000 for the alleged cession of the leased district by
the treaty of April 28, 1866. In brief, petitioners‘ theory, and one
of the bases for its claim that the 1866 treaty affected only a trust,
was that the total consideration for the cession in l866 of over seven
million acres was only $300,000, since the $800,000 paid under the 1855
treaty could not be applied to the lands in the leased district, and,
therefore, in View of the grossly low sum paid to the Choctaws and
Chickasaws, especially in ViCW of the sums paid other Indian tribes for
cessions at that time, petitioners urged it could not have been the in»
tention of the parties to divest the lands in the leased district of the

trust in their favor created by the l855 treaty.

2 602

Defendant, to controvert the pleadings in this respect, alleged in
its answer (Finding 8) that the petitioners never had a claim for lands
west of the 100th meridian, and contended in its brief (Finding 8), that
the sum of $800,000 paid to petitioners under the 1855 treaty had to be
considered as compensation for the leased district. The issue on the
claim as to ownership of the lands west of the 100th meridian was thus
joined.

The Court of Claims considered this dispute regarding the lands west
of the 100th meridian a material fact to be determined in interpreting
the 1866 treaty and in ascertaining the amount of money ultimately paid
by the United States for the leased district. It weighed the evidence
in the form of the treaties, letters and maps touching on the subject of
the Choctaw claim to lands west of the 100th meridian and found that the
Choctaws acquired land west of the lO0th meridian by the treaty of

October 18, 1820. (pp. lO3, lO4 of Op.)

Although the judgment (Finding 5) rendered by the court in decreeing

i that the lands within the leased district were acquired and held by the

United States in trust for the petitioners does not contain any reference
to the lands without the leased district and west of the 100th meridian,
it is evident from a reading of the court's opinion that the issue as to
the Choctaw's claim to the lands west of the 100th meridian was one of
the material factors influencing the court to hold that the treaty of
1866 did not result in an absolute cession.

Before the Supreme Court, 179, U. S. 494, 45 L. Ed. 291

We have already indicated the importance the parties and the Court

of Claims gave the question of Choctaw title to the lands west of the

100th meridian, and when we examine the record and contentions of the
parties on appeal, we can well understand the reasons which prompted

and required the Supreme Court to dispose of the issue so vigorously

injected into the controversy by the parties.

As stated in the findings, each party to suit in the Court of
Claims appealed. In its assignment of error in the Supreme Court the
United States alleged the Cou"t of Claims erred “In holding that the
country ceded by the United States to the Choctaws by the treaty of
October 18, 1820, extended west of the one hundredth meridian.”
(Finding 13). The other two assignments are of similar import.

Passing on to the briefs of the petitioners filed in the Supreme
Court in the former case (Finding ie) we see that the Choctaw in its
separate brief and the Choctaw and Chickasaw in a joint brief claimed
that the $800,000 they received under the 1055 treaty was for the relinquishment of title to the lands west of the 100th meridian, thus
contesting with the Government the ownership of that territory.

The above references are important as showing that the title to
the disputed area was pressed upon the Supreme Court by all parties to

the case under consideration by that court. Moreover, the contentions
in this regard, made in one form or another, so impressed the Court of
Claims that a large part of its lengthy and very comprehensive opinion
was devoted to a discussion thereof and a determination of the extent
of the Choctaw grant by the 1820 treaty. {Einding 12).

Coming now to the decision of the Supreme Court we find an equally

comprehensive discussion of the same facts considered by the Court of

Claims, but arriving at a different conclusion.

2 604

We shall not set forth herein more than enough of the high court's
opinion to show the conclusions reached as to the Choctaw rights in the

country west of the lOOth meridian, leaving to the reader the examination

of the opinion for any omissions considered important.

The court opened the discussion of the Choctaw claim to the lands
lying west of the 100th meridian (Finding 15) with this statement:;

"The Choctaws also contend that they once owned,
by transfer from the United States, a vast body of
lands west of the Leased District, for which they have
never received anything, and that the treaty of l866
must be interpreted in the light of that fact. What
connection such a fact, if it had any existence,
could have with the construction of the treaty of
1866 is not easy to perceive. But as the proposition
just stated was the subject of much consideration in
the Court of Claims, and as it is earnestly pressed
upon our attention, we will first inquire whether
the Choctaws ever owned any lands west of the Leased
District, that is, west of the lOOth degree of west
longitude, and then bring into view the circumstances
leading up to the treaty of 1866, which, it is argued
throw light on its interpretation.”

Beyond doubt the court, by this language, recognized the need for
setting at rest the contentions of the Choctaw respecting their claim
to the lands in the west and proceeded to consider various treaties
leading up to the treaty of 1866, including the treaty with the Quapaw
of August 24, 1818, 7 Stat. 176, which had ceded the land included in
the Choctaw grant under the 1820 treaty, the treaty with Spain of
February 22, l8l9, fixing the lOOth meridian as the west boundary of

the United States, the treaty of September 27, 1830, limiting the west

boundary of the Choctaw grant at said meridian. ‘After reviewing these

transactions, the court said:

thirt -four sears assed before the Choctaw made anv claim to the countr
Y P .

west.

"It cannot be doubted the‘ the purpose of
article 2 of the treaty of 1830 was to provide for
a special grant to the Choctaws of the lands intended to be ceded to them by article 2 of the
treaty of 1820, and no others. It was as if the
parties declared that the words in the treaty of

820, ‘thence up the Arkansas to the Canadian Fork,
and up the same to its source, thence due south to
the Red river‘, should be herd to mean the same as
the words in the treaty of 183 , “thence to the
source of the Canadian Fork, if in the limits of
the United States, or to those limitS, thence dte
south to Red river‘. ihe treaty of 1830 plainly
imports the understanding of the parties at that
time that whatever might be the wording of the
treaty of 1820, the United States had not thereby
intended to grant, and the Choctaws had not thereby
expected to receive, any lands at or near the source

ref the Canadian Fork unless that point was within

the limits of the United States--that both parties
had in View at that time only lands within the
limits of the United States.

"As the treaty of

820 provided that the
Choetaws should have a 3 "

tar west as tie source

of the Canadian river, it is suggested that the United

a J—

States could not legally modiry that provision by the

subsequent ratification in l8 1 oi the treaty with
Spain signed in 1819. But it was entirely competent

for the parties, without any new or valuable consideration intervening, to rectify a mistake in the de»
scription of boundaries, and to agree as in effect
they did by the treaty of 1830, that the words ‘to
the Canadian Fork, and no t e same to its scarce’,
in the treaty of 1820, were to be interpreted as"

meaning ‘to the source of the Canadian ?ork, if in

the limits of the United States, or to those limits‘~+

thus re1ieving_the United States from any obligation

to make a special grant to the Chnetaws ot lands which

b the treat with S ain ratified in 1821, had been
Y P 3 .
recognized as part of Spanish territory. * * W”

The Supreme Court made significant reference to the fact that nearly

This is what it said (Finding 16):

2 605

"Proceeding in our examination of the facts
supposed to throw light upon the meaning of the
treaty of 1866, we find that in 1854, for the first
time, the Choctaws, acting under some influence not
explained by the record, insisted that their country

extended west of the l0Oth degree of west longitude.
3&7’-:7‘<"

And, as shown by Finding 16, it concluded by saying:

"We have made this extended reference to the
correspondence between the Indians and the Officers
of the United States for the purpose, not only of
showing that the Choctaws had no claim, legal or
equitable, to territory west of the lOOth degree
of west longitude, but of indicating the situation
and relations of the parties when the treaty of
1855, to be nresently referred to, was concluded."

Thus, we see from the foregoing, the findings of fact herein, and

the nninion of the court, not specificall set out herein or in the

findings, that the court definiteir disnosed of all contentions as to

ownership of the western {ands made hy the Choctaw and actually decided

as to the applicable law on the principles of res judicata we may

91

start with what has been termed the ciassic statement" of the rule of

res jndicata, set forth in Southern Pacific v. United States, l68

”Tne general principie announced in numeren
r gnt, question, or fact distinctly

s ind tlirectljJ d€t£HHBiUEKi by 21 conrw: of
t jurisdiction, as a ground of recovers,
cannot be disputed in a subsequent suit between the

L-.

same parties or their prieies; and even if the second
suit is for a different cause of action, the right,
question, or fact once so determined must, as between
the same parties or their privies, be taken as con—
clnsively established, so long as the judgment in the
first suit remains nnmodificd. This general rule is
demanded by rho very object for which civil courts

_.-..-s_

have been established, which is to secure the peace

2 607

and repose of society by the settlement of matters
capable of judicial determination. Its enforcement is essential to the maintenance of social
order; for the aid of judicial tribunals would not
be invoked for the vindication of rights of person
and property, if, as between parties and their
privies, conclusiveness did not attend the judgments of such tribunals in respect of all matters
properly put in issue and actually determined by
them."

See case cited and reviewed in the opinion in that case; also, Cromwell
v. Sac County, 94 U. S. 351, 24 L. Ed. l95; United States v. Munsingwear,
340 U. S. 36, 95 L. Ed. 36. The above rule was also adopted and applied
by the Court of Claims in Union tacific v. United States, l2l C. C18. 463.

We have shown above and by the findings of fact (No. 6) that the
Choctaw was a party in the former case and that the same question, that
is, the Choctaw rights in the land west of the 100th meridian which was
made an issue in the former case and determined by the Supreme Court
against the Choctaw, is an issue in the instant case. About this there
can be no doubt, nor do the Choctaw, seemingly, question this. They
rely upon the proposition that the real issue in the former case did
not involve lands west of the l0Oth meridian, but only involved lands
east of that meridian-sin the "leased district”--and, of course,
that is technically correct; however, as we have shown, under the
pleadings and briefs the parties presented the issue of ownership of
the Choctaw land west of the leased district and both courts found it
necessary to determine that issue in the former case.

It is upon this difference between the subject matter of the
former case and that of the present one that the Choctaw mainly rely

as one of their contentions that they should not be estopped to again

2 608
Retyped

asset ownership in the western lands. This contention has been
approached by the Choctaw in several ways, which we shall now consider.

JURISDICTION OF COURT OF CLAIMS AND SUPREME COURT

The Choctaw would have us decide that under the jurisdictional act
(Find. 6) neither the Court of Claims nor the Supreme Court had the power
to make any adjudication respecting lands west of the 100th meridian which
could bind the Choctaw. Manifestly, we cannot inquire into the power of
either court to consider and determine the Choctaw rights to such land,
for the fact that they both did so is a tacit, if not express, determination that they had the power to do so, and such determination cannot
yield to a re-examination of such powers by a collateral attack, such as
that made here. The general rules have been often stated, but we shall

quote one, that from Stoll v. Cottlieb, 305 U. S. 165, 171:

"A court does not have the power, butjudicial fiat,

to extend its jurisdiction over matters beyond the
scope of the authority granted to it by its creators.
There must be admitted, however, a power to interpret
the language of the jurisdictional instrument and its
application to an issue before the court. * * * Every
court in rendering a judgment, tacitly, if not ex~
pressly, determines its jurisdiction over the parties
and the subject matter, An erroneous affirmative
conclusion as to the jurisdiction does not in any
proper sense enlarge the jurisdiction of the court
until passed upon by the court of last resort, and
even then the jurisdiction becomes enlarged only

from the necessity of having a judicial determination
of the jurisdiction over the subject matter. When an
erroneous judgment, whether from the court of firstr
instance or form the court of final resort, is pleaded
in another court or another jurisdiction, the question
is whether the former judgment is res judicata. After
a federal court has decided the question of the jurisdiction over the parties as a contested issue, the
court in which the plea of res judicata is made has no
power to inquire again into that jurisdictional fact."

The broad terms of the jurisdictional act expressly directing the Court
of Claims "to try and determine all questions that may arise” anc LG
"receive and consider as evidence in the suit everything which shall be
deemed by said court necessary to aid it in determining the questions
presented, and tending to shed light on the claim, rights and equities
of the parties * * *" might well have justified the court‘s power to
determine the Choctaw rights in the lands west of the 100th meridian.
In any event, the courts acted and their acts must be presumed an adjudication of their power to do so. we have no doubt but that in the

former case both courts decided they had jurisdiction to pass on the

question of the Choctaw ownership of the lands west of the 100th

udicata

L-.35

meridian, and therefore the decisions of both courts are res
on the question of jurisdiction.

Difference in sub‘ect matter. Under this proposition the Choctaw

 

content that the right of the Choctaw to the lands west of the 100th
meridian was not the main or fundamental issue in the former case
because the lands and the treaties there involved were different from
those involved in the case before us.

As we have already stated, the issued in the former case was
primarily the defendant's right to the 743,610 acres in the "leased
district” which it had conveyed to the Wichita and which by the 1891
agreement was ceded back to the Government, less amount necessary for
allotments,.etc., however, it has also been shown by the findings of

fact herein that it was the Choctaw theory of their claim for the value

of the Wichita lands that the $800}0O0 (of which the Choctaw received

\

2 609

$600,000) paid for the perpetual lease of the "leased district" and
the quit-claim and reliquishment of the land west of the "leased
district," that is, west of the 100th meridain, was paid for the relinquishment only and, therefore, nothing was paid for the leased
lands under the treaty of June 22, 1855, ll Stat. 611, and that all
they received for the 7,713,239 acres in the "leased district" was
$300,000, paid under the treaty of April 28, 1866, 14 Stat. 769,
about 4 cents per acre, which was paid for the cession of entire
"leased district" to be held in trust for the settlement of Indians

and upon the abandonment of such trust the lands to revert to the
Choctaw and Chickasaw. Also, since the Wichita lands, had, by acts

of the Government, been unlawfully removed from the operation of the
trust, the Choctaw and Chickasaw asked for the proceeds from the sale
of the part not allotted to the Wichita and for the value of those
allotted and reserved by the 1891 agreement.

We cannot agree with counsel for the Choctaw the issue of ownership of the lands west of the 100th meridian was not an important and
fundamental fact to be determined in disposing of the Wichita case,
in fact, we do not see how the ,alleged equities of the parties could
have been decided without determining such ownership or rights of the
Choctaw. Therefore, we must hold that that question has been definitely
decided by the Supreme Court against the contentions now made by the
Choctaw.

To elaborate somewhat on this conclusion, the Choctaw appear to
contend that since the decision of the Supreme Court directly operated

on lands within the "leased district”.1ts determination of the Choctaw

2 6]

Rety:

rights to the lands west of the lOOth meridian could not bind the Choctaw
in this case, in other words, that the decision of the Supreme Court on
such rights was mere dictum. We believe the generally accepted rule

to be that where a point was directly made and passed on by the court

in the regular course of the litigation, it is authority on the point
even though the case was determined on another qnestion or even if the

case were dismissed by the court.
The case, Union Pacific v. Mason City, etc., 199 U. S. 160, 166,
50 L. Ed. l34, l37, states the rule as follows:

"Whenever a question fairly arises in the course of
a trial, and there is a distinct decision of that
question, the ruling of the court in respect thereto
can, in no just sense, be called mere dictum.
Florida C. R. Co. V. Schntte, 103 U. S. ll8, 26 L.
Ed. 327, in which this court said (p. 143, L. Ed. 336):

‘It cannot be said that a case is not authority
on one point because, although that point was properly
presented and decided in the regular course of the
consideration of the cause, something else was found
in the end which disposed of the whole matter. Here
the precise question was properly presented, fully
argued, and elaborately considered in the opinion.
The decision on this question was as much a part
of the judgment of the court as was that on any

other of the several matters on which the case as
a whole depended.””.

 

And in Brown v. Chicago, etc., 78 N. W. 771, the court said:

It is a mistaken opinion that nothing is decided in
a case except the result arrived at. All the propositions assumed by the court to be within the case,
and all the questions presented and considered, and
deliberately decided by the tour , leading up to the
final conclusion reached, are as effectively passed
upon as the ultimate questions solvrd, Trustees v.

on-s-nun

--u.-o-a-.qpStocker, 42 N. 3. L. l5. The judgmcrt is authority
upon all points assumed to be within the issues which
the record shows the court deliberately considered and
decided in reaching it.

2 612
Retyped

Also, in the case, Watson V. St. Louis, etc., 169 Fed. 942, the

court said:

A carefully prepared opinion on an important question
of law expressly decided by the trial court (citing
cases), properly brought before the court by the
assignment of errors and the pleadings in the case,
and which was fully and ably argued by counsel for
all the parties, cannot be considered as obiter

even if the action could be, and in fact was, determined upon other issued.

As to effect of a dismissal of a case where the court decided important
points, see Jacksonville V. Schutte, 103 U. S. 118. The rule is quoted

in Union Pacific v. Mason City, supra.

EFFECT OF INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION ACT
ON RES JUDICATA

The other proposition contended for by the Choctaw is, as they state
it:

Had the subject matter been the same in the
former case, the Choctaw Nation would still be

entitled to proceed under the provisions of the
Indian Claims Commission Act.

Before discussing what we believe to be the salient points argued in
the Choctaw brief we should like to dispose of the assertions that "the
treaty of 1820 was reaffirmed by the treaty of 1825," and that that

treaty "reaffirmed the grant of the domain west, without words of qualiw

I

fication or equivocation.' These statements were made as intending to

support the contention that the Choctaw lands extended west of the 100th

meridian.

A reading of the treaty of January 20, 1825, 7 Stat. 234, will show

that its main purpose was to obtain a cession of the Choctaw lands lying

in what was then the territory of Arkansas, the east end of the 1820

2 6

cession. No mention is made of the lands lying west of the 100th
meridian nor do we find anything in that treaty that lends any support
to the Choctaw claim to lands west of that meridian nor any recognition
of it.

Another argument advanced by the Choctaw is that by the 1830 treaty
the Choctaw without consideration relinquished the lands west of the
100th meridian. Apparently, this same argument was made before the

Supreme Court in the former case, Anyway, the court disposed of it

(p. 509) as follows:

As the treaty of 1820 grovided that the Chcctaws
should have lands as far west as the source of the
Canadian river, it is suggested that the United States
could not legally modify that provision by the subsequent ratification in 1821 of the treaty with Spain
signed in 1819. But it was entir.ly competent for
the parties, without any new or valuable consideration
intervening, to rectify a mistake in the description

I of"bonndaries,:and to agree as in effect they"did by
the treaty of 1830, that the words “to the Canadian
For , and up the same to its source,V in the treaty
of 1820, were to be interpreted as meaning “to the
source of the Canadian Fork, if in the limits of the
United States, or to those 1imits”»-thus relieving
the United States from any obligation to make a
special grant to the Choctaws of lands which by the
treaty with Spain, ratified in 1821, had been reu
cognized as part of Spanish territory. After the
treaty of 1830 the line "thence due south to the
Red river" was to be taken as running from a point

‘on the dividing line between the United States and
Spain, the 100th degree of west longitude as established by the treaty of 18l9-1821, thence Q33
south to that river.

 

We next consider the argument to the effect that since the United

.1?

States ”reacquired” the lands here in controversy from L rice by the
treat of Guadalu Hidal»o of Febraarv 2 1848 9 Stat. 922, such lands
p J 3 3

should in equity be considered as having passed to the Choctaw by the

1820 treaty. The facts are, as Finding 5 shows, that the only part of

13

2 614
Retyped

such lands which the United States ever acquired from Mexico was that

located west of the 103d meridian because that part of the claimed area

lying between the 100th and 103d mericians belonged to the Republic of
Texas until its annexation, and thereafter to the State of Texas. But
however that may be, the Supreme Court in the former case definitely
decided (p. 508 of Op.):
"The treaty of 1830 plainly imports the understanding of the parties at that time that whatever might

be the wording of the treaty of 1820, the United

States had not thereby intended to grant, and the

Choctaws had not thereby expected to receive, any;

lands at or near the source of the Canadian Fork

unless that point was within the limits of the United

States—-that both parties had in View at that time
only lands within the limits of the United States."

Finally, the Choctaw assert that they have a cause of action based
upon "fair and honorable dealing.” They do not elaborate on this theory
and we perhaps could pass it by without comment, but it has been mentioned,
although vaguely, and the Government has considered it of sufficient
importance to answer the assertion in its brief.

We fail to see how that question can arise under the allegations
of the petition for it is clearly shown therein that the claim asserted
is for the value of the lands lying west of the 100th meridian, 6,589,000
acres, which the Indians allege they acquired under the 1820 treaty and
which the defendant ceded and sold to Spain without the consent of the
Choctaw and without giving the Indians any "part of the consideration

' Plainly, the petition purports to state a

for such cession and sale.’
claim for the taking of Choctaw lands without compensation. No moral

claim has, by any stretch of reasoning, been pleaded or intimated, nor

has the so-called fair and honorable dealings clause of the Indian
Claims Commission Act even been remotely mentioncd.. So it is quite
evident there is no basis for considering the case on the basis of
clause (5) of section 2 of said act. It should here be stated, in
justice to counsel who now represent claimant, that they apparently did
not represent the claimant when the claim was prepared and filed.
Finally, as we understand the argument, the Choctaw would have us
apply the 5th clause of section 2 of the act, the so-called fair and
honorable dealing clause, in such a way as to include the lands lying
west of the l00th meridian as ceded to the Choctaw by the 1820 treaty.
This clause, like the other bases for recovery in the act, must apply
to something the Indians were entitled to, in other words, we cannot
under the guise of fair and honorable dealings extend the area limits
fixed by the treaty to lands outside of those limits. The Supreme Court
definitely decided that the claimed kinds west of the 100th meridian
were without the boundaries of the lands described in the 1820 treaty
and therefore the Choctaw never acquired the same. This determination
is, as we have held, binding upon us, so there was nothing upon which
fair and honorable dealings might operate. The relinquishment of the

land west of the l00th meridian in the 1855 treaty (for a nominal consideration, as we held in the Choctaw and Chickasw cases, l Ind C15.

Com. 304,327) gives no support to Choctaw ownership of that territory;

the relinquishment was merely to quiet title to the area which the

\

Government always insisted was never coded by the 1820 treaty.

2 615

2 616

We, accordingly, hold that the former adjudication by the Supreme
Court bars re-opening the question of title to the lands west of the
100th meridian and an order dismissing the petition herein will be

entered.

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur in the above.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

Wm M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

