o . ' .
.1: -I-pun . -‘or cje-..j{ 
..- _ ._. H _ .. ' 4 ' . . ‘ ' - _- . .

B .--‘-s.-p&2—&---... .., ,.

s

-- - --up -va--in-1-it-.. 4-no

BEFORE THE INDEAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CHOCTKW NATION,

Petitioner,

v. Docket No. 103

THE UNITED STATES'OF.AMERICA,

'*--/'--«'\....-I*--I\.../-......-I-....2-.../\...2

Defendant.
Decided: March 8, l9Sh

PRELIMINARY'STATERENT

O This claim, as the petition will disclose, is to recover the value
of 6,589,000 acres of land lying between the Canadian and Red rivers
and extending west from.the lOOth meridian, west longitude, to the sources

of those rivers which are in the east part 6f the State of New Mexico,

some 225 to 260 mles‘west of the lOOth meridian. (See Royce, Texas map),

As one of its defenses to the petition the Government pleads res
judicata by reason of the-determination of the case, the Choctaw Nation
and the Chickasaw Nation v. United States, by the Court of Claims, NOm
l8932.(Exs. 1-A, l~B, 2, l(e),.and 5 herein; 3h C. C15. 17), and the
Supreme court, Nos. 88, 89, 90 (Exs,_1,'1.c, 1;n, 5 herein; 179 U.S.
b9h, as L. Ed. 291). ' ' C

By agreement of the parties, the Government's defense of res judicata

rwas sebmitted to the Commission for determination first and before the

other issues are presented.

FINDINGS‘9§_FACT

   

The Commssion makes the following findings of fact:

2 582

1. Prior to the conclusion of the treaty hereafter referred to,
the petitioner, Choctaw Nation, inhabited a large area of land in the
State of Mississippi, and by the treaty of Doak's Stand, dated
October 18, 1820, 7 Stat. 210, petitioner ceded to defendant a described
part of their land in said state (Art. 1). In consideration for said
cession, and im.part satisfaction for the same, the defendant, by said
treaty (Art. 2), ceded to petitioner-“a tract of country west of the.Mississippi river, situate
between the Arkansas and Red river, and bounded as follows:
Beginning on the Arkansas river, where the lower boundary
line of the Cherokees strikes the same; thence up the
Arkansas to the Canadian fork, and up the same to its
source; thence due south to the Red river; thence down

Red river three miles below the mouth of Little river,

which empties itself into Red river on the north side;
thence a direct line to the beginning."

2. At the time of the conclusion of the treaty of Doak's Stand
there existed a controversy between defendant and the Monarchy of Spain
as to the location of the west boundary of the United States, and by
the treaty between the United States and Spain, concluded February 22,
l8l9, and ratified and proclaimed February 19, 1821 (8 Stat. 252), the
west line of the United States (insofar as it affected the Choctaw lands
here involved) was fixed as being the lOOth meridian, west longitude.

The sources of the Red and Canadain rivers, referred to in the
treaty boundary (Finding 1), are far west of the l0Oth meridian, in fact,
they extend west of the lO3rd meridian and into the State of New Mexico.

.3. By treaty of January 20, 1825, 7 Stat. 232., the treaty of
Doakfs Stand, October 18, l820, was modified in some respects and all
lands lying in the territory of.Arkansas were ceded by the Choctaw to

defendant, but such treaty had no bearing on the west limits of the

United States fixed by the 1820 treaty;

h. The next transaction concerning the Choctaw lands in Oklahoma

was the treaty of September 27, 1830, 7 Stat. 333. By this treaty the

Choctaw ceded all their remaining lands east of theIMississippi River

and the United States agreed to grant in fee simple all their lands in

Oklahoma.

"beginning near Fort Smith where the Arkansas boundary
crosses the Arkansas River, running thence to the source

of the Canadian fork; if in the limits of the United States,
of to those limits; thence due south to Red River, and down
Red River to the west boundary of the Territory of Arkansas;
thence north along that line to the beginning."

This treaty was the first to delimit the west boundary of the Choctaw at
the 100th meridian and thereby exclude the area claimed in this action as

having been ceded by the 1820 treaty.
5. (a)

meridian by the treaty of 1819, between the United States and Spain

fter the fixing of the international boundary at the 100th

(Finding 2), the Republic of Mexico revolted and succeeded to_the
Spanish rights to the area lying west of that meridian, between the
Canadian and Red rivers, and thereafter the Republic of Texas declared
its independence of Mexico and succeeded to the rights of Mexico to such
area, in so far as it extended between the 100th and lO3rd meridians, a

distance of about 168 miles.
(b) The 100th meridian was recognized in 1828 as a west limit

(of the United States by this Nation and Mexico (treaty of January 12,
1828, 8 Stat. 372, 37h) and in 1838 by this country and the Republic of
Texas (treaty of.April 25, 1838}.

was admitted

l(c) Until the territory of the Republic of Texas

into the Union all lands claimed by the Choctaw lying west “E the 100th
3 1 L)

meridian and as far as the 103rd belonged to the Republic of Texas, and by

2 58h

the Resolution of Admission of March 1, 18b5, 5 Stat. 797, the State of

Texas retained all lands lying within the limits of the State and that

part of the lands claimed which were west of the lO3rd meridian were

relinquished by Mexico to the United States by the treaty of Guadalupe

Hidalgo, dated February 2, 18b8, 9 Stat. 922.
(d) On June 22, 1855, ll Stat. 6ll, a treaty was condluded between the United States, and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, which

contained the following provisions:

Article 1. The following shall constitute and remain
the boundaries of the Choctaw and Chickasaw country,viz: '
Beginning at a point on the Arkansas River, one hundred paces
east of old Fort Smith, where the western boundaryaline of
the State of Arkansas crosses the said river, and running
thence due south to Red River; thence up Red River to the
point where the meridian of one hundred degrees west longitude
crosses the same; thence north along said meridian to the main
Canadian River; thence down said river to its junction with
,the Arkansas River; thence down said river to the place of
beginning. ,

And pursuant to an act of Congress approved May 28, l830,
the United States do hereby forever secure and guarantee the
lands embraced within the said limits, to the members of the
Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes, their heirs and successors, to
be held in common; so that each and every member of either
tribe shall have an equal, undivided interest in the whole:
Provided, however, no part thereof shall ever be sold without
the consent of both tribes, and that said land shall revert to
the United States if said Indians and their heirs become

extinct or abandon the same.

-31- -3% -3{- -3% -35- -35Article 9. The Choctaw Indians do hereby absolutely and
forever quit-claim and relinquish to the United States all their
right, title, and interest in, and to any and all lands, west
of the one hundredth degree of west longitude; and the Choctaws
and Chickasaws do hereby lease to the United States all that

portion of their common territory west of the ninetyaeighth
degree of west longitude, for the permanent settlement of the .
"Wichita and such other tribes or bands of Indians as the Government may desire to locate therein; excluding, however, all the
Indians of New Mexico, and also those whose usual ranges at
present are north of the Arkansas River, and whose permanent

locations are north of the Canadian River, but including those
bands whose permanent ranges are south of the Canadian, or

2 585

between it and the Arkansas; which Indians shall be subject to the exclusive control of the United States, under
such rules and regulations, not inconsistent with the
fights and interests of the Choctaws and Chickasaws, as
may from time to time be prescribed by the ?resident for
their government} Provided, however, The territory so
leased shall remain open to settlement by Choctaws and
Chickasaws as heretofore.

Article 10. In consideration of the foregoing relinquishment and lease, and as soon as practicable after the ratification of this convention, the United States will pay to
the Choctaws the sum of six hundred thousand dollars, and to
the Chickasaws the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, in
such manner as their general councils shall respectively
direct.

(e) And on April 26, l866, 14 Stat. 769, a treaty was concluded
between the United States, and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, which

contained the following provisions:

Article 3. The Choctaws and Chickasaws, in consideration
of the sum of three hundred thousand dollars, herehy cede to
the United States the territory west of the 980 west longitude,
known as the leased district * *.

6. By the act of March 2, l895, 28 Stat. 876, 898, the Court of Claims
was granted jurisdiction to hear and determine a claim of the Choctaw and
Chickasaw Nations to a tract of land lying east of the 100th meridian in
an area known as the “leased district" which had been ceded to the United
States by the Wichita Indians by an agreement dated June 4, 1891, and
approved by said act of March 2, l895, in which tract the Choctaw and
Chickasaw claimed an interest. By the act, jurisdiction was,

"conferred upon the Court of Claims to hear and determine

the said claim of the Choctaws and Chickasaws and to render
judgment thereon, it being the intention of this act to allow
said Court of Claims jurisdiction, to that the rights, legal
and equitable, of the United States and the Choctaw and
Chickasaw Nations ane the Wichita and affiliated bands of
Indians in the premises shall be fully considered and
~determined, and to try and determine all questions that has
arise on behalf of either party in the hearing of said claim;

7': *2‘: -J: °a'c :9: 9':

2 586
Retyped

"The said Court of Claims shall receive and consider
as evidence in the suit everything which shall be deemed
by said court necessary to aid it in determining the questions
presented, and tending to shed light on the claim, rights, and
equities of the parties litigant, * * *."

The Choctaw Nation mentioned in the above act is the same Choctaw
Nation which joined with the Chickasaw Nation in prosecuting the claim
in the Court of Claims, in these findings hereafter shown, and is the

same Choctaw Nation which is named as petitioner in the above-entitled

C-9.1.188.

7. Pursuant to the act referred to in the last preceding finding,
the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations brought suit against the United States
and the Wichita and affiliated bands of Indians in the Court of Claims,
No. 18932, (Ex. l~A), claiming the "leased district,” in which the Wichita

lands were located, was held in trust for them the Choctaw and Chickasaw,
and alleoed (Ex. l~A, p. 9):

"Other circumstances showing that it was not the intention of the parties to said treaty, in inserting the
said 3rd article thereof, to divest the lands in question
of said trust in favor of the claimants are found by contrasting with the consideration of $300,000 which was
stipulated to be paid for said cession made in article 3
the dealings of the Government with other Indian tribes,
hereinafter stated.

"The quantity of land embraced in said cession is 7,713,239
acres. Excluding from this estimate the $800,000 paid for the
lease and cession embraced in section 9 of the treaty of June
22, 1855 (and which must be excluded because the $800,000
there provided for was paid for the Choctaw lands extending
to the western boundary of the United States from the 100th
degree of west longitude, lying between the Red and Canadian
rivers, and embracing a strip of country correctly estimated
by the United States authorities to contain over 6,500,000
acres, and because the said $800,000 if applied to the said
purchase lying west of the 100th meridian would be less_than
l2 cents per acre), the $300,000 paid for said cession /of the
leased district in 1866:] is less than 4 cents an acre. EH8 *"

"1

8. The defendant, the United States, by its answer (Ex. 1-D, p. 41)

denied the Choctaw or Chickasaw were ceded any lands lying west of the
100th meridian by the treaty of 1820, and in answer to the contention
set forth in Finding 7, the Government in its brief stated:

"The foundation upon which the claimants‘ whole case
rests is the theory that the cession made to the Choctaws
in 1820, in consideration of their cession of lands in
Mississippi, included 6,589,ééC acres west of the on
hundredth meridian, which 6,589,440 acres were ceded to
Spain by the treaty of 1819, ratified in 1821, so that the
Choctaws, having been deprived thereof by the United States,
had a valid claim for compensation on that account, and
their relinquishment of all such claims in 1855 was a relinquishment of a substantial right. Uson this foundation
the claimants build the argument that the $860,000 paid by
the United States under the treaty of 1855 was paid for that
relinquishment only, so that the so—cailed lease was without
consideration, which alleged fact, taken in connection with

other alleged facts in regard to the treaty of 1866, shows,
they conclude, that the eession of the so~cailed ‘eased

“J ..

l
Tee claimants’
cry which will
lv to the

c"district in l856

A.

was in trust and not essointe.
..-..- .7 ‘I (‘ff f\
V‘ l..'._!.‘3t.”_*,,‘' 01. ,Ls'...CaO., ¢,-.

peculiar theory as to to the
be fully considered below, contributes material
C as to the extent of the cession to the Chectaws in 1820 the
theory as to the treaty of 1866 would have much less color
of reason to support it, and hence the former theory may
properly be said to involve the fundamental error of the

claimants‘ argument.

“The extent to which the claimants rely on this theory
may be seen from their request for findings (Nos. 1 to 25
30, 34, 36), their briefs, (Rec., 147-154, 227~229, 234-254,
320-321, 710-712), and their various memorials to Congress * * *.
Clearly, therefore, it is of the utmost importance at the
very outset of the investigation of this case to ascertain
the truth or error of this theory, or, in other words, what
country it was that the United States ceded to the Choctaws
in 1320 * * *.”

9. The case having been submitted to the Court of Claims, e judgment was entered on March 21, 1899 (Ex. 5), but no ‘indings of tact were

H1

made. (See 34 C. C13. 17, at page 46). By this judgment the Court c

Claims decreed that all lands allotted to the Eichita sy the 1895 agreement were to be vested in them, and that all such lands not so allotted

587

..o-_..._.....were owned by the Choctaw and Chickasaw who were entitled to the proceeds from the sale thereof in the event of a sale thereof by the

United States. (Ex. 5-part of Mandate).

10. While the petition limited the claim to some 743,610 acres
of land in the "leased district” the defendant, Wichitas, claimed the
Great Prairie which included not only the “leased district” but the

lands between the Red and Canadian rivers to their sources, and a
1

vast area outside of these areas and lying west of the 95th meridian
(see pp. 52-53 of opinion) and the court determined such claim, but

preliminary to the discussion of the facts on such claim the court

remarked (p. 52):

"The nature and necessity of the case, and the
evident intent of the jurisdictional act to have the
court consider all the testimony necessary to aid in
the determination of the case, has left us no alternative but to carefully examine everything offered; and
where doubts have arisen respecting the relevancy or
competency of evidence we have not hesitated to give
the parties the benefit of the doubt in the spirit

suggested by the board and liberal terms of the
statute.”

And after describing the Great Prairie at p. 53, the court said:

"It is not within our province to determine claims
beyond the immediate reservation in suit, but as this
claim goes to the whole prairie, and the evidence to
sustain an occupation is the same for all and nearly
inseparable, we will examine the issues as presented.

The court then reviewed the evidence and reached the conclusion (p. 75)

that the-”* * *Wichitas have not established such an occupancy

of the land in suit at the time of its acquirement by

the United States as would support the customary Indian
title, or possession of such character that the United
States can now recognize or is under obligation to

protect for purposes of compensation."

2 588

And later, on page 75, the court concluded, concerning the greater
Wichita claim;
"We therefore dismiss this part of their claim * * *."

As showing the scope of the conrt’s inquiry of the question of aboriginal
rights of the Wichita and of the land incidentally involved in the Qugr
troversy, reference is made to the may apptaring on page 48 of its
opinion, which shows the Eichita lands (Tract 5) and the lands claimed
by the Choctaw (Tract 8). The “leased district” referred to in these
findings comyrise Tracts 4, 5, 6 and Y shown on the nape

11. After disposing of the aboriginal rights of the wichita, the

court proceeded to review the evidence relating to the Choctaw and

Chickasaw rights nnder the 3886 treaty, and in this connection said:

After reviewing the evidence the court arrived at the decision that it

was intended by the 1820 rzeaty to grant the center the lands west of

C}

the 100th meridian. (pg. lQZ~3).

l2. The Court of Claims expressed its reason for determining the

ownership of land west o the 100th meridiano its reasons are as

Fri)

follows:

"But the questions relating to the extent of the
original cession to the Choctaws and the intention of
our Government in ceding land to them which at the time
we were trying to sell to Spain in exchange for Florida,
as well as the matter of the inconsistency of the treaty
of 1830 with that of l820 and the intermediate action
of the Government in actually ceding the land west of
the one hundredth meridian to Spain, can only be material
now in determining what amount of money was ultimately
paid by the United States for the leased district. No
relief is sought by the nation on account of any early
claim to country which they failed to get. Whatever

'\

interest the Choctaws had in the land ceded to Spain
after its apparent cession to them was settled by the
treaty of 1855. Having treated the Choctaw quitclaim

to the territory west of the one hundredth meridian as
the relinquishment of a substantial right, the Government is not in a position to raisesthat question anew
and assert that the treaty of 1820 was made void by that
of 1830, so as to deprive the Choctaws of the right of
compensation to land ceded in 1820 but not ceded in 1830.
Nor do we understand that the Government has denied the
effect of its action in recognizing the claim of the
Choctaws to compensation since its acceptance of the
offers to relinquish the claim until this suit. The probabilities are that when this question arose the parties
viewed the matter as one best kept out of the courts for
their respective interests, and in the doubts which each
had as to their rights compromised the difference in the

manner set forth, from which resulted the agreement of
1855.

"While we have gone far enough into the question to say
that by the cession.of I820 the Choctaws acquired land
beyond the one hundredth meridian, we decline to enter that
field of discussion respecting the alleged surrender by them,
under the terms of the second grant, of what they had acquired

by the guaranties of the first cession because unnecessary.
The extent of our opinion is for the purpose of showing a
basis for the claim preferred by the Choctaws in 1855; but
whether their claim was dealt with as one of strict legal
right or made to rest upon moral considerations alone, it
was clearly recognized by the language of the treaty which
recited a consideration for the relinquishment of a certain
tract and the lease of another."

APPEAL FROM COURT OF CLAIMS T0 SUPREME COURT

 n 

 

13. From the judgment (Ex. 5) above referred to all parties thereto

appealed to the Supreme Court.

In its assignments of error submitted to the§SUPTeme Court’

2 590

the

i
United States asserted that the Court of Claims erred in the follow H8

particulars, among others:

2. In holding that the c-fmntrzr ceded by the Quapaws
to the United States by the treaty of August 24, 1818,
extended west of the one hundredth meridian.

3. In holding that the country ceded by the United

States to the Choctaws by the treaty of October 18, 1820,
extended west of the one hundredth meridian.

4. In holding that the treaty of September 27, 1830,
between the United States and the Choctaws, did not annul
any cession of lands west of the one hundredth meridian,
supposing such cession to have been made by the treaty of

October 18, l820.

l4.E1tu3brief for Choctaws (Ex. 3—A, p. 41) on appeal to the
Supreme Court, the facts upon which the Choctaws' claim to the lands
west of the 100th meridian was based, are set forth and argued on pages

28 through 37. From pages 37 through 41 of the same brief petitioners

discuss the 1855 treaty and the consideration paid for the relinquishment of the lands west of the 100th meridian. At page 41 it is there

argued:

"Here is a contra t between a guardian and a war ,
the ward wholly under he power of a guardian, and the
guardian pays the ward a8OS,COG for a relinquishment of
title to 6,589,440 acres, . or a lease of 7,?i3 239
acres, and this in the month or June, 1855. Why,
first tract at 12% cents per acre, a most grossly in- ,
adequate price would amount to $823,688, and it would ’
leave not $1 to be applied to the payment of the lease
for 7,713,239 acres, and under this lease this land has
been held for nearly forty years. (* * 8)

“Counsel for the Government seek to show that in reality
the Choctaws had no claim to the land west of 1000. It is
too late to raise this question. The United States in
the preamble express a desire that the Choctaws will relinquish this claim, and in the 9th rticie they do
actually relinquish this claim, and in the 10th article
provision is made for the payment of the relinguishment.
This right of the Choctaws has been thus recognised by the
Government as a substantial right, and it is too late now
to dispute it; but as to the real merits of the claim, we
think we have heretofore clearly established it.”

In a separate brief filed on appeal for the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, it is stated:

-3

"The attorney for the Covernmcnt devotes sentry one
hundred pages of his Brief {pages 45 to 141) to an attempt

.3

91

2 592

to Show that the $800,000 paid under the Treaty of 1855

for the relinquishment and lease therein set forth, and

the $300,000 paid under the Treaty of 1866, were paid for
the absolute cession to the United States of the leased
district; that this $1,100,000 was a sufficient consideration, and that the Choctaws and Chickasaws have therefore
parted with all their interest in said lands; and in support
of said contention he asserts-(a) That the United States had no power to convey the
land west of the 100th degree of west longitude, relinquished
by the treaty of 1855 to the Choctaws;

(b) That the treaty of 1830, limiting the cession to the
100th meridian, annulled the treaty of 1820;

(c) That the provision for said relinquishment was only
inserted in the treaty of 1855 as a correction of an error
made by the United States in apparently conveying said land
to the Choctaws in the treaty of 1820;

(d) e e e

(e) That the whole of the $800,000 provided for in the
treaty of 1855 should therefore be applied as consideration
for the lease therein made and not for the relinquishment. 1

Aside from the fact that even if this contention of the
attorney for the Government were sound, such a consideration
(about 14 cents an acre) would be grossly so inadequate that
the cession of 1866, under the circumstances under which it was
made, would be set aside for that reason alone. I think it will
be apparent to the court from the following that the $800,000 provided for in the treaty of 1855 was peid at least in part for the
relinquishment in question.“ '

pThe brief contains a recitation of the facts upon which the Choctaw

claim to the lands west of the 100th meridian was based. At page 72 it

is stated:

"As a matter of fact $400,000 was paid for the relinquishment of the Choctaws of their land west of the 100th
meridian and the remaining $400,000 was paid to the Choctaws
and Chickasaws as compensation for the lease of lands between

the 98th and 100th degrees."

Thus we find the issue of the Choctaw claim to an interest in the
la nds west of the 100th meridian squarely before the Supreme Court of the

United States in the Assignments of Error contending the Court of Claims

erred in finding that by the cession of 1820 the Choctaws had acquired

-9

land beyond the 100th meridian and in the lengthy dissertations on the

merits of such a claim in the briefs of the petitioners and the brief

of the defendant. (Ex. 3 (B)).

TEE SU?REME COURT DECISIOE

     

15. The Supreme Court of the United Staten 179 U. S. 494, 45 L. Ed,

291, reversed the decree of the Court of Claims and directed the dismissal

of the petition of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations. In deciding the

case the Supreme Court took cognizance of the claim of the Choctaws that
they had acquired the lands west of the 100th meridian by the Treaty of

October 18, 1820, and said:

“The Choctaws also contend that they once owned, by
transfer from the United States, a vast bcdy of lands west
of the Leased District, for which they have never received
anything, and that the treaty of 1866 must be interpreted
in the light of that fact. What connection such a fact,
if it had any existence, could have with the construction
of the treaty of 1866 is not easy to perceive. But as the
proposition just stated was the subject of much consideration
in the Court of Claims, and as it is earnestly pressed upon
our attention, we will first inquire whether the Choctaws
ever owned any lands west of the Leased District, that is,
west of the 100th degree of west longitude, and then bring
into view the circumstances leading up to the treaty of
1866, which, it is argued throw light on its interpretation."

16. Although the Supreme Court did say the fundamental question to

2 593

be determined on the appeals related to the lands within the Leased District

between the 98th and 100th meridians, the court deemed it necessary in
View of the decision of the Court of Claims and the arguments on appeal
to decide the claim of the Choctaws of an interest in lands west of the
100th meridian. The Supreme Court then discesscd the terms of the treaty
of August 24, i818, with the Quapaws whereby the United States acquired

a cession and relinquishment of the lands to the source of the Canadian

River_ Treaty of February 22, 1819, with Spain setting the 100th meridian
as the boundary line of the two nations; the Treaty of October 18, 1820,
ceding certain lands to the Choctaw Nation to the source of the Canadian
River; the Treaty of September 27, 1830, with the Choctaw Nation which
clarified the original grant to the Choctaws to include lands to the

source of the Canadian River if in the limits of the United States, or

to those limits.

After reviewing these treaties, the Supreme Court said:

"It cannot be doubted that the purpose of article 2 of

the treaty of 1830 was to provide for a special grant to the
Choctaws of the lands intended to be ceded to them by article 2
of the treaty of 1820, and no others. It was as if the parties
declared that the words in the treaty of 1820, ‘thence up the’
Arkansas to the Canadian Fork, and up the same to its source,
thence due south to the Red river‘, should be held to mean the
same as the words in the treaty of 1830, ‘thence to the source
of the Canadian Fork, if in the limits of the United States, or
to those limits, thence due south to Red river‘. The treaty of
1830 plainly imports the understanding of the parties at that
time that whatever might be the wording of the treaty of 1820,
the United States had not thereby intended to grant, and the
Choctaws had not thereby expected to receive, any lands at or
near the source of the Candadian Fork unless that point was within the limits of the United States;-that both parties had in
view at that time only lands within the limits of the United
States.

“As the treaty of 1820 provided that the Choctaws should
have lands as far west as the source of the Canadian river, it
is suggested that the United States could not legally modify
that provision by the subsequent ratification in 1821 of the
treaty with Spain signed in 1819. But it was entirely competent
for the parties, without any new or valuable consideration intervening, to rectify a mistake in the description of boundaries,
and to agree as in effect they did by the treaty of 1830, that
the words ‘to the Canadian Fork, and up the same to its source‘,
in the treaty of 1820, were to be interpreted as meaning ‘to the
source of the Canadian Fork, if in the limits of the United
States, or to those limits‘-«thus relieving the United States
from any obligation to make a special grant to the Choctaws of
lands which by the treaty with Spain, ratified in 1821, had been
recognized as part of Spanish territory. * * *"

2 594

'1 {$1.7
LUJ;

Then the Supreme Court reviewed the Treaty of January 17,

with the Choctaws finding therein a repetition of the words of the 1330

treaty and a distinct recognition of the :act that the Choctaw country
was not to be regarded as embracing any lands not then, in 1837, within
the limits of the United States; and the special grant to the Choctaws

in 1842, provided for in the 1830 treaty, which set out one of the

lines of the lands granted to the Choctaws and which contained the

words ‘to the source of the Canadian Fork, if in the limits of the United
States‘, which grant was accepted by the Choctaws, and the Supreme Court

found no evidence in the record tending to show that the Choctaws at that

time or at any time prior thereto claimed that the United tates was

under any obligation to transfer to the Choctaws, or to compensate them

for any lands west of the 100th degree of west longitude. with respect

to this claim the Supreme Court said:

"?roceeding in our examination of the facts supposed
to throw light upon the meaning of the treaty of 1866,
we find that in 1854, for the first time, the Choctaws,
acting under some influence not explained by the record,
insisted that their country extended west of the 100th

degree of west longitude. * * *.”
The Supreme Court then reviewed the documentary evidence in the form
of letters from and to the Choctaw Indians with respect to the claim of

lands west of the 100th meridian. Upon reciting this documentary evidence

at length, with long quotations, the Supreme Court said:

"We have made this extended reference to the corresspondence between the Endians and the officers of th
United States for the purpose, not only of showing that
the Choctaws had no claim,legal or equitable, to the
territory west of the 100th degree of west longitude,
of indicating the situation and relations of the parties
when the treaty of 855, to he presently referred
concluded,"

2 595

2 596
Retyped

17. The Supreme Court, on December 10, 1900, issued its order

and mandate (Ex. 5) in said cause, which is in part as follows:

IT IS NOW HERE ORDERED AND ADJUDGED by this Court
that the judgment of the said Court of Claims in this
cause be, and the same is hereby reversed.

And it is further ordered that this cause be, and
the same is hereby, remanded to the said Court of Claims
with directions to dismiss the petition of the Choctaw
and Chickasaw Nations, and to make a decree in behalf
of the Withita and Affiliated Bands of Indians fixing
the amount of compensation to be made to them on account
of such lands in the Wichita Reservation as are not
needed in order to meet the requirement of the Act of
Congress of March 2d 1895, c. 188, and for such further
proceedings as may be consistent with law and with the
opinion of this Court.

18. And on January 31, 1901, (Ex. 6) the Court of Claims made its

order which, insofar as the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations were concerned, reads:

"* * * it is ordered adjudged and decreed that the
petition of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations in
the present suit be dismissed."

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 __ _
Associate Commissioner

