31

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 31
BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION‘

THE EASTERN (EMIGRANT) czreeorcma
INDIANS: on the relation of Florian H.
Nash. Junior. Francis.A. Nash, Henry C.

Walkley. Rachel Davis-Driver. Nell
Stopler—Bradshaw. Nannie R. Mayes and
Ellen.Morgan—Fleetwood.

v. Docket No. 5

THE UNITED ST$TES OF AMERICA.

Defendant

Messrs. Woodsen E. Norvell and George E. Norvell for the plaintiffs;

Messrs. Ralph A. Barney and Jules M. Sigal, with whom was Mr. assistant
Attorney General.A. Devitt Vanech. for the defendant.

NOV 3 5 1343
OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

C‘

Holt. Commissioner, delivered the epinion of the Connission:

This case, in certain respects. is a companion case to cases
numbered 2 and 3, this day decided by the Connission, on a notion for a
summary judgment by the defendant in each case. The Western (Old Settler}
Cherokee Indians and the plaintiffs herein are joined as parties plaintiff in case number 2. The Western (Old Settler) Cherokee Indians are
plaintiffs in case number 3. but. aside from the difference in amount
claimed, the issues involved in that case are substantially the same
as in the case here under consideration.

The present claim is asserted by the Eastern (Emigrant)

Cherokee groups of Indians and added to the group are named individual

1 In.d Cl. Comma 31 H 2 H

descendants and heirs—at~law of said group. We do not determine the
status of such individuals in this action nor decide whether they are
necessary or even proper parties. as they allege no individual rights
and it is apparent they are acting on behalf and asserting the claim for
said group of Indians. the Eastern (Emigrant) Cherokee Indians. we
shall, therefore, dispose of the questions to be considered as though
the individual Indians had not been named as party plaintiffs.

The plaintiffs filed their amended petition herein and there—
after the defendant filed its motion for a summary judgment under
Section li(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the Comnission. The motion
was orally argued before the Commission and taken under advisement.

iThis case was submitted to the Commission on the motion of the
defendant for a summary judgment, asking that the amended petition herein be dismissed ”on the ground that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law in that the issues contained in the petition have been heretofore
judicially determined and the matter is res judicata by reason of former
decisions of the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court of the United

States.“ Attached to said motion and made a part thereof is an affidavit

the facts therein set forth being undenied.
In support of its motion the United States maintains that by

express provision of the not it may interpose all legal and equitable

32

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 31
...3._

defenses. including res judicata. save only those of the statute of

4-.

limitations and laches.

The plaintiffs make no objection to the manner in which the
question is raised, but contend,.in substance. that under the provisions of the Act creating the Indian Claims Commission (50 Stat. 1049;
25 U.$.C.A. 70) jurisdiction is vested in the Commission to hear and

determine their claim "without reference to any former litigation.

any action of Congress. or other department of the defendant Government

prelating thereto."

This question of whether the defense of res judicata by the
defendant is permitted under the terms of the Act, creating the
Commission and fixing its jurisdiction, is settled for the purpose of
the present case by the opinion in case number 2. decided this day:
wherein this Commission reached the conclusion that the words "all
other defenses" in the Act includes the defense of res judicata in a
proper case.

In the present case. as in the companion cases numbered 2 and 3.
counsel for plaintiffs. during the oral argument, was inclined to concede that the pending claim and the one decided by the Court of Claims
(Nbo 42077: 82 Ct. Clsc. 180} invslve the same parties and that the

U“ contended. however. that the

J.a'.\..n

facts are the same in both caseso

Court of Claims in that case was restricted by the terms of the

33

.1“‘Ind. c1‘. Comm. 31

_.h _

‘jurisdictional act and could therefore not grant the relief the

plaintiffs were entitled to while, by the Act of August 13. 1916.
this Commission has been granted broader jurisdiction and may consider issues and grant relief denied the Codrt of Claims by the Act
under which the former case was decided.

The defendant pleads as a bar to the prosecution of the pending case, the judgment in the case of Eastern (Emigrant) Cherokee
Indians (No. @2077, Supra) decided by the Court of Claims on
December 2. 1935. and upon.nhich a petition by the plaintiffs for a
writ of certiorari to the Court of Claims was denied on October 12.
1936 by the Supreme Court of the United States (29~ U.S. 51l)e

.A comparison of the pending action with the former case
E0. @2077 in the Court of Claims shows that the parties were the same in
both cases. In case No. @2077 the plaintiffs sought to recover and:
according to the allegations in the amended petition in this case; the
plaintiffs now seeh to recover the sum of $654.377.63. without interest;
and for an alleged balance due on interest—bearing principal due on
March 15. 1910, in the sum of $1,989.2l8.h9, with interest until paid
at the rate of 5% per annum. In both cases the plaintiffs based their
claim upon the facts. shown in the first case and alleged in the pending case. as follonsz that the Western and the Eastern Cherokee Indians
were dissatisfied with the results of certain treaty arrangements with

the defendant and were quarreling among themselves. To settle these

3é

'1 Ind. c1. Comm. 31   —-5 «- 5 35

differences and to reunite the whole Cherokee tribe. the defendant
undertook the role of mediator. and as a result a treaty was made on
August 6. 1846 (9 Stat. 871) between all the Cherokees and the defendant.
This treaty of l8H6 provided for an adjustment and settlement of “claims
and difficulties“ between the Cherokees and the defendant. as well as
among the Cherokees themselves: growing out of prior treaties of 1828
‘and 1835. It was provided in the l8h6 treaty that the Senate of the
United States was to determine whether interest should be allowed the
Cherokee Nation on whatever anount might be found due the Nation. and

from what date and the rate per annum to be paid. Pursuant to this propvision. the Senate of the United States on September 5. 1850 (Sen. Jour.

1st Session. 31st Congress. p. 601) adopted the following resolution:

"RESOLVED. that it is the sense of the Senate
_that interest at the rate of 5§'per annum
should be allowed. upon the sums found due the

'Eastern‘ and ‘Western‘ Cherokees. respectively.
from the 12th day of June. 1838.“

The plaintiffs new state the account between themselves and the

~ defendant as being a balance due them under the 1846 treaty in the

sum of $2.06?.539.lU. which fund, under the resolution of the Senate of

pseptember 5, 1850. supra. is claimed to be an interest—bearing fund at

the rate of 5%«per annum until paid; that on April 5. 1852 the

accumulated interest due thereon amounted to $l,b28,0l8.l3 and the pay'ment made by defendant on April 5. 1852 of $1,506,338.78, when first

applied on accumulated interest and balance on principal, leaves a

1 Ind. c1. Comm._3l. - 6 _

balance of interest;bearing principal of $l.989.2l8.h9; that subsequent payments made by the defendant when.applied on accumulated

interest leaves the sum of $1,989,218.49 of unpaid interest—bearing

.principal'with interest from March 15. 1910 (date of last payment).

pand. unpaid accumulated interest of $66&s377.63. which are the

amounts claimed by plaintiffs.

The difference between the account as now stated by plaintiffs.

and as it was found and stated by the Court of Claims in Consolidated
Cherokee Nation vs. The United States (U0 Ct. Cls. 252). is in the
application of the payment made April 5, 1852 of $1,506,338.78. of.
which amount $918,026.13 was the balance of the principal fund then
ascertained to be due and unpaid and the remainder being interest
thereon from June 12. 1838. ln that case the $9l¢.O26.l3 was deduct~
ed as a principal payment from the balance found due the plaintiffs
and a judgment entered for the balance of $l,llle28#.7O with interest
at 5% from June 12. 1838, which was paid in full.

It is urged by the plaintiffs that upon the rendition of the
decree by the Supreme Court of the United States in the case of The
United States v. The Cherokee Nation (202 UeS, 101) on review of the
decision of the Court of Claims in Cherokee Nation v. The United
States (#0 Ct. Cls. 252). it became the duty of the defendant
government to adjust and restate the account of the plaintiffs int
respect to interost_bearing principal and to give them the benefit

of the usual rules and principles of partial payments by first

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 31 _ ' 37

.-7 —

applying payments made_to the discharge of accumulated interest.
and any balance to the payment of principal debt. which it is asserted would have been that shown in the readjusted account upon which the
plaintiffs new rely.
In support of this contention the plaintiffs cite the proviso
in section 3 of the jurisdictional act of Congress approved April 25:
1932 (H7 Stat. 1371 which provides as follows}
“Provided. however. that any claim sued on by
said Cherokees for any part of an interest—
bearing fund upon which amount any payment or
payments shall have been made. such payment or
payments shall first be applied to reduction or
payment of interest earned to the date of such
"respective payments, and the balance; if any.
shall then be applied to reduce the interestbearing principal. and not otherwise.“
The ultimate question before the Court of Claims was
whether the principal and interest claimed to be due the plaintiffs:
under the provisions of the l8b6 treaty. had been paid as provided
in the Senate resolution of September 5. 1850. and whether such pay~
ments were properly made and applied. The Court of Claims. in considering the foregoing facts. alleged in the pending case and relied on by
the plaintiffs in the former case (No, 42077) was of the opinion that
plaintiffs‘ claim had not only theretofore been determined and adjudicated on the merits by that court. in Cherokee Nation V. United States

(ho Ct. Cls 252) and affirmed in United States v. Cherokee Nation

(202 U;s. 101). and paid in full. but that such determination was_a1so

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 31s

- 8 _

on.a correct statement of the account between the plaintiffs and.

defendant. and.decided:

“The claim sued upon by the plaintiffs having

"been adjudicated by this court and the Supreme

Court of the United States on its merits and

jpaid in full. is, under the terms of the jurisdictional act. without the jurisdiction of the Court. The
jpetition will therefore be dismissed. It is so orderedo"

The jurisdictional act (iv; Stat. 137) under which the
icourt of Claims determined the former case No. 4207?» in explicit
terms conferred.jurisdiction on that court

“to hear. examine. adjudicate: and render

judgment in any and all legal and equitable

claims arising or growing out of any treaty

or agreement between the United States and

the “herokee Indians. or arising or growing

our of any act of Congress in relation to

Indian affairs. which the same Eastern (Emigrant) * * *
Cherokees may have against the United States * * *."

That court gave due consideration to all the facts and issues

of fact raised.by plaintiffs. and had no difficulty in deciding that the

plaintiffs‘ claim had been determined and adjudicated on the merits as
a.legal and equitable claim for a specific amount of money alleged to be
due under the provisions of the 1836 treaty. the Senate reso1ution.of
September 5.11850; and that payments made thereon were properly made
and applied. The scope of the jurisdictional act. supra,'under which

the former case (#2077) was decided is substantially the same as that

. provided under clause (1) of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission

Act. The same ultimate question is raised.by the amended petition in

the present case as in the former case (@2077). so that this case as now

38

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 31

_ 9 presented, under the allegations of the amended petition. would be

for consideration by the Commission under said clause (1) of Section 2
of the Act. The facts and issues now presented being the same as those
previously considered and decided on the merits by the Court of Claims.

it appears that there would be nothing new for this Commission to now

determine.

We are. therefore. of the opinion that the cause of action
stated in the amended petition is the same as that adjudicated by the
Court of Claims in Case No. 42077; that it is between the same parties
and that there was an adjudication by that court on the merits of the
claim set forth in the amended petition herein. and therefore not withm
in the jurisdiction of the Commission to entertain.

The motion for summary judgment will therefore be sustained
and the amended petition is dismissed. It-is so ordered.

Dated this 15th day of November. 1948.

/s/ wn. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

I. the undersigned,.concur in the foregoing opinion.

/s/ LOUIS J. o*nAnR
Associate Commissioner

39

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 31 ' 40

Chief Commissioner Witt, concurring:

I agree with the decision of the majority of the Commissioners
that the notion of the defendant for summary judgment should be granted.
but i do not agree with all the reasons given.or statements made in
their opinions

My principal disagreement is with the statement that "* * * so
that this case as non presented. under the allegations of the amended
petition. would be for consideration under subsection (1) of Section 2
of the Act." I think that the pleadings by the plaintiffs in the case
at bar invoke and require the application of clause (5) of Section 2
of the Act: and I think the Act authorizes the finding of liability by
the Commission if by application of clause (5) to the facts, the
Commission should find that the plaintiffs have been wronged by the
Government in the respects alleged, and have not had redress or a preu
vious day in court upon the merits of their claim. yHowever, I think
that the pleadings. the findings of fact and the decisions of the Court
of Claims in its decisions in the cases of Cherokee Nation V. U.S.. 50
Ct. Cls.a 252. and Eastern Cherokee V. U; Sis 82 Ct, Cls 180, show
that that court gave consideration to every contention and-fact urged
in the case at bar, or could have done so: and did not decline the
consideration of any fact or contention for want of jurisdiction or

the absence of legal liability therefor on the part of the Government;

1 Ind. c1."-comm. 31 .. 2 .and that therefore the decisions in the cases mentioned constitute
res Judicata of the instant case.

Attention is called to the statements of Chief Justice Nott
of the Court of Claims in both Ct. Cls..‘decision that

"the court. or the accountants. were to go
behind statutory and treaty bars and receipts

in full and were to consider ‘any alleged or
declared.amount of money promised but with~
held"under any of said treaties or laws‘.

This meant that there were to be no technical
defenses set up. no pleas of res judicata. no
releases or relinquishments. compromises or
settlements: or it meant nothing.” "Interpreted

. in the light of the long. sore controversy
which had existed between the parties. it is

plain that the Cherokees believed the agreew
ment to mean (and the United States allowed

«I-.\........ L... __.. ‘L..."s.‘.'_..___\ :.1-...1. _..'|"| -.t‘ :.‘I..-9..‘ ,_'\-..--....;
ULLGIJ uv bu uu.1..LL:vt.:; Uiidu c1.J...L U4. b1Lt;J..L L-J..c.1..L£.1t3

and rights and equities were to be reopened and
reexamined de novo." '

Attention is also called to the language of Chief Justice
Fuller of the Suprene Court in its opinion affirming (with modification

only as to distribution of the judgment). as follows:

"Recovery of the item of $l.lll.28U.7O was adjudged
‘with interest thereon at the rate of 5% from June

12. 1838. to date of payment‘. and it is contended

that the Court of Claims erred in this allowance

of interest * * *."

"In view of the terms of the jurisdictional act
and the conclusion reached in reference to the
amount due, it appears to us that the decision

of the Senate in respect to interest is controlln
ing. and that. therefore interest must be allowed fron June 12. 1838 upon the balance we have
heretofore indicated."

The plaintiffs had opportunity in the 40th Court of Claims

41

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 31

...3...

case to present their contentions as to how interest should be

‘calculated; and as to the application of partial payments, and

whether or not they presented their views; it is my opinion that
having had the opportunity_to do so, before a court having jnris—
diction to consider same. the decision LR one case becomes res
judioata of that issue, as held by the Court of Claims in 82

Cto Cls.180.

/s/ EDGAR E. MIT,
Chief Gommissioner

742

