1 Ind. Cl; Come. 20

« 20*
Breome THE I'i:IDI.»%1E CLAII-ES CO1-«EMISSION

THE WESTERZI (om SETTIER) cztsnorss
INDIANS. on the relation of Dorothea
Owen. Thomas Roach. Ellis Crowell
Duncan. Elisabeth Schrimsher—Lewiss
Alice Flournoyusmith and Faxine Woodall,

Plaintiffs
vs. Docket No. 3

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA:

N-.o*\~—I-._I\..I\_#\.../\..r\../~.../s_2\..r-..a~._;' Defcndant_

Messrs. hbodsen E. Jorvell and George E. Horvell for the Plaintiffs.

Messrs. Ralph A. Barney and Jules M. Sigala with whom was Mr..Assistant
%Attorney General A. Dcvitt Vanech. for the Defendant. ' ' e

~ may '1 5 1948

0:.-“=-*'W* 0? see rezsnic Ion‘

-L5-sx.;-‘a — .1 —« .. -— 5..-1...

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case. in certain respects, is a companion case to cases
numbered 2 and 5, this day decided by the Commission on a notion by
the defendant in each case for a summary judgment. The Eastern

(Emigrant) Cherokees and the plaintiffs herein are joined as earties

F‘

‘plaintiff in case number 2. The Easterh (Emigrant) Cherokees are

plaintiffs in.case number 5 but. aside from the difference in the
amounts claimed. the facts and issues involved are the same as in the
case here under consideration.

The present claim is asserted by the western (Old Settler)

9

Cherokee group of Indians and added to the group are named individual

N
1

1' Ind. C1. Comm.  . "' 21

descendants and.heirs—at~law of said group. we do not determine the
status of such.individuals in this action nor whether they are necessary
or even proper parties. as they allege no individual rights and it is

apparent they are acting on behalf of said group of Indians and assertC ing the claim of the Western (Old settler) Cherokee Indians. We shall.

‘therefore. dispose of the question to be considered as though the
individual Indians had not been named as party plaintiffst

The plaintiffs filed their amended petition herein and thereiafter the defendant filed its motion for a suumary judgment under

section ll(b) of the Rules of Procedure of the Commission. The motion
was orally argued before the Commission and taken under advisement.

This case was submitted to the Commission on the motion of
defendant for a summary judgment, asking that the amended petition here—
in be dismissed #05 the ground that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of
law in that the issues contained in the petition have been heretofore
judicially determined and the matter is res judicata by reason of former
decisions of the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court of the United
States." That attached to said motion and made a part thereof is an
affidavit (Enhibit "A”). the facts therein set forth being undenied.

_ In support of its motion the United States maintains that by express

_provisions of the Act it may intorpose all legal and equitable defenses.

including res judicatas save only those of the statute of limitations

and laches.

1'  Clo   ‘M 3 -"

The plaintiffs contending. in substance: that under the

provisions of the Act creating the Indian Claims Commission (60 Stat.

lOQ9; 25‘U.S.C.A, 70) jurisdiction is vested in the Commission to

hear and determine their claim "without reference to any former

ilitigationg any action of Congress; or other department of the

defendant Government relating thereto.“

This question of whether the defense of res judicata by the
defendant is permitted under the terms of the.Act, creating this
Commission and fixing its jurisdiction. is settled for the purpose
of the present case by the opinion in case number 2. decided this
day; wherein this Commission reached the conclusion that the words

1

"all other d;f9R39S" in the set, includes the defense of res judicata

U

in a proper ease.

The counsel for the plaintiffs during oral argument was inclined to concede, as he did in cases numbered 2 and 55 that the
pending claim and the one decided by the Court of Claims (No; 42078;
82 Ct. C159 566) involve the same parties and that the facts are
substantially the same in both cases. He again contends, however.
that the Court of Claims in that case was restricted by the terms of
the jurisdictional act and could not therefore grant the relief plaintiffs were entitled while, by the Act of Aug st 139 19b6, this
Commission has been granted broader jurisdiction and may consider
issues and grant relief denied the Court of Claims by the jurisdictional

act under which the former case was decided.

1 Ind. c1. cemm. 20

The defendant pleads as a bar to the prosecution of the pending case. the judgment in the case of Western (Old settler) Cherokees
vs. The United States (No. 42078; 82 Ct; Cls. 566), decided by the Court
of Claims on February 3. 1936. and from which judgment no appeal was
taken: I

p.A comparison of the pending action with the former case (#2078)
shows that the parties were the same in both cases. In the former case
(#2078) thé plaintiffs sought to recover from the defendant the sun of
$320,13H.?0, with interest thereon from March &, 1899. at 5%jper annum
until paid. and the sum of $U2.552.3l interest which it was claimed had
accrued on the principal sun-prior to March h, 1899. According to the
allegations of the amended petition in the present case. the plaintiffs
now seek to recover the sun of $308,5n8.59 principal. with interest
from August 2%, 1894 until paid at the rate of 5%jper annum and in addition the sum.of $39.953.hO of unpaid interest, without interest.

In both cases the plaintiffs based their claim upon the facts. shown in
the first case. and alleged in the pending case. as follows: that the
Western and Eastern Cherokee Indians were dissatisfied with the results

of certain treaty arrangements with the defendant and were quarreling

among themselves. To settle these differences and to reunite the whole

- Cherokee tribe. the defendant undertook the role of mediator. and as a

result a treaty was made on.angust 6, l8h6 (9 Stat. 871) between all the

23

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 20

_ 5 _

Cherokees and the defendant. This 1846 treaty provided for an adjustment and settlement of "claims and difficulties" between the Cherokees
and the defendant, as well as among the Cherokees themselves, growing

out of prior treaties of 1828 and 1835. It was provided in said l8#6

itreaty that the Senate of the United States was to determine whether

interest should be allowed the Cherokee Nation on whatever amount
might be found due the Nation. and from what date and the rate per

annun to be paid.

Pursuant to this provision, the Senate of the United States
on September 5,,l85O (Sen. Jonr, 1st Session, 3lst Congress, p. 601)

adopted the following resolution:

WRESOLVED, that it is the sense of the Senate
that interest at the rate of 5§jper annun should
be allowed, upon the sums found due the ‘Eastern‘
and 'Western‘ Cherokees. respectively, from the
l2th day of June, l838."

The plaintiffs new state the account between themselves and the
defendant as being a balance due then under the l8Q6 treaty of

$746,618.53 in the former case (@2078), and $7b5,2?3.8h in the present

2’;

Cases which fund, under the resolution of the Senate of September 5, 1850,

supraa is claimed to be an interestwbearing fund at the rate of 5% per
annum until paid;
to the plaintiffs
the sum of s887.u8o.15; on.$ngust 2t, 189s the sum of $?96,2o?,o5 and

on March 3, 1899 the sum of $29,850.74; that applying these partial

that three several payments were made by the defendant

on account of this principal fund: on September 22, 1851

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 20

Ln

-6... , o ,' 

c

payments at the dates respectively made. first on the accumulated interest
and the balance. if any, on the intercst~bearing principal. there remains
unpaid. as stated in Case No. H2078, phe sum of $320,139.70 interestbbearing principal at the rate of 5% per annun from March 4, 1899 (date of
last payment) until paid. and, unpaid accumulated interest of $42,552.31.
and as stated in the present case. the sun of $308,598.49 interest—bear—
ing principal at the rate of 5%»per annum until paid. and, unpaid accumulated interest of $39,953.60.

The difference between the amount as it was found and stated-by

the Court of Claims in.Western Cherokee Indians V. United States (27 Ct.

(‘Ila ‘M. on nae:-P: an an n'...*.4.
ijf W Q

A
g: -......p 4-ca.-u---.-a-an-urn-.A. h-J Klnlaadu 5;

ya. uupeuug V. \.I.L\.A- up‘

and as stated in case number 42078 in the Court of Claims and in the present case, is in the application of the several payments made by the

defendant. The payment on September 22. 1851 was for $887,U80.l5. of
which amount $532,896.90 was the balance of the principal then ascertained to be due the plaintiffs under the treaty of 1846. and the balance
Of $354.583.25 was for interest thereon. In the Court of Claims

(27 Ct. Cls. 1) the $532,896.90 was deducted as a principal payment
from the amount found due the plaintiffs and a judgment was entered for
the balance of $22”s972.68. which was later reduced to $2l2.376.9U by
the Supreme Court: the payment made on August 29. 1896 was for the
amount of the judgment of $212.376.°4 and the balance of $583,830.12
for interest thereon from June 12, 1838 to June 6, 1893, or a

total payment of $796,207.06; the last payment of $29,850.74 on March 3.

1399 was in payment of interest on the said judgment of $212s3?6.9Q from

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 20
.a 7 _

June 6, 1893 to March 28, 1896‘,

The plaintiffs urge that upon rendition of the decree by the

Supreme Court in the case of United States V. Old Settlers, supra.

it became the duty of the defendant government to adjust and restate the
account of the plaintiffs in respect to interestubearing principal and

to give them.tho benefit of the usual rules and principles of partial
payments made to the discharge of accumulated interest, and any balance to
the payment of the principal debt. which it is asserted would have been

that shown.in.the readjusted account upon which the plaintiffs now rely.

I

C?"

In support of his contention the plaintiffs cite the proviso in

section 3 of the jurisdictional act of Congress; appreved.£pril 25; 1932
(#7 State 137): which provides as follows:
9 “Provided, however, that any claim sued

on by said Cherokees for any part of an
interest—bearing fund upon which amount
any'paynent or payments shall have been made»
such payment or payments shall first be

applied to reduction or payment of interest
earned to the date of such respective payments.
and the balance. if any. shall then be applied to
reduce the interest—bearing principal, and not
otherwise.“

The'ultinate question before the Court of Claims was whether
the principal and interest claimed to be due the plaintiffs under the
provisions of the 1826 treaty, had been paid as provided in the
Senate resolution of September 5, l850. supra. and whether such payments were properly made and applied. The Court of Claims in consideru
ing the foregoing facts. alleged in the pending case and relied on

by plaintiffs in the former case (#2078) was of the opinion that

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 20 ' 27

plaintiffs‘ claim had not only theretofore been determined and adjudicated on the merits by that Court in Western Cherokee Indians v. United
States. supra. in conformity with the.nandate of the Supreme Court
in.United States v. Old Settlers. supra, and.paid in full. but that

t

such determination was also a correct statement of the account between
the plaintiffs and defendant. and dismissed the petition.
The jurisdictional act (#7 Stat. 137} under which the Court

of Claims determined the former case (@2078) in explicit terms conferred jurisdiction on that court

"to hear. examine. adjudicate, and.render

‘ judgment in any and ai legal and equitable

claims arising or growing out of ang'treaty

or agreement between the United States and

the Cherokee Indians, or arising o; grow"

ing out of any act of Congress in relation

to Indian affairs» which the said Eastern

(Emierant) * * * Cherokees may have against the

United States * * * *."
That court gave due consideration to all the facts.and issues of fact
raised by plaintiffs; and had no difficulty in deciding that plaintiffs‘
claim had been determined and adjudicated on the merits as a legal '
and equitable claim for a specific amount of money alleged to be due

I

under the provisions of the l8#6 Treaty. the Senate resolution of
September 5. 1850 and that payments made thereon were gmeperly made
and applied. The scope of the jurisdictional act, under which the
former Case (42073) was decided is substantially the same as that
provided under clause (1) of Section 2 of the Indian Glaims Commission

Act. The same ultinate question is raised by the amended petition

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 20 .. 9 M

in the present case as in the Case Nos @3073, so that this case as
now presented, under the allegations of the amended petition, would
be for consideration by the Cemmission under said clause (1) of
Section 2 of the Acts The facts and issues now presented being the
same as those previously considered and decided on the merits by the

4;’:

Court of Claims, it anpcars that there would be nothing new for this
Gomaission to new determine.

It is true that plaintiffs have restated their claim so that
the amount of principal and interest now claimed to be due differs

slightly in amount from that claimed in case E0. @2078, but the

fuRdaR9ntal issue is identical in both caseso

We 8X90 therefore. of the opinion that the cease of action
stated in the amended petition is the same as that adjudicated by the

Court of Claims in Case Nos G23?8g that it is between the same parties
and that there was an adjudicatien by that court on the merits of the
claim set forth in the anondec petition herein. and therefore not Withu
in the jurisdiction of the Commission to entertains

The motion for suaxar" adgment will therefore be sustained

LI:

and the amended petition is dismissed. It is so ordered.

Dated this 15th day of Eovcaber, l9U8.

T6‘?-R’ E """ 1""
/S/ uric Lia 
Associate Ce""issioaer

Is the and rsigned: concur in the forceeil

.1 Ind. Clt Comm. 20

‘Chief Commissioner Witt. concurring:

This case is a companion case to case No. 5 this day decided
by this Commission. in which case I concurred with the decision of
the majority of the Commissioners in granting the notion of the
defendant for summary judgment, but did not agree with all the reasons
given therefor, or statements nade in their opinion. Likewise. I agree
with the disposition made in this case. but disagree with some of the
reasons given and statements nade in the opinion rendered by my
colleagues.

In View of the statements I make in the companion case to
which I refer. I will in this case. merely say that my principal
disagreement. as in the companion case. is with the statement that
"* * * this case as now presented. under the allegations of the amended
petition. would be for consideration by the Commission under said
pclause (1) of Section 2 of the.Act". ,I think the pleadings by the
plaintiffs in this case invoke and require the application of clause (5)
_of Section 2 of the Act; and I think the Act authorizes the finding of
liability by the Commission if by application of clause (5) to the
facts. the Commission should find that the plaintiffs have been wronged by the Covernment in the respects alleged. and have not had redress
However.

or a previous day in court upon the merits of their claim.

I think that the pleadings. the findings of fact. and the decisions

'29

1 Ind. c1. cm. 20 «- 2?vof the Court of Claims in the ease of Western Cherokee Indians vs.

The United States. 27 C. Ce 1. and hestern Cherokees V. United States,
82 C. C. 566, show that that court gave consideration to every contention and fact urged in.the case at bar, or could have done so,
and did not aecline the consideration of any fact or contention for
want of jurisdiction or the absence of legal liability therefor on
the part of the Government — and that therefore the decisions in the
cases mentioned constitute res judicata of the instant case.

The plaintiffs had opportunity in the 27th Court of Claims
case to present their contentions as to how interest shoulo be calu
Culateda and as to the application of partial payments; and whether or
not they presented their contentions in these respects, it is my

opinion that having had the opportunity to io so in a court having

ijurisdiction to consider some, the decision in that case becomes res

judicata of those issues; as held hy the Court of Claims in 82 Ca 0;

566: and in the case at bar.

/s/ EDG.€L'E?. E . wire.
Chief Cemzissioner

'2!‘

