I SULLIVAN THOM, EARL FRANK, N:»=:sIEL'

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 332

RmcRE TEE INDIAN OLAI‘2e OON2IIssION

THE NORTHERN PAIDTE NATION AND TEE
BANDs WOT, EX REL. WALTER
VORREBS, AVERI NINNENDOOA, RARE
JONES, FRANK JOHN, ANDREN DICK,
DENEI SAMPSON, RAsTINos PANOBO,
WILLIE sTEVE, NILLIAN HARDIN,

KENO, IRANEEAISBR, ALBERT ALEOE,
RARRI SAMPSON, ANN DOEINOTON,
Ross HARDIN, OCHO NINNENUOOA;
THE NALEER RIVER TRIBE OF THE
NALNER RIVER REsERVATION, THE
PTRANID LAKE TRIBE OF THE RIRANID
LAKE REsBRVATION, TEE IERINOTON
PAIUTE TRIBE OF THE IERINOTON
RESERVATION; m RENO-sPAR1<s ..
INDIAN OOLONI; T2-IE PAIUTE ssqosaom
TRIBES OF THE FALLON mIRVATION,
THE FORT MCDERI-1I’IT BAIUTE sBOs..-1 ONE
TRIBE,

Petitioners ,

1:. Docket No. 8'?

3
THE UNITED sTATEs OF AMERICA,

\__;s..__;s..,_;~.__.;~.._,_/~.__;\__;x__/»_;\J\./\.J\_/\J\.J\/\_.z\_4~..z\_/\./~.Jx_/\.x\./\./\./

Defendant.
Decided: March 21;‘, 1959

FINDINGS of §_A_c_:_:_T_

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. (a) Under the authority of the Indian Claims Ciomission Act
of August 13, 19116, 60 Stat. 10149, a petition was timely filed on
December 6, 1950, with the Commission in behalf of ‘the N«:rt1:ern Paiqte
Nation of Indians and its various bands by the Walker River Tribeof

the Walker River Reservation‘-, the P31:-asnid Lake Tribe of the Pyramid

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 T 323

Lake Reservation; the Yerington Paiute Tribe of the Yerington Reservation; the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony; the Paiute Shoshone Tribes of
the Fallon Reservation; the Fort Mcllermitt Paiute Shoshone Tribe and
by Walter Vczrhees as a member of and representative of said Northern
Paiute Nation and all its members. These six reservation tribes, located in Nevada, are sometimes hereinafter referred to as the tribal
petitioners .

(b) On August 8, 1951, an amended petition was timely filed in
which 1.7 more individual Indians joined as petitioners. The original
and amended petitions set forth a number of causes of action, including
claims for the value of certain lands located in Nevada, Idaho, Oregon,
and California to which petitioners claim the Northern Paiute Nation and
its constituent bands had aboriginal Indian title, which lands are
alleged to have been taken at various times between 1865 and 1882 by
the United States without payment of any compensation therefor. A
hearing was held before the Commission at which only questions relating
to these aboriginal title claims were at issue. Thereafter, the Com-'
mission by orders dated April 211, 1957 , permitted severance from the
amended original petition of all claims other than the original 
claims and accepted an amended petition in Docket No. 87, which.   
had been filed on April 15, 195?, and set forth only the origf,   
claims already heard and which are to be determined in this proceeai:1g;;.; 
A separate petition setting forth the severed claims was also filed m2<.«

rrumbered Docket No. 87-3.. Those claims are of no comern hem:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 32h

2.. There are two other separate cases filed with this Commission
by other‘Northern Paiute claimants. in which  are asserted 1"
parts of the area in Oregon claimed by petitioners in Dockt 87. 1 These
claims are as follows:  A
8 (a) In the case of the Snake or Piuteul Indians of Former Malheur Reservation in Oregon v. The United States, Dccldet No. 17% LL Ind.
Cl. Comm. S"{l; the petitioners inothatcase asserted ‘a claimof Indian
title to a lage area of land in southeast Oregon. On December- '28,"l9S6,
this Commission found  “the petit ioners‘ ancestors}. the Snakeor
Piute bands orttribe who were parties to the unratified treatytof
December 10, 1868, hadexclusively occupied and nse-d in Indian fashion“
from  zimmemoriale 61- -31- the area of land included. within the boundaries
of the 3‘1alheU.r Res"erva.ion is Oregon as it was defined and described in
the Executive Order of January 28 , 1876 ~>’- *-‘1- -‘é."‘  land lies unitrdn
the boundaries of thearea in Oregon claimed bv petitioners‘    8?.

(b) In the case of  and Modoc Trihes and the Yahooskin

 

Band or sage Indians v. United states, Docket Ioioo, the petitioners"

 

in that case are asserting on behalf of the Yahooskin  alclaim for
the same lands in Oregon as claimed for them" in Docket 87, and are doing
so indemndently‘ of their relationship tothe‘ Northern Paiute Nation

and for a right to such lands as thev claim ‘belonged  them exclusively.
By an order of this Commission entered Fay l9, IQSS; in Docket Nose lOO
and 87, the claim asserted for and on behalf of the Yahooslclnt Band 
Docket 87 was dismissed and saidband was granted the exclusive right

to maintain in Docket 100 their claim for the land claimed by them in

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 325

Docket 100. Thereafter, by order of the Commission on June 6, l9S7, the
finality of the previous order of May 1955' was stayed without prejudice
to its reinstatement following determination by the Commis sion of the
issues presented in Docl-at 87.

3. (a) The amended petition filed in Docket 87 on April 15, 1957,
alleges, in substance, that at and prior to first white contact and for
many years thereafter, the Northern Paiute Nation was divided into
various bands but as a result of the acts of the United States "in
taking away the ancestral lands of said Nation including the bands
thereof,“ the members thereof were first dispersed and later concentrated on various reservations including those of the tribal petitioners;
and, that the individual. petitiomrs and the Northern Paiute Indians
enrolled as members of the six petitioning reservation organizations
comprise a substantial part of the descendants and members of the
Northern Paiute Nation and its various bands who held aboriginal Indian
title to the lands here in issue. Each of the tribal petitiomrs sue
in its can right, and jointly with the others, both as successors to
the claims of the Northern Paiute Nation and all of its bands and in a
representative capacity on behalf of said Nation and bands; and the
named individual petitioners are suing as members and representatives
of all the members of such Nation and bands. Tte petitiorers allege
that by various acts of the defendant their ancestral ‘lands were ta.i‘-.~:en
from them without their consent and without compensation.

(b) In petitioners‘ Requested Finding No. 3 under a heachg, "Was

Issues at Trial “ is the statement ‘that "the etitioners have underta;re:,ii;
J

7 Ind. Clo Com. 322 326

to establish (l) the right of these claimants to bring these claims
under the Act, (2) the Indian title of these claimants to the lands
used and occupied by them at the time of taking by the United.States,
(3) the manner and date or the taking er these lands -:2" -:é -:2-, and (La
the boundaries of the claimant's lands taken by the United States."
b. (a). The six tribal petitioners are located on separate reservations in Nevada. The Walker River Paiute Tribe of the Walker River
Reservation, the Pyramid Lake Tribe of the Pyramid Lake Reservation, the
Yerington Paiute Tribe of the YeringtonPReservation,-the Reno-Sparks

Indian Colony, and the Fort McDermitt Paiute Shoshone Tribe of the Fort

McDermitt Reservation.are separate corporations formed under the Indian

1, “P1..- 12)-.--...I.... <'H.-..'n ..
1...; -xix; -<.a..x..L4u<‘.'. n..auUD11.U1.tC

Reorg.'—3.ni 7.::t~'$ rm An.-I-. NF‘ .T1m.£= 18; 1.931;, 1:8 St
Tribes of the Fallon Reservation have a business committee elected by
their members. I

(b) ‘Each of these six reservation.organizations have been recognized by the Secretary of the-Interior as having the authority to represent
its enrolled mlembersrt According to the last Census ‘Report made in 19h;
of the Indian population in the United States under the durisdiction of
the Office of Indian Affairs by State, Reservation; Tribe; and Residence,
the following number of Indians were enrolled on each of these six reservations: at'Walker River L37 Paiutes and 38 other Indians; at Pyramid
Lake, 563 Paiute and 9 others; at Yerington Reservation, 78 Paiute; in
the Reno-Sparks Colony, ISL Paiute, h2‘Washoes and 9 others; at Fallon L

Reservation; 198 Paints and 9? Shosh

0

no; and “t Fort =
Paiute and 5 others, The present enrollment figures appear to be approximately the same.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 32?

(c) The 1915 Census Reportpalso showed 8711 other Paiute Indians
located in Nevada in 19115. In addition the report showed 1396 Paiutes
located in California; 3S1 in Oregon and 128 in Idaho. These population
figures total 111180 Northern Paiute Indians in the four states in 19115.
Walter Vcrhees, an individual petitioner, testified that "the actual
population of Piute people today (1951:) may run close to 6,000."

5. The individual petitioners are Northern Paiute Indians, with
the possible exception of Earl Frank who has not been identified. 01‘
the individual petitioners, Ocho Winnemucca lives on the. Summit Lake
Reservation in Nevada and Frank John, whose present residence is not
shown, was born in Warner Valley, Oregon. Each of the other fifteen
is a_ member of one oi‘ the six, tribal. petitiomrs and resides in Nevada.

6. The area claimed by petitioners takes the form of an inverted
triangle with its southern tip in Owens Valley, Caliiornia, and its
broad northern base extending from the Cascade Range in Oregon, about
the hSth degree of latitude, eastward to Fayette Lake in Idaho. The
area, approximately 78,000 square miles or 50 million acres, encompasses

more than half of Oregon, half of Nevada, a portion in northeast

California and a portion in southwestern Idaho. It is about 300 miles

Wide at its widest point and extends approximately 600 miles north and

south.

The claimed land lies mostly in the physiographic province of the

Great Basin which is bounded on the west by the Cascade, the Sierra Nevacfis;-t

and other mountain rages. It is, and was in aboriginal times, an excessively arid area, classified as "steppe“ rather than a true "desert

7 Ind. cl. Com. 322 - 328

The small streams in the area flow into landlocked lakes (often brackish,
salt, or evaporation pools or swampy sinks), and there is sparse vegetation and animal life. The northern portion of the area did include
tributaries of the Columbia River which tributaries were important for
salmon while the Owens Valley area in California held an abundant

supply of pine nuts and more plentiful game.

7. That potion of the claimed area north of the h2nd parallel,
in the present States of Oregon and Idaho, became part of the United
States in l8h6. Prior to that time it had been claimed by both the
United States and Great Britain. The Treaty of June 15, l8h6 (9 Stat.
869) gave the territory south of the hath parallel to the United States,
preserving to tne Hudson‘s bay Company and other Brioish °“bjects sort“
of the border whatever possessory rights they might have. On August lb,
l8h8, the United States established the Territory of Oregon (9 Stat. 323),
which included the present States of Oregon, 'ashington and Idaho.

The area south of the h2nd parallel was acquired by the United I
States on February 2, l8h8, from Mexico under the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo (9 Stat. 922), which.treaty ceded to the United States the area
of what is now California, hevada, Utah, Arizona, Non Mexico and part
of Colorado. California was admitted into the Union on September 9,
1850 (9 Stat. LS2) and on that same date the Territory of Utah was
established (9 Stat. L53). That Territory included the land which
later (l86h) became the State of Nevada. *

8. (a) One of the earliest reports concerning the inhabitants of

the claimed area came in l8OS from the Lewis and Clark expedition which

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 329

passed down the Columbia River to the mouth of the Deschutes River, where
they gathered reports of numerous Snake Indians 12 days travel to the
southeast (an.area apparently within the claimed territory in the present
state of Oregon).

The first recorded white contact with the Indians within the area
claimed by petitioners is found in the Journal of Peter Ogden of the
Hudson’s Bay Company, who reported encounters in 1825 and 1826 with
Snakes at the fork of the Deschutes and Crooked Rivers, all along the
John Day River, on the Snake River, in the Harney Basin area, on the
Silvies River, on Albert, Earner, and Malheur Lakes (all locations in
the present State of Oregon) and on the Humboldt River west to Humboldt
Lake (in northwestern Nevada) (Pet. Ex. 832; Def. Ex. 36). John Work
in his "Journal Covering Snake Country'ER;edition of 1830-31" also located Snake Indians in the Oregon portion.of the claimed territory (Pet.
BX. 921; Def. Ex. 36). twashington Irving wrote of Captain Bonneville’s
expedition of l83h. Along the Powder River, three miles above its entrance into the Snake River, Captain Bonneville encountered Indians in.
considerable numbers whom he identified as "that branch of the great
Snake tribe called Shoshokoes or Root Diggers, from their Sub$jnti;;,
in a great measure, on.the roots of the earth; though they‘Ig>wvT*
fish in great quantities, and hunt, in a.small way. They are, §J:f?T'”
Very poor; destitute of'most of the comforts of life, and extremely inw
dolent;'but a mild, inoffensive race. They differ, in many respeuts,

from the other branch of the Snake tribe, the Shoshonies, who

horses, are more roving and adventurous, and hunt the buffalo“ E“

7 Ind. Cl. Coznm. 32k 330

Ex. 21). John Charles Fremont traveling down the Deschutes River in
the l8bO’s recorded meeting a village of Nez Perce Indians and with
them a "few Snake Indians of the root-digging species" (Def. Ex. lb).
Nathaniel J. Hyeth in January, 1835, found “Snakes” in the region around
the junction of the Deschutes and Crooked Rivers (Def. Ex. 52).

(b) There were also early reports of the Indians found to the
south of the Oregon section in western Nevada. Jedediah Smith reported on the presence of Indians described as the "most miserable of
the human race having nothing to subsist on.except grass seed, grasshoppers, etc." Smith’s expedition passed through Yevada to the north
Of Walker Lake and south of the Humboldt River (Def. Ex. 10).. Fremont
found Indians encanped about Vrlker Lake in lPh5-L6 (Def. Ex. lb), and
in 1859 Captain J. 3. Simpson reported that fPi-Utes" from Walkers Lake
came into his camp to sell salmon.trout (Def. Ex. LO). Fremont en-.
countered "Digger" Indians between the Truckee and Carson Rivers.
Zenas Leonard reported the killing of some 80 to 100 Indians along the)
Humboldt River, identified as "Pai-utes or Root Diggers" (Pet. BX. 852).
iEdnin Bryant encountered “Diggers” in l8h6 above Humboldt Sink (Def.
EX- 7), and James Abbey in the spring of 1850 was visited in the valley
of the Carson.River by some twenty “Root Digger Indians" (Def. EX. 1).

(c) There were fewer early reports on the Indians in the Owens
Valley area in California at the extreme southern end.of the claimed
territory.‘ The Journal of Edward H. Kern.tells of explorations of the
Owens Diner and Lake area in December, IELS, and January, ISL6, where

rnnnerous Indians were encountered. They were described as the “most

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 0" 331

degraded class, entirely naked, and with scarcely a sufficiency of food
to sustain life" (Def. Ex. 25).

(C1) In summary it is clear that there were, in various localities
throughout most of the claimed area, Indians who were encountered by the
earliest white explorers in the area. These Indian inhabitants were
variously described as Snakes, Bannocks, Tzfarrucks, 5hoshokoes, Diggers,
Digger Snakes, Dogs, or Paiutes (Pai-utes). They were described as a
wretched lot, living on roots, ants, locusts, grasshoppers and fish,
with scarcely any clothing. They were foot Indians and lived, apparently,
in small groups in non-permanent shelters made of grass or brush and, it
appears, roamed the land without any permanent villages.

9. The early reports of United States military officers and other
government agents in the claimed area refer to Indian inhabitation in

Various localities throughout the claimed territory. The Superintendent

of Indian Affairs, Oregon Territory, in 1851, reported that there was a

large tribe of Shoshoms or Snakes in the southwestern part of Oregon

and extending into the Territory of Utah. In 1851,: Maj. G. J. Rains reported a band of about 3,000 Snake Indians in Oregon, which band  
was composed of Bannocks (whom he later reported spoke a different f?..a.n«~—
guage), the Shoshones and Root Diggers.
In his report of September ll, 19511, the Super intendent of :%

Affairs, Oregon, reported that east of the Elamath and Mo-dochs and er»:-»

1-.

tending to the eastern limits of the superintendency were the  
Snakes or Diggers, of which, he reported, little was known.
the report of the Commissioner of Indian ffairs for 18514 was a 

of R. R. Thompson, Indian Agent, Viddle Oregon, in which he stated:

.7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 332

“I would here observe that there appears to be a marked
distinction in the habits, manners, and pursuits of the
Indians within this agency. They may properly be divided
into three classes, viz: the northeastern, the northwestern
and the southern. Those on the northeast are the Cayuses,
Nez Perces, Flatheads, and those of the Sho-sho-nies known
as Hountain Snakes. Those on the northwest are the John
Day, Deschustes, Tyich,'Wasco and Dog River or Cascade
Indians. Those of the south are the Tlameth, and those
Sho-sho-nies known as Diggers.

“The Mountain Snake Indians are a branch of the Root

Diggers, (who, in the extreme south, are presumed to

be the lowest order of the aboriginal race,) and have -a common language. They occupy the country on the north

and east of Fort Hall [Tort Hall was in Idaho east of the

claimed are§7 and to the south to include Bear River valley.

V ."...V..
">fn A

"The third and last division are along the southern
border of this agency district, and include a portion of
the Digger and Tlameth tribes. The latter inhabit the
country along the eastern base of the Cascade and Sierra
Nevada mountains, and south to the Great Klameth lake;
the Digger country extending to the north of the Snake
river. "With the exception of the immediate margin of the
streams, their country is a barren waste, affording very
little vegetation save artemisia, or wild sage. They
subsist upon roots and almost every living thing within

their reach, not excepting reptiles, crickets, ants, etc.
«- «—  (Def. Ex. 59)

In a report of August 1, 1857: Indian Agent A. P. Dennison.reDorted.from his headquarters in Dalles, Oregon, on the Columbia River,

that Mountain Snakes, Bonnacks, and Diggers were three tribes generally

known as the Snake Indians. Of them he said:

“The Sho—sho~nies or Snakes, are divided into many
different bands, occupying different sections of country.
All speak the same language. Of these Indians but very
little is known. They are considered an indolent,
thieving people, and those known as Diggers are of the
lowest degree of the Indian race, living upon all species
of insects, and sometimes eating one another. Thy occupy

7%. Ind. Cl. Com. 32¢. 333

the country from Burnt River on the east [near the IdahoOregon b0rde_I_'7 to the Des Chutes river on the west, east

of the Blue mountains, and as far south as California."

(Def. Eb-:. 61)

In 1852, J. H. Holeman, Indian Agent, Utah Territory, wrote of a
village of about 350 "Pa-Utah" Indians who resided in Carson Valley,
Nevada. In 1853, Agent Holeman found two separate bands of “Pi-Utes"
residing on the Carson River (Nevada) and in the mountains east and
southeast of the River. In a report made in March 1851; Agent Holeman
enumerated the various Indian tribes which he said claimed all the land
within the Territory of Utah. They were the Shoshonies, Uwinte Utes,
Pi-Utes, Timpany Utes, Parvante Utes, Banacks, Awshaws and Sosokos
(Pet. Ex. 117).

Superintendent Forney reported on his travels on October 3, 1858,
west of Stone Point on the Humboldt River (Nevada) nearly a hundred
miles into the “Pey-Ute" country where he learned from straggling "Pey-Utes”
that their chief was further down near the Humboldt and, from later reports, that the chief and all his people were at Pyramid Lake. (Def. Ex. 107)

On December ll, 1857, the citizens of Honey Lake Valley entered
into an agreement of peace with Win-ne-ma-cha, a chief of the "Pah-Utah“
Indians. On January 5, 1858, three sub-agents of the California Superintendent of Indian Affairs, entered into a treaty of peace with Win-ne-macha, chief of the "Smoke Creek Band of Pi-Utahs." (Smoke Creek crosses the
California-Nevada line to the northeast of Honey Lake).

J. Dodge, Indian Agent for Carson Valley, reported on January 1;,

1859, t -~:-, the "Py—Ute" nation numbered some 6,000 souls with bands at

Smoke Creek near Honey Lake», Carson Valley, and about the Lake and

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 331:

sinks of Carson and Walker's Rivers, the Truckee River, Pyramid Lake,
and lower Mud Lake (Pet. Ex. 113; Def. Ex. 100). Likewise, the

Surveyor General for Utah Territory reported in January 25, 1860, that
there were a very considerable number of Piutes on both Walker's and
Pyramid lakes. There were also reports in 1860 of "Pah-Utes" in the
mountains north of the Humboldt; from the Truckee River over to a point
north of the Sink of the Humboldt; and between the Sink of the Humboldt
and Lassen's Meadows, some 50 miles to the north.

A§ent'warren'Wasson in a report dated April 20, 1862, told of his

trip to the south to quell disturbances about Mono and Owens Lakes

in California. At Mono Lake he found the "Pah-Utes of that section cone
gregated and each exoited.“ Later he reported he passed the boundary
between the "Pah;Ute" and Owens River Indian country (Pet. Ex. l80).

l0. Petitioners‘ expert anthropologist, Dr. Omer C. Stewart,

described the Northern Paiutes as a group of Indians linguistically,
culturally and territorially united with smaller units, called bands,
within the tribe. These bands were described as being politically
autonomous with small population and simple, informal social organization. There was, reported Dr. Stewart, no political authority'binding
the whole group together. "While Dr. Stewart found evidence of the development of influential leaders who covered large areas within the

Northern Paiute territory, he said in his study entitled, "The Northern
Paiute Bands," published in 1939 in the Anthropological Records of the
University of California (Vol. 2, No. 3), “Prior to the arrival of the

white people, bands united for special hunting, fishing, dancing, pinon7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 335

nut gathering, rarely for war; ‘but no one was generally recognized as
possessing any authority above the local band chief. It seems that the
Northern Paiute were ripe to become politically united; this, however,

never happened." In summary Dr. Stewart wrote, "Occupying a single

physiographic province, speaking similar dialects of one linguistic
family, possessing cultures and traditions in common, the Northern
Paiute bands, without doubt, formed one tribe. The unity was tenuous,
but no indications of internal strife were discovered; on the contrary,
hunting grourris were shared, and Old Winnemucca, in the early days of
white contact, nearly united the bands under one political leadership.
The cultural uniformity of the tribe and its nice adjustment to its

environment definitely established unity, and on this basis I am of the

opinion that the Northern Paiute took possession of their entire terri0)

tory when they first entered the country and have occupied it up to its

. . . . I!
present limits for a comparatively long time.

ll. Dr. Julian H. Steward, an anthropologist who testified for the
defendant, described the Northern Paiutes, in aboriginal times, as small

groups of rarely more than a half a dozen families who were scai’{.s‘tered

over a wide area of land obtaining their mibsistence from seech: and :;_;

 c.0

Larger groupings generally occurred only during the winter and  ;;:f .:. :.;

seasons.
united and the so-called bands were merely local groups with names derived from the striking or important food of the locality. Dr. Stews:.~i:*d
did recognize the Northern Paiutes as spea.-«ting a mutually  i t

dialect, possessing a basically similar culture and associcti 

one another more often than with members of other tribes.

The Northern Paiutes were not, in aboriginal times, 3;, 

7 Ind. c1. Com. 322 335

12. It is apparent that within the territory claimed in this case
there were, in aboriginal days, certain Indians who, as described by the
early explorers, government officials and anthropologists, possessed
certain distinguishing similarities. Notably they spoke the same language, shared a common economic life and, in general, had a similar
Indian culture .

Although in aboriginal times they were variously classed under a
variety of names ,' they gradually became known as Paiutes and finally,
distinguishing them from the southern branch of the family, as Northern
Paiutes. This term Northern Paiute, while not originating in the aboriginal period, has been used for many years to refer to those aborigines
living in the Ureat Basin who spoke Mono-Paviotso. heir language is
described as belonging to the Utah—Aztec family of Indian languages.

One branch of this family was the Ute~Chemehuevi speaking peoples who
are now classified as Ute and Southern Paiute. Another branch of the
family was the Shoshonean which includes the Mono-Paviotso and the
Shoshone-Camanche. ‘However, the Shoshonean Indians speaking MonoPaviotso also includes the Monos west of the Sierra.Nevada.¥ountains and
the Fort Hall Rannocks of Idaho, both of which groups were comprised of
very different Indians from those described in the territory claimed in
this case. As petitioners state in their proposed findings of fact, the
Bannocks may have been a part of the Northern Paiutes, but, by the time
of the alleged takings in this matter, they had adopted the culture of
the plains Indians and were separate and distinct from the Northern Paiute

(petitioners' Proposed Finding of ‘act do. lb}.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 337

Defendant has no trouble identifying those Indians embraced within
the term Northern Paints and defines them in its Proposed Finding of Fact
No. 11 as "those portions of the Mono-Paviotso speaking peoples living
east of the Sierra iievadas, who were at the time of white contact, primitive foot Indians. This includes (1) the Indians of Owens Valley,

(2) the eastern Monos, (3) some Indians in (a) the Honey Lake area and
other portions of Northern California, (b) perhaps the southwest portion
of Idaho, and (c) the southeast part of Oregon.%

Other government officials have used the term Northern Paiute to

refer to the Indian occupants of this general area. The "Compilation

of Ma+.er~w‘:a‘1 Re]::'i*."sn_:_>'_ to the Tndians of the “rited States and the Territory of Alaska, Including Certain Laws and Treaties Affecting Such Indians"
prepared by the Subcommittee on Indian Affairs of the Committee on Public
Lands, House of Representatives, 81st Congress, 2d Session, published I
June 13, 1950, Serial No. 30, referred to the Paiute as a_"subdivision

of the Shoshonean stock [x7r‘nic_t§7 is in turn divisible into two groups, the
northern or Paviotso and the southern or Paiute proper." (Page 36)

Whatever may have been their names or designations in aboriginal

times and regardless of their status as a so-called "tribe,“ 
"nation," the Indians living in most oi‘ the territory claimed  
descendants have become known as Northern Paiutes. The ConLTniss;I=..~.)1’;; ;j‘-‘I.’-iilr-5-:‘i‘E.:'-i
that the Northern Paiute Indians are a clearly defined vgroup of‘ 
Indians with in the meaning of the term “identiiiable group" as used 
sections 2 and lo of the Indian Claims Commission Act. Accordi,

this Com.m.:Z_-.,sion has jurisdiction to hear and determir“ the  ‘r I

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 338

by the petitioning members of the Northern Paiute Nation on behalf of all
its members.

Having found petitioner VNorthern Paiute Nation" to be an "identifiable group" for jurisdictional purposes ne shall now turn to an examination of (1) the aboriginal bandfs) or group(s) who are non broadly
referred to as Northern.Paiute and the extent of the territory aboriginally possessed by such group or groups, if any, and (2) the existence
of members or descendants of mmbers of such group or groups.

In making our findings with respect to the occupancy of this large
territory the Commission will consider first the southernmost area claimed,
namely that about Owens Lake in California and continue north through the
Nevada areas with their adjoining sections in California and finally the
Oregon and southwestern Idaho portion of the claim. .

Owens Valley Area

13. (a) This area of Paiute occupation includes the claimed territory in southern Nevada south of Walker Lake and in California from
slightly north of Reno Lake south to Owens take.

This area, although semi-arid, held greater natural resources to
support its Indian inhabitants than did the claimed lands to the north.
The area included the eastern slopes of the Sierra Nevada dountains and
the less rugged western slopes of the White and Inyo Mountains. The
Sierra—Nevadas were rugged mountains of not under lO,COO feet'with peaks
Surpassing lb,OOO feet. The mountains gave rise to many mountain streams
which upon reaching the valley joined the Owens?Rivier which flowed into

saline Owens Lake. ihe creeks supported wild vegetable foods and fish.

\O

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322   3

U)

The area also contained rabbits, antelope, deer and mountain sheep. Pine
nut plots or groves covered the '3?-‘hits and Inyo Mountains between 6000
and 9000 feet.

(b) The record conta.ins meager reports of the early explorers in this
area. This land was not on the route of immigrant trains and did not
attract settlement until its mineral resources became of interest about
1855. In December, I8h5, Edward Kern reported on his explorations down
Owens River where he encountered numerous Indians (Def. Ext. 25). A. W.
von Schmidt estimated the Indian population in Owens Valley in 1855 at
1,000. Major 11. C. Egbert repczrted in l870 that there were Indians at
‘Round Valley, Bishop Creek, Big Pine, Independence, George's Creek, Lone
Pine and Cerro Gordo, all localities lying along the Owens River (Pet.
Ex. 821;-A). Capt. J. M. Davidson reported on an expedition into this
area in July and August 1859. He described the Indians as E-Eohopies,
living upon the shores of Owens Lake and in the valley of Owens River
and upon its numerous tributaries. He stated that the Indians had never
been at war with any other tribe or people which, Capt. Uavidson said,
“vould seem to be established by their form of government, for they have
no principal Chief oz-leader, which warfare would make necessary, ”;::m;.
are ruled by the heads of families--a patriarchal mode of goverr.men‘i. 
He also reported that these Indians were living in an almost isol.=:¢-ir:.r’?,
condition, having but little intercourse '.rith rcther tribes (Pet. 

In reporting on Indian uprisings in the Owens Valley area in l862,
Agent lrfarren ‘fasson wrote on April 20, 1862, a report of his 

the area. He found the "Pah-Utes" of Mono Lake excited over the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 we

disturbance at Owens River and, Agent Wasson reported, they sent one of
their tribe who spoke the language of the Owens River Indians. Then
leaving that area they travelled south, about noon passing "the boundary between the Pah Ute and Owens River Indian country." Upon his return to "Pah Ute“ country, he went to the Walker River Reservation where
the "Indians were all glad to see zEi§7 return, said they had been afraid
that [h§7 and the interpreter would be killed by the Owens river Diggers
. . . ." (Pet. Ex. l80)

In a letter of May 26, 1862, Captain Edwin A. Rowe wrote of the
Indian uprisings about Owens River. He met with Indians at Mono Lake
including some of those who had engaged in the disturbances at Owens Lake.
Those Indians "pretended to have no connection with the Owen River Indians
but nevertheless were anxious to convey to me the idea that the ‘Owens
Rivers’ from this time forward desired peace.“ After leaving Mono Lake,
Captain Rowe proceeded to Adobe Valley, some 32 miles east and slightly
south of Mono Lake, where the "Indian boundary line runs dividing the
‘Pi-Utes‘ from the ‘Owen Riversl." (Pet. Ex. 18h)

Stephen Powers, in October, l87S,‘visited.the Indians in Owens
River Valley. He stated that the Patutes there were locally called Honos,
and he described them as "meznbers of the Paiute nation distinctly,‘ ‘though
there never was any solidarity or community of feeling in this nation,
and the different sections or tribes were sometimes at bitter feud with
each other." (Pet. Ex. 888)

'(C) One of defendant‘s expert anthropologists, Dr. Julian H.

Steward, testified concerning this area and his previously published

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 3151

works were introduced into evidence. Dr. Steward was one of the eminent
authorities concerning this area having done field research in the area
in 192?, 1928 and 1931. On the basis of his studies of the area Dr.
Steward reported that the Northern Paiutes of Owens Valley were subdivided into "true composite land-owning bands." He found that each of
these “bands” carried on a number of cooperative activities and possessed
chiefs. They had not engaged in warfare to any extent except with the
white man when formerly independent bands united. Dr. Steward described
the Deep Springs and Fish Lake Valleys as "western independent Northern
Paiute Villages." Both valleys he described as occupied by small groups
of Northern Paiutes who intermarried with each other and Owens Valley
Paiutes and who visited those areas for dances and rabbit drives. He
found the chieftainship of Deep Springs and Fish Lake Valleys interlocldng. There was scant ethnological evidence concerning the Mono

Lake area, Dr. Steward spending but a few days in the area. He did
however locate a settlement on the southwest shore of Mono Lake at the
site of Bridgeport Tom's ranch.

Dr. Steward in his “Ethnography of the Owens Valley 32*‘ 
lished in 1933, (Pet. Ex. 90l) described the eastern bourré  ’*i.."m;+
line separating the Paiute from the Shoshone as running s<;>u.'3:fr:v:  
MountaiJ1S, Nevada, through Columbus salt marsh, through  7? 
(which he says was occupied by both tribes) through Iigureka Valley (z-:hj..ch
he says was uninhabited and seldom visited by either )0, _thro13_g‘n  
Mountains, and around the south shore of Owens Lake.  r .

Defendant's Exhibit 136, prepared for this case, he said    

7 Ind. c1. Com. 322 g 3&2

1933 report was supplemented and slightly modified in the light of subsequent research and was published in his 1938 report (Pet. Ex. 91:1-A,
Figure 7. facing page 58). On that map he placed the Paiute-Shoshone
boundary further to the east of Fish Lake Valley. Dr. Steward wrote a
biography on "Panatubiji, an Owens Valley Paiute" (Pet. Ex. 9051) an
Indian who lived from about 1820 until 1911. It is interesting to
note that this aboriginal Paiute occupant of the Owens Valley area
apparently felt: free to travel about and use the resources of the
entire ‘area including Fish Spring Community (where he was born and later
became chief), Owens Lam (to hunt deer), Big Pine, Fort Independence,
and Deep Springs Lake (to gather pine nuts). He did not go up into the
territory of the Paiutes in western Eievada.

The petitioners’ expert anthropologist, Dr. Omar C. Stewart, made
no detailed study of the Owens Valley and Mono Lake region which had been
studiedby Dr. Steward and, at the hearing, testified that‘ he accepted
all of Dr. Stewar-d‘s findings concerning that area.

Another eminent anthropologist, Dr. Willard 3. Park, who also testified for the petitioners, studied the Paviotso or Northern Paiute of western
Nevada. In his work entitled, “Tribal Distribution in the Creat Basin,”
Dr. Park described the Owens Valley Paiutes as close linguistic and
cultural relatives of the western Nevada Paiutes although the latter regarded themselves as an entirely distinct group (Pet. Ex._ 88h; Def. Ex. 37).

Western Nevada Area

11;. (a) This ‘area of alleged Paiute occupation extends from just

north of Pfono Lake to northern Tfevada and includes a small area in

California along the western Nevada border.

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 3&3

This portion of the claimed territory has several major internal
drainage areas; the Humboldt River and Lake, Truckee River and Pyramid
Lake, Carson Lake, and WaJ.ker River and Lake. It contained a relatively
dense Indian population in aboriginal times and includes the area.from
which most of the petitioners’ ancestors originated.

Along the southern edge of this area there was high terrain separating
the Mono Lake region while deserts lay between'Ealker Lake and Owens
Valley. There uere practically no geographical boundaries to the east
where the Shoshone Indians were located. On the north rather extensive
deserts intervened between Pyramid Lake and the Summit Lake area. On
the west the Sierra Nevada Mountains rose sharply to divide the Northern.
Paiute from.their neighbors to the west, with the exception of a small
area on the eastern slopes of the mountains which was occupied by the
‘Washes Indians.

(b) In the south portion of the area we find those Paiutes living
about Walker Lake and Walker River. This area petitioners’ expert anthropologist, Dr. Stewart, assigned to three bands: Agaidokado, to the I
north; Pakwidokado on the south end of Walker Lake; and Tovusidokado,
along the Walker River. .

There were early reports of Indians about Walker Lake and Walker
River and oi'the wonderful salmonetrout fish, weighing up to twenty Qtmfdw.
which could be caught there. The Fremont expedition of_ 18245-1:6 rm.-yea.
Indians encamped about the lake. In l8S9 Captain J. H. Simpson, reported
that “Pi-Utes" from Walker's Lake came into his camp to sell or trades:

Salmon-trout (Def. Ebc. LO). ?.~Za;':or Dodge also reported that 't}'l<~.-"_~:  

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 3hb

River and.Lake area.was one of the principal.areas of Paiute occupation.
In his report of January h, l8S9, Major Dodge described the "Py~Ute"
bands of O-derkae-o (Tall Han), Pe-tod-se-ka (White Spot), and To—sarke
(Grey Head) as the three largest bands which he had seen, numbering 1625,
and, Dodge reported, they stayed in the country around the Lake and

sinks of Carson and Walker's Rivers. (Pet. Ex. ll3; Def. Ex. lOO)

On January 25, I860, the surveyor General, Utah Territory, 5. C.
Stambaugh, wrote, "A.very considerable number of Indians have settlements
on both Valker‘s and Pyramid lakes. They are of the Tribe called Piutes
or Pahutes." (Pet. Em. l2?) I

Agent Franklin Campbell in l866 wrote that one of the five distinct

bands, into which he considered the Pi-Ute tribe divided, was made up of

the Walker River or Ocki Pi-Utes, numbering 1500 and located in the yici-H

nit? of Walker River and Lake and Carson River and upper Lake. He reported the head chief to be Oderie with Joaquin and E-sah-dawh as subchiefs. (Pet. Ex. 281; Def. Ex. 66)

I Stephen Powers, appointed by the Secretary of the Interior as a
special commissioner to collect Indian materials for the Centennial
Exhibition.of 1376, reported on the Indians on the Walker River Reser'vation as a branch of the Paiutes called "Ahgyweit" or "Ahgy-tecitteh”
(trout eaters). As mentioned in Finding l3(b), Powers, while including
these Walker River Indians'nith the Owens River Valley Indians as'meme
bers of the "Piute“ nation, found them to be separated from their neighboring Paiutes to the south and sometimes at bitter feud with each other

(Pet. Ex. 888).

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 31:5

Llewellyn L. Loud recorded the Northern Paiute bands as listed by
Gilbert Hatches, a Northern Paiute informant. The list includes the
Agai-tekade "trout-eaters” of Walker Lake (Def. Ex. 30). Isabel T. Kelly
also reported.that the A’ga itikadu (Fish-eaters) were a Northern.Paiute
band living about Summit and Walker labs, Nevada (Def. Ex. 22, Pet. Ex.
3&7). 'Willard.Z. Park; who found the Paviotso or Northern Paiute of
western Nevada grouped in "five main, loosely organized, named, and
localized bands," listed.the Agai tuked as one of the five groups and
stated.that they usually wintered on the banks of Walker River close to
the point at which it empties into Walker Lake (Pet. Ex. 88h; Def. Ex. 37).

Dr. Hodge's_, "Handbook of American Indians,“ lists the Agaihtikara
(fish eaters) as a division of the Paviotso living in 1866 in the vicinity of Walker River and Lake and Carson River and Lake, Nevada (Vol. 1,
pp. 20, 21).

Defendant’s expert, Dr. Steward, identified the Paiutes about Walker
Lake as the agai dika, fish eaters. He placed Paiutes to the east in
Soda Springs Valley (calling them ozav dike). ‘He described.the line
dividing the Paiutes from the eastern Shoshone as running from Pilot
Mountains, Nevada, south through Columbus salt marsh (Pet. Ex. 90l).

(C) To the west and.north of Walker Lake is Carson River which
rises in the Sierra Nevada mountains:of(h£jibrnia and flows worth and
east through Nevada to Carson Lake and Shun In Zenas Leonardis acsoumt
of the Walker expedition in l833 he told.of meeting Indians every day}
and some days hundreds of them, in the area'between Carson Lake and the

Sierra Nevadas (Pet. Ex. 8523 Def. Ex. 28). Col. Freemont in Jaxcarwp

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 3,5

181111, encountered Digger Indians between the Truckee and Carson Rivers
(Def. Ex. 11.1). James Abbey in the spring of 1850 passed through the

valley of the Carson River where his party was visited by some twenty

1 “Root Digger Indians" (Def. EC. 1). In 1856 Indian Agent Garland Hurt

found eighty "Py-utes“ at Ragtown on the Carson River and on the next
three successive days, as he passed up the Carson River, he encountered
other Paiutes totaling 150 (Def. Ex. 60; Pet. Ex. Th). Capt.Si1npson
reported that his camp in June, 1859, at the head of the outlet from
Carson Lake into the sinlc of Carson, was near some two dozen Paiutes
who were drying fish (Def. Bic. 110).

Major Dodge in his January 1:, 1859, report located San-Joaquin's
band of Py-Utes in the Carson Valley at the forks of the Carson River;
Had-Sa-poke's band at Gold Canyon on Carson River; and ‘:3’a-he's band at
the big bend of the Carson River. He placed O-derk-e--o, Pe—tod-see-ha
and To-sarke's bands in the country around the Lake arri sinks of Carson
as well as Valker River (Pet. Ex. 1133 Def. Ex. lOO). Agent Wasson in
1882 identified the summit of the Desatoya Mountains to be the boundary
between the Shoshone and the Paiute (Def. Ex. 61;). Agent Campbell, in
1866, placed the Qcki Pi-Utes in the Vicinity of weaker River and Lake
and Carson River and upper lake while, he reported, the Toy Pi-Utes
occupied territory at lower Carson Lake (Pet. BX. 281; Def. E24. 66).

Dr. Stewart placed the Toe do 1-cado band in the Carson Lake and
Sin}: and Carson River area. Kelly stated that the Toitikad (Cat-ta’
Eaters) lived at Fallon and Yerigton. Loud‘s informant placed Toitekade

at Stillwater Slough, north of Carson Lake. Park said that the Toituked

7 Ind. 01. Com. 322 v _‘ 3117

formerly lived along the Carson River but now are to be found at Fallon
and Stillwater, Nevada.

(d) North of Carson Sink is Humboldt Law which is fed by the
Humboldt River. The River extends north and eastward into the Shoshone
territory. Peter Skene Ogden observed Indian inhabitants along the
Humboldt River in 1828 and in the spring of 1829 about Humboldt Lake.
Zenas Leonard in reporting on the Walker expedition of 1833-31.; described the lcilling of 32 of some 80 to 100 Imians along the Humboldt

River. He described the Indians (footnoted ir1’v:'. F. Wagner‘s edition

of Leonard's Narrative as Pai-utes or Root Diggers) and their subsistence
which consisted of grass seed, frogs, fish and dried flies from Humboldt
Lake (Pet. Ex. 852). Edwin Bryant encountered Digger Indians in l8L16

at a point identified by Dr. Steward as about 25 miles above Humboldt
Sink (Def. Ex. 7). Lt. E. G. Beckwith in his report of 18st told of
Digger Indians who called themselves "Pah-Utahs“ in the area of the
Sonoma Mountain Range. In his report of September, 1856, to Governor
Young, Indian Agent Garland Hurt told of the throngs of Shoshone Indians
along the Humboldt River east of Stone-point. Agent Hurt had made a
treaty with these Shoshone on August 7, 1855, at which time they had
been described as occupying the northern and middle portion of the  75-2%,?
of the Humboldt River. Agent Hurt then recounted his meeting 's,ome i€{Lv‘ri':
P3‘-Utes at the meadows and about the sink of the Humboldt, and, hr 
told, there were about 1100 members of the same tribe camped in tT:s.e.

mountains south of the sink (Pet. Ex. 7h; Def. Ex. 60). On November 5,

1858, J. Forney, Superintendent of Indian Affai:*s, Utah Territory.-’;.. '=.=7#r:>t:e

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 3&8

of his visits with the Indians of the Humboldt. He reported on the presence of Shoshone Indians east of Stoney Point. He continued west of
Stoney Point into Fey-Ute country where he learned from "straggling
Fey-Utes" along the road, that their chief was further down and near

the Humboldt. The dividing line between the Paiutes and Shoshon
Indians of the Humboldt Valley was placed by Mr. Forney at "a range

of hills about 30 miles west of Stony Point . . . and I cannot learn
that either encroach upon the others land." (Def. Ex. 107)

Dr. Stewart placed the Kupadokado (ground Squirrel eaters) in the
area about Humboldt Lake and Sink. He placed the Shoshone-Paiute
boundary across te summit of the Desatqya Mountain north along the
summit of the Sonoma Mountains (Pet. BX. 908). Loud‘s Northern Paiute
informant was born north of Humboldt Lake at Toy. His informant located the Northern Paiute band, Kep a tekade or squirrel eaters at

4 Granite Spring Valley west of Lovelock, Hevada. Loud also listed the

sawa-kate band at Winnemucca and the idza'a-teaga-tekade (Coyote—canyon—
eaters) near Unionville (Pet. Ex. 85h; Def. Ex. 30).

The “Handbook of American Indians" lists the Sawagativa as a
Paviotso tribe formerly about Winnemucca, Nevada (Vol. 2, p. h8l)3 the
Itsaatiaga, as a Paviotso band.formrly living about Unionville, Nevada
(Vol. l, p. 626); and.the Laidukatuuiwait as a Paviotso band formerly
living about the sink of the Humboldt (Vol. 1, p. 753).

Dr. Steward found the Humboldt Valley occupied by Shoshone westward approximately to Iron Point, between Battle Mountain and Winnemucca,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 3149

where there was a.n intermixture of Shoshone and Northern Paiute. He
listed the country west of the Sonoma and Hot Springs Mountains as occupied by Northern Paiute (Pet. Ex. 9141-A; Def. Ex. 112). One of Park's
five Northern Paiute bands was the Ha-pudteked, whose members wintered
along the banks of the Humboldt River from the Lake to the present site
of Winnemucca (Def. E . 37).

(e) To the west of Carson Lake and Sink and north of Carson River
was another center of Indian occupation in the vicinity of Truckee River
and Pyramid Lake. In January, 18113, Fremont met Indians at Pyramid I-aka
who spoke “a dialect of the Snake language.“ At the mouth of the Truckee
River , which empties into Pyramid Lake, Fremont encountered parties of
Indians, and they crowded into his camp (Def. EL. 11;). Bryant net
several Indians on the Truckee River in 183.16 (Def. Ex. 7) and Hurt,
in 1856 met several parties of Py-utes in the Trucme Valley (Def. Ex. 60).
In 1857 Captain William F. Drannan reported that five Indians attacked his
party in the area where Wadsworth, Nevada, is now located (Def. Ex. 12).
IT1 1859 Dodge listed the following Pah-utes in this area:

“To-no-yiet (‘D-Iowan Helper) band stays below the Big Meadows ,
Truckee river, and numbers . . . 280

To-Repe’s (Lean Han) band stays near the lower crossing of
Truckee river, and numbers . . . 360

Ge--nega‘s (Dancer) band stays at the mouth of Truckee. river
andnumbers.......... 290

Wat-se-que-order's (Four Crows) band stays along the shores
of Pyramid lake, and numbers. . 320

Wun-a-muca‘s (The Second) band stays around the shores of
Lower Mud lake, and numbers . . 300.“

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 3“0

To the west of the Paiutes, hajor Dodge located the ha-sho nation whose
country, he reported, extended along the base of the Sierra Nevada
Mountains from Honey Lake on the north to the west fork of Walker‘s River
on the south (Pet. Ex. ll3; De}. Ex. 100). In 1866, Agent Campbell located the Coo-er—ee band, numbering some 700, in the vicinity of Pyramid
Lake (Pet._Ex. 281; Def. Ex. 66).
Dr. Omer Stewart placed the Kuyuidokado (black sucker eaters) band

of Northern Paiutes in this area (Pet. Ex. 908). ark included as one of
his five main bands of Northern Paiute of western Vevada the Khyuitukede
centered around Pyramid Lake, particularly near the mouth of the Truckee
River (Def. Ex. 37). Loud listed the woitsi-tekade band of Northern
Paiute living on the Truckee River near Wadsworth and kuyui-tekade band
of Pyramid Lake (Def. ER» 30). Kelly also listed a Northern Paiute

band, the Khyuitikadu living at Pyramid Lake and Nixon, hevada (Pet.

Ex. 8&7; Def. Ex. 22). The "Handbook of American Indians" lists the
Khyuidika (sucker eaters) as a Paviotso band formerly living near the

Site of Wadsworth on the Truckee River (Vol. 1, page 7&3).

(f) To the west of Pyramid Lake is Winnemucca Valley, Nevada,

while to the north and west is Honey Lake and Smoke Creek, California.
Park reported that the area was occupied by Northern Paiutes known as

kamu tuked (rabbit eaters) one of his smaller named groups (Pet. Ex. 88h).
Stewart placed the Tasiget tuviwarai (between dwellers) in'Winnemucca
Valley (Pet. Ex. 908). teward did not really question the presence of
Paiutes in this area and in his oral testimony stated he had no particular dispute with the western boundary of area 17 (the Tasiget tuviwarai)

as fixed by Stewart (Tr. 606).

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 351

The early reports of Fremont (l8b3) and Beckwith (l85h) do not help
in identifying the Indian inhabitants of the honey Lake and Smoke Creek
areas.

Dodge was the first to make specific reference to the area when he
I-rrote that "wuh-a.mucca (The Giver) is the head chief of the Paiute nation.
He generally stays on Smoke Creek, near Honey Lake 3 his family and small
band that stay with him huhher 155." (Def. m. 100) On December 11, 1857,
"Win ne ma cha“, on behalf of the Paiute Indians, entered into a treaty
of peace with the citizens of Honey Lake Valley (located to the east of
Honey Lake between that Lab and Pyramid Lake) (Pet. Ex. 89). On
January 5, l858, ”h"innemacha“ also signed a treaty with sub agents of
the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for California agreeing to remain
at peace with the white people at Honey Lake Valley and vicinity (Pet.
Ex. 9h). In reporting on this treaty the three sub agents wrote on
January l5, 1.858, that they had beenunable to treat with tie Pitt River
Indians as they only made their appearance at night. They also ‘referred
to previous difficulties with the "-‘Fa-sho Tribe (Pet. EX. 95). First
Lieutenan 3-I. T. Carr described Honey Lake Valley in a letter of July 2 ,
1858, reporting that the white settlers had suffered depredatic-ns eer~:—t
mitted by the Pitt Rivers , the Shushonies and the Utahs, the Paj__'1I.'“t..tr;f’-.3
being the only peaceable Indians about the area. He wrote that the;

Paiutes then lived on Smoke Creek and that “Chief I~.’innemooke“twouj; 

let his people stay in Honey Lake Valley because the otter Indians were

stealing, and, if his people stayed around there, they would be aCCl1St‘f?-'.':§

of stealing too (Pet. Ex. lOl).

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 352

In a letter, dated September 27, 1860, F. W. Lazder, Superintendent,
Wagon Road Ecpedition, Sacramento, California, wrote of a meeting with
"Pah-Ute" chiefs at which Winnemucca complained that the whites had
robbed the tribe of their lands in Honey Lake, Long, Steamboat, and
other valleys (Pet. Ex. 150). In a statement of Captain Trfeatherlow
he told of his settlement in Honey Lake Valley in June, 1856, when
"the Pah-Ute tribe of Indians occupied the Valley in common with the
whites, and were upon the most friendly terms with them.“ Captain
Weatherlow was one of two commissioners appointed by the Governor of
the Territory to visit old I-finnemucca to demand the suspected Paiute
murderers of a white settler. At that time T.-Iinnemucca refused to give
the order for the surrender and demanded 316,000 for Honey Lake Valley
(Pet. Ex. 153). L

Dr. Steward identified the Kamodokado as the Northern Paiute band
living in the Smoke Creek area and the ‘afadadokado band living about

Honey Lake (Pet. Ex. 908). Kelly's informants identified the Wadatikadu

band about Susanviile, California, which, however, is west of the claimed 

area (Pet. Etc. 9&7; Def. Rt. 22). Park placed, as one of his five main
Northern Paiute of western Nevada bands, the Wadatuked whose members
claimed Long Valley and the shores of Honey Lake in California as their
winter home (Pet. Ex. 88h). However, Long Valley, south of Honey Lake,
is not claimed by the petitioners in this case.

The commission finds that the Bforthern Paints area of exclusive use

and occupancy included Honey Lake Valley’ to the eastern shore of the Lake

and the area to the north of Honey Lake extending west to within about

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 353

10 m;L'|.es of Susanville. The line in this area runs substantially the
same as that on petitioners‘ map Cbchibit 7&2).

15. To the north and east of Smoke Creek and as far east as the
vicinity of Winnemucca, Nevada, and east of Pyramid Lake to within a
few miles of the Humboldt River, there was an area which, although
claimed by petitioners, has not been shown to have been exclusively
used and occupied in aboriginal times by the Northern Paiute. This
area includes the Black Rock Desert and similar barren arid areas. It
was remote from established routes of travel ad is.today sparsely populated.

(a) Dr. Stewart, petitioners’ expert anthropologist, has located
the Kamodokado (jack rabbit eaters) band in an area of 3900 square miles.
However, the only specific locations mentioned  his report on this
band was Gerlach, Nevada, and Smoke Creek. Smoke Creek, it appears,
was to the west in the area reported by Dr. Stewart to be occupied by
the Wadadokado and Gerlach was in the south central part of the area
above Mud Lake. Dr. Stewart stated himself that his Kano band was
allotted that territory which others did not claim and he reported that
most of the area was in two deserts, 5moke Creek and Cranite. The Commission finds that the Kamodokado area (number lS on petitioners’ exhibit 942), north of Gerlach and the Mud Lake area, was not exclusively
used and occupied in aboriginal times by Northern Paiute Indians.

(b) To the southeast of the so-called Kanodokado llr. Stewart
assigned the Kupadolcado band an area of some 3600 square miles. The

area of Paviotso or Northern Paiute occupation within this ‘Ca.-.""Z‘I‘i‘?I.---'."T.:'_;‘.““_j'-"'

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 35h

set forth in our Finding lh(d) dealing with the Humboldt Lake and River
area. Dr. Stewart did not offer any evidence of specific areas of Paiute
occupation in this Kupadokado area to the west of the Humboldt River.

The lower Humboldt River and the marshes of Humboldt Sink were the
centers of habitation, as stated by Dr. Stewart. There is not sufficient evidence to believe that the barren area west of Humboldt River

and extending to the Pyramid Lake area was exclusively used and.occupied by the Northern Paiutes in aboriginal days.

(c) To the north of petitioners’ Kupadokado area the extensive
Black Rock:Desert extends northeast from Mud Lake for some seventy
miles. Dr. Stewart recognized that the desert was uninhabited.when he
testified that the Sawawaktodo band was aware that their country went
to the desert and on the other side of the desert were the other people
(Tr. page 315). Although Dr. Stewart has assigned the Sawawaktodo band
a large area extending some sixty miles west of Winnemucca, Nevada, the
evidence refers to the Sawawaktodo as the band about Winnemucca, not
mentioning any other Northern Paiute location in the 3000 square miles
assigned to this band. The "Handbood of American Indians” identifies
the Sawagativa as a Paviotso tribe formerly about Winnemucca, Nevada
(Vol. 2, page h8l) while Llewellyn L. Loud listed the Sawa-kate band
of Winnemucca Mountain (Def. Ex. 30). The Commission finds that, with
the exception of the immediate area around'Winnemucca3 petitioners‘
Sawawaktodo band area (numbered 9 on petitioners’ exhibit 9&2) was not

exclusively used and occupied by Northern Paiutes in aboriginal days.

7 Ind. 0].. Com. 322 I 355

(d) To the northeast of his San-anaktodo area, Dr. Stewart assigned

some 2000 square miles to the Yamosopo band of Paradise Valley, Nevada.
Dr. Stewart reported that, except for two references by Powers and
Powell, no published information was found concerning the existence of
this group. His informant Pete Snap, from MclDe~rmitt which was outside
this so-called Iamosopo area, reported the Yamosopo band. to be mixed
with Shoshone (Pet. BX. 908).

The “Handbook of American Indians" lists the Yammostuwiwagaiya as
a Mono band formerly living in Paradise Valley, Nevada (Vol'.r2, p. 987),
citing Powell and Powers. However, Beatrice Blyth in her article in
"Tribal Distributions in Eastern Oregon and Adjacent Regions" (Pet. Ex.
890) wrote on page L011, "in the vicinity of Paradise Valley and the '
railroad to Winnerrrucca, however, there was a group known as the Paradise
Indians, who were half Paiute and half Shoshoni.“ Defendant‘s expert,
Dr. Steward, also considered that the Indians of Paradise Valley were
probably mixed Shoshone and Paiute (Def. Etc. 136).

The Commission finds that the Paradise Valley area was‘ not exclus ively used and occupied by Northern Paiute Indians.

Oregon Area

 

16. In the northern portion of the claimed territorywas the 
in northwest Nevada along the Oregon border, in south central   v Oregon, and in southwest Idaho. The western limit of the claimed. 
in Oregon extends northwest from the headwaters of the '5prague River to
the crest of the Cascade Mountains and from there north along the Casscades

to about the 115th degree of latitude. The north 'ooundar'_';r  w 0

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 356

east along the hSth degreecf latitude to a point some to miles east of

the Snake River, which River at that point forms the boundary between the

States of Oregon and Idaho.

The eastern limits of the area, as originally claimed, extended for
some distance into Idaho, as shown on the map, Petitioners’ Exhibit 9h2.
However, a large portion of the area was cross-hatched to indicate the
territory where Dr. Stewart, petitioners’ expert anthropologist, found
a dispute over the land which he could not resolve. Petitioners conceded that there was conflicting evidence concerning the Indian occupancy of the cross-hatched area and in their proposed findings of fact

Stated:

“The line marking the north and east boundary of Hdrthern
Paiute land east of the Snake River, if drawn to include
‘within Northern Paiute land only the areas used and occupied
by the Northern Paiute bands to the exclusion of other Shoshonean speaking peoples, is as follows: Eastward from the
Snake River along the hSth degree of latitude to the foothills of the mountains to the east of Weiser River Valley,
thence southward along these foothills in the direction of
the present site of Emmett, thence following the same foothills in a more southeasterly direction to pass just north
and east of the present site of Boise, from which place the
line runs south including the area in the vicinity of Castle
Mountain and meeting the Snake River opposite its junction
‘with Castle Creek.”

This definition of area excludes the disputed cross-hatched area in

Idaho.

(3) In the northwestern portion of this area petitioners place the
Hunipitoka or Halpapi band of Northern Paiutes. It was with this band
that Superintendent Huntington negotiated a treaty of cession at Sprague
River Valley on August 12, 1865. That treaty, signed by eleven chiefs

and headmen.of the Woll-pah-pe tribe of Snake Indians, provided for a

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 357

cession to the United States of all the tribe's right, title, and interest
to the country occupied by them, as described in Article II of the treaty,
Articles VI through VIII setting forth the consideration agreed to be
expended by the United States for the benefit of the Noll-pah-pe tribe

of Snake Indians. The treaty was duly ratified on duly S, 1866, and
proclaimed by the President on July 10, l866 (lh Stat. 683). The Walpapi Indians thereafter, pursuant to an agreement in the Treaty, removed

to the Klamath Indian Reservation, where, it appears, a number of their
descendants’ presently reside. While no evidence has been introduced
concerning the paymnts made to the Walpapis under the terms of the
Treaty, an examination of various appropriation acts reveals that the
five 82,000.00 annual installments provided for by the seventh article
of the Treaty were appropriated under Acts of Congress: 11.: Stat. 1192,
511 (March 2, 1867); 15 Stat. 198, 218-219 (July 27, 1868); 16 Stat. 13,
33 (April 10, 1889); 16 Stat. 335, 356 (Ju1y_15, 1870) and 16 Stat. Shh.
565 (March 3, 1871). The ten $1200.00 instalments were appropriated by
Congress under: -17 Stat. 165, 183 (May 29, 1872); 17 Stat. LL37, 1:56
(Feb. 111, 1873); 18 Stat. 11:6, 168 (June 22, 18714); 18 Stat. 1120, 11112

(March 3, 1875); 19 Stat. 176, 193 (August 15, l876)3 l9 Stat.  

(March 3, 1877); 20 Stat. 63, 81 (May 27, 1878); 20 Stat. 29,53,  it 

1879); 21 Stat. 118, 127 (May 11, 1880); and 21 Stat. L185, 897  
1881). I

S

The Commission finds that the T.-Ealpapi Indians constituted an aboriginal land using entity, existing as such separate and apart frc"-“:8 "time
Northern Paiute or Snake Indians with whom they were and ha'v::_8;. 

ally associated.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 358

The petitioners in the instant case do not include any individual
who purports to be descended from the aboriginal Walpapi band nor have
they introduced the testimony of any living descendant of the band. No
individual Ealpapi or Walpapi tribal organization has entered into a contract retaining the attorneys in this matter or in any way authorized the
institution or maintenance of any action before this Commission on their
behalf. The Walpapi band and the territory which it allegedly held in
aboriginal times are included in this action, it appears, only to the
extent that this band might be found by the Commission to have been a
constituent part of an aboriginal, land using Northern Paiute entity.

The pleadings indicate and.the attorneys for petitioners have stated

that the claims before the Commission in this Docket No. 87 are rested

upon a non-treaty taking. Any action for an alleged taking of the

dhalpapi lands should, it seems be rested upon the revision of their

treaty of cession on the basis that the amount paid by the United States
constituted an unconscionable consideration for the cession of their
lands. Such an action would be based upon facts and law distinct and
separate from those raised and under consideration in this case. Such an
action would come within.the provisions of Clause (3) of Section 2 of the
Act. The Commission considers the present action to be one brought under
Clauses (L) and possibly (5) of Section 2 of the Act.

Having found the Walpapi band to have been a separate and distinct

-.0

aboriginal land using entity whose claim, LL any, against the United
States for taking of its lands has not been pleaded in this case, no consideration can be given to this area as claimed by petitioners.

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 359

(b) To the south of the Walpapi area is the territory of the
Yahuskin band of Northern Paiute or Snake Indians. On October lb, l86}_;,
Superintendent Huntington at Klamath Lake, Oregon, negotiated a treaty
with the Eamath and Hodoc and the Yahooslcin band of Snake Indians for
a cession of all their right, title and claim to all the country claimed
by them, as set forth in Article I. The treaty was duly ratified on
July 2, 1866, and proclaimed by the President on February 1?, 1870
(16 Stat. 70?). The Yahoosldn Band moved on to the Klamath Reservation,
near Klamath Lake on the southern border of Oregon, where their descendants
have lived to the present day.

In the case of the ECLamath and Modoc Tribes and the Yahooskin Band

of Snake Indians v. The United States, Docket No. 100, a claim has been

 

presented on behalf of the descendants of the l’ahoos1<in Band of Snake
Indians with whom that treaty was made. The claim is based on an alleged
taking, by a treaty of cession of their aboriginally held land and the
payment of an unconscionable consideration therefor. For the same
reasons as applicable to the walpapi band this Commission could not consider in this Docket No. 87 a claim by the Yahooslcir. band 1‘ or lands

ceded by them and for which they were compensated.

Further, this Commission has by order entered May 19, 1955, in thi-_.s
Docket BI . 87 and Docket No. 100, dismissed the claim asserted for and
on behalf of the Iahooslxin Band in Docket No. 8? finding that said 
was entitled, under Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, to
be accorded the exclusive privilege of representing the descendants of

the Yahooskin Band in their claim before this Commission. Therea_i”‘te;‘,

7-Ind. Cl. Com. 322 360

by order of the Commission on June 6, 1957, the finality of the order
of May 19, 1955, was stayed without prejudice to its later reinstatement
following final determination by the Commission of the claims presented
in this Docket No. 8?. The purpose of this stay was to toll the time
for appeal to the Court of Claims of the decision of the Commission in
its order of May 19, 1953, in order that petitioners might be able, if
they so desire, to make a single appeal to the Court of Claims in the
matter of this Docket No. 87.

p Accordingly, no consideration can be given in this case to the socalled Yahooskin area.of the claimed territory.

(c) To the east of the Yahooskin lands there was a group of snake
Indians described by several anthropologists, including petitioners’
expert, Dr. Stewart, as the wada eaters or Wadatoka. The descendants
of the Indians in that area brought an action before this Commission as
the "Snake or Piute Indians of the former Halheur Reservation in Oregon,"
Docket No. 1?. In our opinion of December 28, 1956, (h Indian Claims
Commission.S7la) we found that the petitioners’ ancestors, who were
parties to an unratified treaty of December 10, 1868, had exclusively
occupied and used in Indian fashion from time immemorial the area of
land included within.the former Malheur Reservation in Oregon. Accordingl , that group of Eortharn Paiute Indians identified as the Snake
or Piute Indians of the former Malheur Reservation who represented those
Northern Feiute Indians descended from the parties to the unratified

treaty of December 10, 1868, having been found to be the descendants of

an aboriginal land.using entity and having brought their own action

7 Ind. C1. Com. 322 361

independent of this action, no interest in Docket No. 87 actioniand their
aboriginally owned territory having been determined in Docket No. l?, no
consideration need now be given to that area.

(d) To the southeast of the Yahooslcin lands was an area occupied
by Snake or Paiute Indians. In June, 1827, Peter Skene Ogden traveling
east from Albert Lake came to some muddy lakes In-‘here he found huts
supposedly belonging to “SnaI<.es“ (Def. Ex. 36). In the area believed
to be about Long Valley or Surprise Valley (just south of the present
Oregon and Nevada—California border, to the east of the Warner Range)

Oaptain Fremont, in l8h3, met Indians who belonged to the “Shale nation"

(Def. Ex. 11;). In 1851; Capt. Jesse Walker led a company of fighters
against the Indians. He reported that:

". . . learning that the Pi-ute Indians were very hostile,
and were stealing stock from immigrants in the vicinity of
the Sierra Nevada mountains, on the lst of October I moved

my headquarters to Goose Lale, and on the 3d of October
took with me 16 men and proceeded along the immigrant trail
to the east side of the Sierra Nevada, and there discovered
a large Indian tra&, running in a northeasterly direction.
I followed this trail about eight miles, when I"-came in sight
of a large band of Indians encamped at the head of what I
Shall now call Hot Spring valley, which lies on the east side
of these mountains . . . We pursued a large band of them

I north about forty miles, and on the second day came in gjnt
of them, strongly fortified at the south end of Pi-ute 
. . . We named it Y-a"erner's Rock in honor of the late 
Captain Warner, of the United States army, who was mass-r: 
with three of his company, at or near this rock, by the Pi
ute Indians in 18349 . . .

“The next day we travelled up Pi-ute £§'arner7 valley“ f"“f7 7'“
miles, and discovered several large ranches that had just "Cu-';:,i.’:;I;l
abandoned by‘ the Indians, leaving behind them large quantities
of fish and the firest grass seed, which they use for food.

".$-X-1‘?

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 362

“The Pi-utes in the vicinity of the Sierra Nevada mountains are hostile, brave, and very numerous . . . They are
connected with the Snake Indians, and they own one of the
finest countries in Oregon.“ (Def. Ex. 99
In the official report of the Owyhee reconnaissance made by Lt.

Col. C. S. Drew in the Sumner of 1861;, it was reported:

“Among the Snales, Modoc, upper Pitt River, Klamath, and
Piute Indians, Goose Lake Valley, or that portion of it which
lies to the northward of the Lake, is neutral ground; neither
tribe claiming it especially, but each using it at will for

hunting and fishing, and gathering the wild rye for winter
food." (Def. Ex. 121:) .. Petitioners‘ expert, Dr. Stewart, placed the Kidutokado (woodchuck
eaters) band in this area. A detailed report on the Northern Paiute in
this territory was made by Isabel '1‘. Kelly in her "Ethnography of the
Surprise Valley Paiute," which work was based upon her field work among
the Indians in the area in 1930. 5he identified this band of Northern
Paiute as the Gidutikadu or Groundhog-eaters. Her description of the
land occupied by this band was substantially the same as that described
by Dr. Stewart. Dr. Kelly's informant did not know the name of the
band immediately south of the Gidutikad but did know the name of their
headxnan, and her informants, were generally familiar with their Oregon
neighbors, listing but three bands, the Agaitikadu, Ktryuitikadu, and
Toitikadu in the more southerly Nevada areas. Dr. Kelly identified
established wintering grounds throughout the area corresponding to area

7 on petitioners’ map, Echibit 93:2 (Pet. Ex. 8&7).
Beatrice Blyth W iting identified the Northern Paiute in the

Surprise Valley area as Gididika (Ground Hog Eaters). She described

the various bands, who were named for their staple food, as possessing

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 353

' no real political organization, the names merely designating people who

tended to visit the same food gathering locales year after year. Her
map placed this band in a smaller area aruund Warner Lake and to the

south across the Nevada. border (Pet. BX. 916).

(8) To the east of this area there was a stretch of barren or
near barren land which, although sparsely populated, did contain aeas
of Indian occupation in aboriginal days.

Dr. Kelly's informants told her of an Agaitikadu (fish eater) band
at Summit Lake, Nevada, and the Kwinaduva, Kwinodub (SmoI-2 Indians) in
the McDermitt region of Nevada on the Oregon border with the country
north of McDermitt uninhabited (Pet. Ex. 8&7).

Dr. Whiting reported virtually the entire area uninhabited with the
exception of the Guinidiba Paiutes about E%cDermitt (Pet. Ex. 916).

Dr. Hodge, in his "Handbook of American Indians ," lists the
Agaivanuna as a Paviotso division forrrerly living at Summit Lake,

Nevada (Vol. l, p. 21) and the Koyuhow as a Paviotso band formerly
living about McDermitt, Nevada (Vol. 1, p. 729).

In 1870 , Agent Douglas, _in his annual report to the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs, reported on his meeting at Fort McDermitt hr.}.f’;;:: 'LliC,::l
Quin’s River (Nevada) and Steen's Mountain (Oregon) Indians .. 
report of his conversations with Pi-Ute Indians at Fort MCDera:ii:it,, 
Dmlglas told of his efforts to persuade the Indians to mpve 

Truckee River or Pyramid Lake Reservation, promising them contiriued. govern»..L.  C,  .:_

1 3 «-_, -_ re.‘ '1' .-1"‘; ‘-.-v\_ r'-"
, u 3“. ._ - ..

ment aid and assistance if they would so move and guaranteeing?

if they remained about Fort McDermitt. Indian Charlie (P 

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 36h

his people wanted to stay at McDermitt. Irs-a-ah-mah was very emphatic
in stating that the Quinn River Country was his people's hunting ground
and that he would stay and die there. He said if the military post

there were broken up he would live on what he did before the whites care
to the area. This Paiute Indian replying to Agent Douglas stated, "I

‘was glad when you were coming up here, but I am sorry to hear you ask

us Indians to go away from our country to the reservation." (Pet. BX. 390)

(f) In the southeast corner of Oregon extending to the north is
the Owyhee River area, another section of sparse population, today as
well as in aboriginal times. Defendant's Dr. Steward stated that in
native times it was sparsely populated by unmounted Northern Paiute
(Def. Ex. l36) while petitioners‘ Dr. Stewart placed the Tagoto'a
(tuber eaters) band in the area (Pet. ER. 908). Dr. Whiting places the
Tagu Eaters in an area about the Owyhee River and Jordan Valley (Pet.
BX. 916). Dr. Whiting stated that there were no Paiute bands farther
to the east (Pet. Ex. 890). Dr. Kelly's informants told her of the
Tubuiuitikadu (Berry-eaters) east of Steens Mountain, Oregon (which
would appear to be in.this Owyhee River region) (Pet. Ex. 8h7).

Agent Ballard reported in l866 on a roving band of hostile'“Pi
Ute” and outlawed Shoshone in the Ogyhee country (Def. Ex. 66).

To the west and northwest of the Owyhee River area was the MalheurHarney Lake region.occupied.by the Nada Eater band of Snake or Paiute
Indians. It is the descendants of this band who bI'oug:ht the action in
Docket No. 17 as the 5nahecn'EHmte Indians of the former Malheur Reservation in Cregon, all of which is more fully set forth in Finding l6(c).

? Ind. 03.. Com. 322 363

(g) To the east, southeast, and northeast of the Owyhee River
region is a large area included within the territory originally claimed
by petitioners. However, petitioners’ expert, Dr. Stewart, testified
as to his doubt comerning the area and the lack of proof of exclusive
occupancy of this territory by petitioners‘ ancestors. The area is
"cross-hatched“ on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit No. 9112, indicating petitioners‘ concession that there was conflicting evidence in the area and
that, while Northern Paiute Indians were allegedly in the area, there

were probably other Indians also us ing that land. The Commission finds

that this “cross-hatched“ area is clearly territory not exclusively used

and occupied by the petitioners’ ancestors and, in View of the admission
by the petitioners that they have not proven their case within this
territory, no detailed findings will be made concerning the evidence of
Indian occupancy of that land. ""

(h) North of the Cnyhee River is the area where the Boise, Payette
and Veiser Rivers empty into the Snake River. The reports of the early
explorers in this area are of little value due to usage of the term

Snake and the term Bannock to describe both the foot Indians who lived

on roots, crickets, rodents, small game and fish as well as the horsepeople the possessed many traits of the Plains Indians and travelled
great distances in search of game, furs and trade. The Bannocks, while
speaking the Northern Paiute language and in earlier times probably
having been a part of the so-I-called Northern Paiute Nation’, are not
Part Of the Northern Paiute Nation represented in this action. They

are recognized by petitioners as a people separate and distinct from

the Northern Paiute (see petitioners‘ Proposed Finding of Fact No. 114)7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 366

Dr. Whiting placed.the Salmon Eater Band (Agaidika) on the Snake
River around the Eeiser and Payette River mouths and west on each side
of Malheur River (Pet. Ex. 916). However, it cannot be definitely shown
whether these Salmon Eaters along the Snake River were a portion of the

petitioners’ Northern Paiute ancestors or were Shoshone Salmon Eaters

3

and therefore belong to the eastern Shoshones, who also used food names
for groups of Indians. There is evidence that many of the Indians in
this area were mounted, which would not have been true of the Northern
Paiute, and.that they travelled east to the buffalo country. Dr. Whiting
herself states that her Salmon Eaters were placed further east by Dr.
Stewart, which would be his Koa aga itoka (salmon eaters) in the crosshatched area of admittedly non-exclusive Northern Paiute use or occupancy.

Dr. Verne F. Ray placed the hex Perce Indians in the area east of
the Snake River about the Kaiser and.Payette Rivers, and he placed the
Cayuse in that area to the west of the Snake River (Pet. Ex. 890).

Petitioners‘ expert, Dr. Stewart, in writing of the Koa aga itoka
(Salmon Eaters) stated that these Indians occupied a muchydisputed and
questionable position. After recounting the early references relating
to the Indians in.this area, he concluded that “although these accounts
are not definite, they do show that there is as much historical evidence
to unite the Snake River Indians of the Boise area with the Paiute as with
the eastern.groups.“ (Pet. “X. 908)

Defendantls expert, Dr, Steward, concluded that the historical
sources relating to this area may be interpreted to mean.tr*t the area.

‘was frequented by mounted northern Shoshone and Bannock as well as some

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 367

Northern Paiute and western Idaho Shoshone. Ee further identified the
area as a thoroughfare often used by the Bannock, Northern Shoshone, Nez
Perce, Cayuse, Wallawalla and other tribes (Def . Ex. 136).

The Commission concludes that the petitioners have failed to prove
their entitlement to that area since they did not exclusively use and
occupy the area in aboriginal times.

( i) The area north of the Wadatoka Band, while claimed by petitioners in their amended pleadings, was not included in the Northern
Paiute territory by petitioners‘ expert, Dr. Stewart, in his original
work on the subject (Pet. Ex. 908). In 1826, Peter Skene Ogden reported
encountering “Snake" Indians on the Snake River below the mouth of the
Burnt River (which would be near the southeast corner of Petitioners‘

an

Area No. 2 or in Area 310. 3). However, he reported that these Indians

had not long since left the buffalo country (Pet. BX. 881; Def. Eat. 87).

This would make it doubtful that the Snabs referred to by Ogden were of

the "Digger" varietgr. More probably they were Bannocks. In October, l8l:3,

Captain Frenont's party traveling west of the Snake River north from

the I'3alh.eur River , encountered a party of Cayuse Indians who then traveled

with them across the Burnt and Powder River, where the Cayuses traveled

on ahead to reach their homes. Then Captain Fremont reported his g'.T."i"..'J"'i.:iE.'_3

was visited by several Indians who belonged to the tribes on the C::>I‘E,,1:_m‘%_;;:§..zr

River. There were no references to Snaie or Digger Indians in that s...rea.
Agent Nathan Olney in July, l8SS, traveled from The Dalles tax; fit

Boise. He reported on a band of Eannack Diggers called lfal la lack; 

residing on the Burnt River and ‘Ear-atte-Haws about Lake S)"1,"’.-"‘t  

7 Ind. Clo Come 322 

bands being grass seed eaters. However both of these groups may have been
'Wadatoka (seed eaters), the band represented in Docket No. l7. Certainly,
there is nothing to indicate that they were members of petitioners’ Pa-=tichichi-tika or Elk Eaters.

Dr. Whiting places the 5lk'Eaters in the general area as that identified by petitioners as area 2 on their exhibit 9&2 although it does not
extend as far north as does the territory claimed by petitioners. How»
ever, it is noted that the two bands identified by Dr. Whiting as occupying
territory north of the Wadatoka are the Hunibui eaters and the Elk Eaters,
whom, she says, Dr. Stewart considered as one and included them with the
band called by Dr. Whiting, the Juniper-Deer Eaters. Thus all three of
Dr. Whiting’s Juniper~Deer Eaters, Hunibui Eaters and Elk Eaters Bands

would seem to have been included by Dr. Stewart in his Hunipuitoka or

.7Wélpapi Band.

Dr. Verne F. Ray found that "the Umatilla utilized the entire drainage
area of the North Fork of the John Day River; the Cayuse used the slopes
draining into the Umatilla and Powder Rivers” (Pet. Ex. 890). Dr. Ray
PlaCed.Dr. Stewart’s Patichichitika of area 2 in the Cayuse Indian terrie
tory. '

The Commission finds that the Northern Paiutes did not exclusively
use and.occupy area 2 as defined on.petitioners’ map, exhibit 9h2.

l7. The Northern Paiutes, in aboriginal times, are described by
the anthropological authorities as possessing no political authority

which bound the sowcalled nation together. There were leaders who led

the Indians on rabbit or mudhen drives or "antelope shaman" who led the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 359

antelope drives. t these leaders existed primarily for a certain
specific activity and in one restricted location. There'was no overall
"chief" of the Northern.Paiutes.

l8. The most prominent of the horthern Paiutes, at least from the
white man's point of view, was Winnemucca. Dodge, in 1859, referred.to
lrfun-a-rr:uc-a (The Giver) as the head chief of the Nation (Def. Ex. 100).
Other government officials also referred to Winnemucca as the chief’of
the Northern Paiutes. However, the position of Winnemucca was more
accurately described by petitioners‘ expert, Dr. Stewart in his study

of the Northern Paiute bands:

"The position attained by Old Winnemucca . . . suggests
that the independent Northern Paiute bands were in process
of becoming united under one chief. Old Winnemucca's role
offers an example of cultural change which was activated by
historical contacts with white men. The picture is not entirely clear, but we seem to have here an example of the
leader of one band being transformed into a tribal chief
by governmental agents desirous of having one authoritative ,
person to deal with, and by an ambitious, educated daughter,
Sarah Winnemucca, trying to attain self-aggrandizement by
ex. ting her father . . . Sarah acted as interpreter for
most officials who visited the Nevada Indians and was in
an excellent position to color the governmental reports . . .
‘white people called Sarah Jinnemucca ’Paiute Indian Princess,’
although Indians did not credit her with any such distination.
South of Pyramid, Old'Vinnemucca'was never considered more
than a leader of the Pyramid Lake band. Prior to the arrival
of the white people, bands united for special hunting, fishing,
dancing, pinon-nut gathering, rarely for war; but no one was
generally recognized as possessing any authority above the
local band chief. t seems that the Northern Paiute were
ripe to become politically united; this, however, never
happened." (Pet. Ex. 908, pp. 129, 130).

19. (a) In summary it appears that the early explorers throughout

the claimed.territory, while recognizing some general similarities between the Indian inhabitants, found them to be living in separate

7 Ind. Cl. Cmn.322 370

definable groups which were divided generally into the Snakes in the
northern portion, the Paviotso or Paiute in the central area, and the
Mono to the south.

(b) So also the early governnent agents described the Indians within
those certain areas. Captain Davidson described the Owens Valley Indians
as living in an almost isolated condition, having little intercourse
with other tribes. Agent Wasson and Captain Rowe both described a boundary between the Pah Ute and Owens River Indian country; Stephen Powers
found the Owens River Indians to be separated from their northern neighbors with no solidarity or community of feeling between them. The Snakes
of Oregon were considered a branch of the Root Diggers in Eevada. The
Indians told Agent Douglas at McDermitt that their land was to the north
and they never wanted to leave it to go south to a reservation in central
Nevada. Agent Rinehart said, of the followers of'Ee-ow-wewa and Paulina,
"they are classed as Paiutes, and claim the name, though they were then
known as Snakes, and now have very little friendship for the Paiutes of
Nevada, regarding them as an inferior race of rabbit hunters." (Def. Ex.
77)

(c) Leading anthropologists who have studied the Northern Paiutes
have grouped these Indians into similar divisions. Dr. Willard 2. Park
found the western Nevada area to be occupied by five main Paviotso bands,
the members of which recognized no boundaries separating the territories
of the bands but ranged in search of food to the localities of neighboring groups. But these Paviotso Indians, said Sr. Park, considered

themselves as an “entirely distirnt group” from the southern Owens Valley

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 S 371

Paiutes as well as the Surprise Valley Paiutes to the north. And Dr.
Park states that the Paviotso were even less closely bound to their
neighboring Paiutes at Summit Lake md McDermitt.

Similarly, Dr. Steward, who studied the Owens Valley area extensively
found the Indian inhabitants there to have characteristics which differentiated them from the Nevada area Paiutes. Dr. Beatrice Elyth Whiting,
who studies were in the Oregon portion of the Paiute territory, wrote
of the tendency of the Paiutes to wander over a large area hunting and
gathering food. She spoke of the Wada Eaters knowing well and having
frequent intercourse with seven surrounding bands. However, all of
those seven so-called bands were located in the Oregon area and none of
the Paviotso groups of ‘élevada were included in the list.

Ruth Underhill, Associate Supervisor of Indian Education, Office of
Indian Affairs, in a pamphlet entitled, "The Paiute Indians of California
and Nevada," wrote that the Paiutes were not a nation but "a chance narre
given by the Whites to a number of Indians who live in the same part
of the country and speak the same language. We have been talking about
Northern Paiute but the people whom we gather under this name do not,
themselves use it, or even understand it." (Pet. Ex. 911, p. lb). She
stated that the pamphlet would deal with three groups of Northern. }:f:’£:1.T?.‘L'!.’5.-=’;--'5.?_,
the Paiute of Owens Lake and Surprise Valley in California, and the

Pawdotso , in Nevada.

‘w

20. The Commission finds that in aboriginal times the Northern Paiute
Indians did not have any overall political organization. They were never

T5’C0§:’T1iZed, designated or dealt with by government officials as  or “

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 372

land holding entity or nation. The Northern Paiutes did not collectively

occupy and use the entire Northern Paiute territory but were rather
grouped into certain.main divisions, within.which localized family groups
or bands were free to roam over a large area, staying, however, within
certain defined limits. The Northern Paiute Nation did not hold Indian
title to any portion of the claimed territory.

21. The Commission finds that there was in the southern portion of
the claimed territory an area (referred to in detail in our Finding 13)
‘which had been exclusively occupied and used in Indian fashion from time
imnenorial by the bands or groups of Eorthern Paiute Indians who were
then generally referred to as the Monos or Piutes of Owens Valley, which
area is described as follows:

Commencing at the present town of Olancha, California,

(south of Owens Lake), thence to a point about h miles

east of the present town of Keeler, California, thence

north to the crest of the Inyo Eountains and continuing
north, northwest along the crest of the Inyo hountains to

a point at 36° 50“ N latitude, ll8° OO“'W longitude, thence
north, northeast to the present town of Oasis, California,
thence north to the present town of Coaldale, Nevada,

thence west, northwest to the summit of Potatoe Peak, thence
southwest to the summit of Dunderberg Peak, thence southeast
to the summit of Rt. Morgan, thence southeast to the commencing

point at the present city of Olancha.

22. The Commission further finds that there was an area largely
in Nevada, with small areas in California (referred to in detail in our
Finding 114) nnicn had been exclusively occupied and used in Indian fashion
from time immemorial by the bands or groups of Ecrthern Paiute Indians

in Ecvada who were aboriginally known as Paviotso or Paiute of western

Nevada, which area is described as follows:

(Amended by Order of June L, l9S9)
7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322

Commencing at Pilot Peak, approximately 7 miles east of the
present town of Sodaville, Nevada, thence north, northeast to the
crest of the Paradise Range of mountains and continuing north along
the crest of the Paradise Range, thence north, northeast to the crest
of the Destoya Mountains and continuing northeast along the crest of
the Destoya Mountains to the ll7O 30" W longitudinal line, thence
north to the summit of Mt. Tobin, thence north, northwest to the

summit of Sonoma Peak, thence northwest to the present town of'Winnemucca, Nevada, thence west, southwest to the present town of Gerlach,
Nevada, thence west to a point at an elevation of about 6hOO feet
about 7 miles north, northwest of the present town of Karlo, California, thence south to the northwest edge of Honey Lake, thence
east, northeast along the northern shore of Honey Lake and continuing
south along the eastern shore of Honey Lake to the southeast tip of
Honey Lake, thence southeast to a point at L00 06" N latitude, ll9°
52" W longitude, thence south, southeast along a line to the present
town of Silver City, Nevada, to the point where said line intersects
with the summit of the Virginia Range at latitude thirty-nine degrees
twenty-eight and one-quarter minutes North (Lat. 39° 28-1/L" North),

thence along said summit in a southerly direction to the point where
said summit again intersects the aforesaid line at latitude thirtynine degrees twenty and two-tenths minutes North (Lat. 390 20.2“

North), thence southerly along said line to the present town of Silver
City, Nevada, thence southeast to the summit of Lyon Peak, thence
south, southwesterly along the summit of the Pine Nut Mountains to

the summit of Mt. Siegal, thence south, southwest to the summit of
Sonora Peak, thence southeast to the summit of Potato Peak, thence
east, northeast to the commencing point at Pilot Peak.

’ 23.: The Commission further finds that there was an area in northwestern Nevada and southeastern Oregon with a small portion in northeastern California (referred to in detail in our Finding 16) which had
been exclusively occupied and used in Indian fashion from time immemorial
by bands or groups of Indians who were aboriginally known as Snakes,
Digger Snakes or Paiutes, but who are now known as Northern Paiutes.
Included among these bands or groups of so-called "Snakes" were certain
bands who had, in aboriginal times, developed into land using groups
separate and apart from.the other “Snake” Indians. These bands were the
'Walpapi, the Yahooskin, and the Snake or Paiute Indians of the former
Malheur Reservation in southeast Oregon who were parties to an may QC
These Indians and their claimed terrified treaty of December 10, l868.

tory are specifically removed from this action for reasons previously

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 37h

O

detailed in our findings. The remaining bands or groups of these "Snake"
or Paiute_lndians exclusively occupied and used the territory described

as follows:

Commencing at the present town of Fairport, California, on
the east shore of Goose Lake, thence south, southeast to the
summit of Eagle Peak, thence southeast to the southernmost
tip of Lower Lake, thence east, northeast to the summit of
Pahute Peak, south of Summit Lake, thence east, northeast to
the summit of Santa Rosa Peak, thence north, northeast to
the present town of Jordan Valley, Oregon, thence north along
the Oregon-Idaho border to the h3° 30" N parallel, thence
northwest to the summit of Freezeout Eountain, thence southwest to a point at h2° 53” N latitude, ll80 W longitude, thence
west, southwest to the present town of Rlitzen, Oregon, thence
northwest to appoint at h2° 58” N latitude, 119° h7"'W longitude, thence south, southwest to the northeasternmost tip of
Goose Lake, thence south along the eastern shore of Goose

Lake to the starting point at Fairpcrt, California.

2h. Petitioners have not included the testimony of any Rorthern Paiute
‘who can definitely trace his ancestry to a member of the aboriginal group
of Paiutes who occupied the Owens Valley area. Perhaps the leading anthropologist uith respect to this area was the defendant's witness, Dr.
Steward. ‘When he studied the area in 1927, 1928, and 1931 he found many
descendants of the original Paiutes in the area. In his “Ethnography of
the Owens Valley Paiute“ (Pet. Ex. 901) he outlined the population figures

for the area as follows:

1855 - 1000 (estimate by Von Schmidt)

1863 - l8l2 (estimate by military commander which
included some Indians from outside
the area)

1870 - 1350 (estimate by Egbert which included
about lOOO for Owens Valley proper)

1880 - 637 (U. 8. Census) '

1890 - 850 "
1900 - 9&0 “
1910 - 792 “
1920 - 632 “
1930 — 736 "

970 (Indian Service Survey)

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 375

Dr. Steward reported the Owens Valley Pai we then living in "camps" a
each of the towns. He also listed informants used by him to gather information concerning the aboriginal life of their ancestors,

Dr. Ste:-:ard’s study in the area in l93S is reported in his "BasinPlateau Aboriginal Sociopolitical Croups" (Pet. Ex. 9111-A) in which he
lists numerous informants in the area who were descended from the aboriginal Owens Valley Paiutes. Dr. Steward also wrote a biography of

Panatubiji, an Owens Valley Paiute, who lived from about 1820 to l9ll

(Pet. Ex. 905). The biographical sketch was based on information gathered

as late as 1935 from Panatubiji's grandson, Tom Stone.

The House of Representatives Subcommittee on Indian Affairs of the
Committee on Public Land in its ”Compi_'!.ation of Material Relating to the
Indians of the United States and the Territory of Alaska, Including
Certain Laws and Treaties Affecting Such Indians“ publxhed June 13, 1950,
listed the Indian Reservations in the Owens Valley area and their populat ions as fo llows:

Fort Independence Reservation 69 Paiute in 1950

Indian Ranch Colony 5 Paiute in 

Mono County Group 1403 Paiute in 19115

Inyo County or Owens Valley Area 773 Paiute in l9}.: 5 t:r-n1=::”~f. ’
338 in l.':”:‘:":L-r{C_'.i=
(This includes JO’

“:3

Pine Colony, EH...:“:}T":<:":-§.:".Colony and Lone Pine
0 Colony)

Based on this evidence, the Commission finds that. there  ">2"
December 6, l9SO, the date of filing of the petition in this acti
living descendants of the aboriginal Eionos or Paiutes of Owens. "»7a7'l*f'
who were found to have held Indian title to that area deSCI”"i_"._;  

Finding of Fact No. 21.,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 376

25. Many of the named individual petitioners and the other Northern
Paiute Indians who testified in this action presently live in and/or have
ancestors who were from the Nevada area found to have been aboriginally

occupied by the Paviotso or Paiute of western Nevada. One of the individual petitioners, Hosie Quartz, who was 73 years old when she testified (January 2h, 1951), stated that she was born at Schurz, Nevada (near
Walker Lake), that her father and mother were both born aound Walker
Lake, that her grandmother was born on the Walker River Reservation and
that her grandfather was born around Topaz (west of Walker Lake and just
across the bievada-California border).

The "Statistical Supplement to the Annual Report of the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs," for the fiscal year ending June 30, l9L;S, lists the
Paiute population in western Nevada as:

Fallon Reservation 198

Fort McDermitt Reservation 301 (this is outside
the Paviotso area
as described in

Finding 22)
Pyramid Lake Reservation 563
Summit Lam Reservation L16 (this is outside
the Paviotso area
as described in
-Finding 22)
Walker River Reservation L37 Yerington Reservation 78
Fallon colony Sl
Lovelock Colony 133
Reno-Sparks Colony 151*.
Wirmemucca 0010557 31
Yerington Colony 9?

Non--reservation, Paiute Area 323 Upon all the evidence of record the Comission finds that there were,

on December 6, l9SO, the date of filing of the petition in this action,

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 377

living descendants of the aboriginal Paviotsos or Paiutes of the western
Nevada area, who were found to have held Indian title to that area described in Findim of Fact No. 22.

26. One of the Northern Paiutes who testified for petitioners,
Charles G111, was born at Burns, Oregon. His father and mother were
both born in the Harney Valley and his grandfather lived on the Steens
Mountains, which were in the 512.3% or Northern Paiute area of occupation
described in Finding of Fact No. 23.

The "Statistical Supplement to the Annual Report of the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs," for the fiscal year ending June 30, l9L;S, lists the
Paiute population at the Ft. Mcflermitt Reservation .. 301 and at the
Summit Lake Reservation - L1-6. Both of these reservations were in the
northwestern portion of Nevada found, in Finding of Fact No. 23 , to be
in the area exclusively used and occupied by the Snakeior Northern
Paiute of the Oregon area. Other Paiutes are included on the IQ_a_m.ath
Agency and Reservation (151), the Umatilla Agency and Reservation (lh5')
and the Warm Springs Agency and Reservation (55).

Upon all the evidence oi‘.record the Comznission finds that there
were, on December 6, 1950, the date of filing of the petition in this
action, living descendants of the aboriginal Sm?-.<es or Paiutes of the

Oregon area who were found to have held Indian titl- to that area deyr

SCI‘lb€d in  23,

Y

27. In aboriginal times the 75
areas had, at best, a meager existence.

in this country and the Indian occupants taxed the scanty resources to

limit .

Their lands were among    t = =

—-.—._--.-n—n-4.-_n_..-nu.-—n-4'

«orthern Paiutes in all of their separate

7 Ind. Cl. Ccmu 322 378

Upon the advent of white settlement in the area, there occurred
numerous instances of the atnriginal Indian occupants suffering from
starvation. To a great extent this occurred from the white man's use
of the natural resources of the area, such as pine nut trees for
building and fuel and grass fdr cattle, which deprived the Indians of
two of their main sources of food, i.e., pine nuts and seeds and roots.

Thus by the gradual influx of white settlers, miners and travelers
in the various areas and the appropriation of area for the use of the
white man, the Indians were deprired.of the use and occupancy of the
lands which they had occupied from time immemorial.

The government agents in the area were constantly striving to promote peaceful relationships between the Indians and the white settlers
who had moved onto their lands. Attempts were made to induce the Indians
to remove to reservation areas, and the efforts to remove any Indian interference uith.the use of the land by whites culminated in several instances in military actions against the Indians. “hile, in View of the
gradual encroachment of the whites, it is not possible to set a precise
date of taking of the lands in question, the Commission does find that
by the conduct of the white settlers, travelers, miners, together with
actions taken by United States military forces and the actions of other
agents of the United States, the Indians were deprived of their Indian
title to their lands. Thus, without payment of compensation, the Un1ted_

1‘

States acquired, controlled, and treated.the lands oi the various Northern

Paiute groups as public lands.

7 Ind.CH” Com. 322 379

In'view of the fact that the Commission has divided the claimed
territory into three areas each exclusively used and occupied by a
separate and distinct aboriginal Northern Paiute group, the question of
the dates of taking must necessarily be considered for each area. The
Commission will not now make such determination but will leave it either
to the parties to agree upon average dates of taking for each area, or,
upon further briefing of this question in the light of this decision,
the Commission will fix average dates of taking for each of the described areas.

28. The Conmission will, however, fix the date of taking of the
areas of land in the present tate of California, which includes most
of the land described in Finding of Fact No. 21 and small portions of
the areas described in Findings of Fact Nos 22 and 23. On March 3, l8Sl,
Congress passed (9 Stat. 631) “An.Actix>Ascertain and Settle the Private
Land Claims in the State of California." ’Under the provisions of this
Act all claims to land had to be presented to commissioners within two
years for confirmation, and, at the end of that time, all lands the

claims to which had not been presented were to be deemed to be held

and considered part of the public domain of the United States. Two

years later Congress on March 3, 1853, and in accordance with the provisions of the l8Sl Act, passed.(1D Stat. Zhh) legislation entitled an
"Act to provide for the survey of the public lands of California and

the granting of preemption rights to settlers." From'that date, March 3,
1853, the United States for all intents and purposes treated the lands

of the Northern Paiutes in California as public lands and so considers?

7 Ind. Cl. Can. 322 . 380

said lands to be public lands. (The Eohave Tribe v. The United States,

 

Dockets 283 and 295, consolidated, decided March 19, l959, 7 Indian
Claims Commission 219) .

Therefore, the Commission finds that the California portion of the
land aboriginally possessed.by the Monos or Paiutes of the Owens Valley

area and the California portions of the land aboriginally possessed by
the Paviotso or Paiute of the western Nevada area and the Snake or Paiute
of the Oregon area were taken by the United States, without payment of
compensation, on Harch 3, l8S3.

Edgar R. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. C'Narr
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. H. Holt
Assoc iate Co1':1miS Sioner

 

\.__\

