1 Ind. C1. Comm. 154 l J 154

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

ERNEST RISLING. PETEIR MASTEEI. tom 9. )
DOBNBACH, as the representatives of )
and on the relation of the Indians of )
California, %
Plaintiffs )

)

vs. ) Docket N00 37

l 3

mar UNITED STATES or amazon. 3
)

Defendant. )

Thurman.Arno1d, with whom was.Regina1d E.
Foster, Walter M. Gleason, Ag Brooks Berlin,
Paul A. Porter and L. A. Rikoloric,
Attorneys for plaintiffs.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was At Devitt
Vanech, Assistant Attorney Generalg
Attorneys for the defendant.

43:

ER? 6 :3 9
OPINION OF TEE COMMISSION

PER CURIAM: The original petition was filed herein by the Council of
California Indians, Inc.. a nonwprofit California corporation, as the representative of the Indians of California v. The United States of Americaa To
that petition the defendant directed a motion to dismiss on the following
grounds:

1. The "Indians of California" referred to in the petition
herein is not such an identifiable group of Zndians as is contemplated by Section 10 of the Act of August 13. 19h6.
2. The “Council of California Indians, Inc.” is not an

“identifiable group“ of Indians as that term is used in the Act

of August 13. l9h6.

After the filing of the motion by the defendant the plaintiff. named in

the original petition. on January 2?, 1999, by motion asked leave to amend

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 154 155

- 2,its petition by adding thereto the names of four individual Indians of California. This motion was granted by order entered on the 28th day of January.
19h9, however, no amended petition was filed until March 2U. 19H9. two 5835
after the argument on the defendant's motion to dismiss, above referred to.
Since the motion to dismiss raised questions which apply to both the
original and the amended petition. t was agreed, in open hearing, by the
parties, at the time of the oral arguments, March 21 and 22. 1949, that the
Commission should consider the motion as being directed to the amended petition. This we shall do in so far as the motion raises the question as to
the legal capacity of the plaintiffs named in the amended petition to assert

the claim set forth in the amended petition. There were other questions of

law argued by the defendant but the amended petition seems to have eliminated

those, so they will not be considered.

After considering the motion. briefs and oral arguments of the counsel
for the parties, we have reached the conclusion. as we did in the case,
Indians of California v. United States, Docket No. 31. this day decided, that
the motion of the defendant raises an important issue of fact which should
only be determined when raised by an appropriate pleading and after a full
hearing upon the issue of fact so raised.

From the above it follows that the motion of the defendant must be over—

medo

May 6, 19%?

