O‘-nu-nu-nf'\ v- fr-00 ‘h o. - -1- In w-1¢_-5 a-Lsgqg--I-al-1 "—
out»: an: : I- , II-‘T-U I ' Ya} .I\.! If‘ ‘ gt‘ -.  b c i -.c: a :\1
I-J-3-5 Ki 4- q-n-.n oa—-u_- -|—J“ Ln-a-I-u.-.-:0 \J¢..—..-o.-In--0 Ala!‘ \J\-Aa-L-—¢u-II-/‘-’IJ- -5‘

TEE UZNTRE UTE IF1IéNS Q? UT“£

Docket No. an
VG

TEE UNZTED ST£TES C? §V7EICa,

\~..../‘-..a-*‘-.../'\-../‘a.d"\-..a#\.¢/‘-../“-..-/

Defendant.

 

1. ?laintiffs timely filed this claim pursuant to the Indian

Claims Commission Ect of august 13, 1 36 (o. 059, 50 Stat. lO&C‘

I /.3’

\

25 U.S.C. Sec. 70). The claim asserted, pleaded on alternative grounds

 

under the l9&6 Act, snore, is for compensation for the taking, by the

U

13
P .3 £ I I ‘I 0 U
deienoant, of lands occupied or plaintiffs.

or

2. ?laintiffs arena band or group of enerican Indians commonly

Q

known as the Uintah Ute Indians and are resident on the Uintah and

Ouray Reservation in the State of Utah. Since 1936, plaintiffs have

I" 3 ‘ 3- ;----r 0". 4- -5 7 '—v_ ‘.1’, ,..., -5,...‘ -‘u g-.-L- a. an .59
been a C3nStluUcnt par. 0; th “Lte lhoian TAIDE of the Uiatah and Ourag
‘H C: l"""'-.3 ll -1. ‘L. .........-.,....' " .. ‘ ;* "" .1‘, ""'- ,-...‘..........,...-T. .-.4.‘ -s .1. .5‘
necerxec_on, a trioe Claaulzea anoer tn inaien :eo.5a_-zation ncb oi

"I

June L3, 1933 (c. 5?6, £3 Stat. 3?h, 25 U.S.

(7

. Sec. #61 et seo.).

 

;/ This case was consolidated for hearing before the Commission

with The Uintah 3t Indians g§_?tah v. §nited States, Zocket K3. #5,
“to the extent that documentary jevidencg/ and oral testimony may be
taken ior both cases at the same time and cons‘ ther case.”

j 1
T ‘-\ 9 I -I -u q 9 I - - 0
xr.. 2 :-ai:tiffs‘ orooosac fincinas of fact and documentation in
I
‘IN

     

C.-...... ‘."' J. . .
, . I-1-a_ C-r"\—u-an‘-I--..q_.-.....— Vt:-.9.-Q.gn§Iy— 
c--D8 L-O . -v5 ..-._ E‘. .,o..-¢, - — ;~, __ :___ __ _ er; _._;

\uI .-on-hr

2:3 '’Uin;'.a':: 15-‘ "

-/O

kn
f\}

Plaintiffs are known as Uintahs and are a distinct and identi-L

fiable group on the Uintah Reservation, on which also reside the white

River (formerly Yampa and Grand River), and Uncompahgre (formerly Tabetguache) bands of Ute Indians.

3. That at the time plaintiffs were deprived of their lands by
defendant they were in the exclusive use and occupancy of lands lying
within the following boundaries:

Commencing at the northwest corner of the Uintah and Ouray
reservation in the Uintah Mountains and running thence along
the crest of said mountains through Clayton, Sunset and Lone
Peaks and across Jordan Narrows, where Jordan river cuts through
the mountains separating Salt Lake and Utah Lake valleys; thence
along the crest of such mountains to Butterfield Peaks; thence
along the crest of the Oquirrah hountains to a point thereon due
east Of the town Of Lofgreen: thence SO11‘f'.':":wa==.=;*J'.e»r-Ty +_n 1'€r'a'§'.r-"r- 9:21:
in the House Hountains; thence along the crest of the mountains
or hills lying immediately west of Sevier Lake to a place west
of the south end of Sevier Lake; thence easterly‘to'hgunt Terrel.
in the'Kasatch Mountains; thence northeasterly through Vasatch
Peak and Seeley Hountain, to the southwest corner of said reservation, as originally established, near Indian Head Summit;
thence along the west boundary of said reservation to the placeof beginning. (hots - The location of.the above lines can be
followed by referring to U.S. Department of the Interior map of
Utah, l9¢3, which is in evidence as Befend. Ex. l3).

U. The lands described in Finding No. 3, suora, were inhabited in prewhite times by people who were all Utes. In earlier aboriginal times, five
names occurred.most consistently in describing the Ute groupings in Utah;
that portion of plaintiffs found in the Uintah Valley were called Uintahs;
those around Utah Lake were called Timpanoags, or variations of that name;

‘ gq " D ‘ '0 4-9 9 v—.o ' .
those around Sevier Lake, Corn Creek and sevier nrver were the Pahvants;

east of the Pahvants, in the area known today as San Pete County, Utah,

"ii-'.:;s;«.=a=

5 3

were the Sampitches; and there was another te group which roamed in the

area described in Finding No. 3, known as Seuvarits. However, the use or
occupancy of the lands described in Finding No. 3 was not at any time divided
or separated by Internal boundaries as among plaintiffs, and the Ute

people known in aboriginal times by the above-mentioned names ultimately
became merged or amalgamated under the coruon name of "Uintah Utes."

In earlier aboiriginal times the groupings referred to above were

made up of even smaller groups or clusters of families throughout the

area occupied by plaintiffs. This was the type of social organization,

then found throughout most of the Great Basin area. These small groups

iof families gathered roots, nuts, and berries, and hunted in the area

with which each was most familiar because they could exploit most effectively
the resources of familiar terrain. However, they made seasonal trips to
other parts of the territory for the purpose of hunting, fishing, and
visiting. The individual membership of the groups of families who customarily roamed together in search of food fluctuated as be ween the groups
from time to time. Any of the plaintiffs moved about at will from one
part of the territory to another, using and occupying the lands in the
most efficient manner known to them. Even during this early aboriginal
period, indiéiduals or families associated themselves from time to time
with certain leaders as their desires or interests dictated.
, the

Later, during aboriginal times and following,acquisition of the

‘ C 1 Q Q 0 V O 9 c u horse in large enough numoers to azfect their haoits, t-e leaders attracted

F

as followers individuals from various of the small groupings; the mounted

Ute (mostly young men) raided for horses under the leadership of a chief,

while the olde

H

people, women and children remained in their accustomed
haoitat seeking out a meager existence. The acquisition of horses in

greater numbers enabled these te groups to gather together in greater
numbers for the purpose of food-gathering activities (fishing and hunting)
and of social visits, participation in sports, and the celebration of their
annual Bear Dance. As a result, certain chiefs came to assert a subtantial
degree of authority and influence over all the plaintiffs. After the coming of the white man, in the only two attempts by the government to negotiate with these Indians (the unratified Spanish Fork Treaty of l865, and

the l878 release), the Indians who were recognized as the chiefs or headmen were the same individuals who acted as the leaders of plaintiffs in

other activities during the same period.

Throughout the various stages of their aboriginal or historical development the plaintiffs shared a common language and culture, whereas on

all four sides of their original lands they were bounded by Indian peoples

of a different language, or culture, or both.

The separate identity of plaintiffs is demonstrated by the following
distinguishing characteristics:
(1) All of the individuals included within the aboriginal groupings

were Ute;

(2) Individual Ute Indians of whatever of the groupings of plaintiffs'

lived and moved at will over all the subject lands;
(3) The subject area was not inhabited by Shoshone, Paiute, or Colorado Ute;

\..'I .. -.
.«,_;,'.__-ti.

(Q) There were no boundaries betxeen the Ute groupings, all of the
people being free to move about and use.or occupy the area at will;

(5) among the plaintiffs were chiefs, or leaders, who commanded,

and received, a following and allegiance from members of all groupings;

and

(6) Substantially, all Ute occupying the area ultimately merged or
amalgamated under the common name "Uintah.“
5- To the south of the plaintiffs lived the Southern Paiutes. Their
cultural characteristics marked them as a people different from the plaintiffs, and their language, although of the same linguistic stock, differed

to a noticeable extent. The Southern Paiutes and plaintiffs were hostile

‘I:_t__'_\1;._?_v;_I-r-3 c;'.':o--‘H rs-*1’-lnrn--. an-u-I

9
"
at ‘I--Iuvqr-sq ~.v3.-i__ ’ E-__-é I . .

w
‘J
(D
(n

K  If:/igqq-‘I‘L|ILaI|In'|bIIV-In D-I-I-:1-I‘va-Ina— «I-«I-a'\sq..14J and-L‘ in-Idluunu-d'iuI--in-. ‘LII: 

; Q.‘-no-In 5-vii--A. I-I¢c\.r¢ ¢¢ Jr I-nu-.-A. huh’!-I !i\-I9-A-In-N-A o¢\J \a J... H-9-I.c\f V Bur HJNJ E-Jud‘-..l
\

Uintah Valley Reservation, because of their fear of the plaintiffs and
recognition that they were a different people.

To the west and north of the original habitat of the plaintiffs
lived various bands of Shoshone Indians. The language of those people
differed from.that of the plaintiffs to the extent that they could not
understand or be understood by each other, The Shoshone did not use or
occupy any of the lands involved in this case, and authorities agree that
they are separate and distinct people.

The nearest peoples to the east of the plaintiffs in Colorado were

also Utes. They were, however, distinct and separate from the plaintiffs,

as was understood by officials of the defendant. The Colorado Utes did

""‘**'- ...-....... ...1.......‘ '1...‘ , ' *.. ‘ .4. .. 4.‘
H0» use Or occupy the lands claimed herein, nor have they at an’ time

The plaintiffs and the Colorado Utes were distinct and separate

in other aspects besides their relative locations and the lands they

the Utes in Colorado acquired the horse approximately lOO years before those
in Utah, the Utes in Colorado had acquired many material culture traits
of the Plains Indian type of aboriginal culture, which set them apart from
the plaintiffs.

6. From time immemorial and until after their removal to the Uintah
Valley Reservation following negotiation of the unratified Treaty of
June 8, l865, plaintiffs used and occupied the lands described in Finding
No. 3. Plaintiffs used or occupied those lands to the exclusion~of other
tribes, bands or groups of Indians. Plaintiffs were deprived of lands by
the defendant within the area described in Finding No. 3, without the
Payment of any compensation whatsoever, but the extent thereof and the

time of such deprivation is to be determined at a later hearing herein.

(Tr. p. 310).

7- The Hasatch Range of Hountains,-which bounded the plaintiffs‘
lands on the east, presented not only a natural boundary but was also a
natural barrier. This eastern boundary is marked by steep cliffs, canyons,
and gorges.

8. The northern boundary of plaintiffs‘ lands as_described in Finding
No. 3. for much of its length was formed by the Uintah Hountains, one of
the Host formidable ranges of mountains in the United States. In native

’ _ ‘La J‘ 0 :.a. g I O A .t seehs those nounoains e-:ectively separated the areas oz permanent

5 7

residence of the Ute and the Shoshoni. The northern boundary runs approximately south of the present town of Oakley, Utah, to the Eutterfield
Peaks through where the Jordan niver cuts through the mountains separating
Salt Lake and Utah Valleys.

9. The southern boundary of plaintiffs‘ original lands is established as a substantially straight line running east from near the southernmost point of the House Mountains to Mount Terrel in the'Wasatch Range.
This boundary, unlike the northern and eastern boundaries, was not delineated by a geographical or topographical line, but is based upon ethnological data and the documentary accounts of the habitual and immemorial
locations of the plaintiffs and the Southern Paiute Indians. The line
west from near the southern tip of Sevier Lake largelv follows~the geographical division of the drainage areas.

l0. The western boundary of plaintiffs‘ aboriginal lands, from near
the southermost point of the House Mountains to Notch Peak, thence to
the Oquirrh Hountains and Butterfield Peaks, formed a natural boundary

between the use and occupancy of lands by the Shos?oni and Gosiute Indians

Ulla

on the west and the plaintiffs on the east. The expanse of country to
the west of this line is anothe. virtual desert, and was occupied very
little, if at all. The country between Utah Lake and Sevier Lake was an
area of permanent and concentrated habitation by the plaintiffs, who were
separated physically from Shoshone Indians to the west.

11. The first whit people to settle permanently in substantial
numbers, in the Territory of Utah were the aormons, who arrived in the

C

f'H 0
+ . I q no t . .
*eTT1~3T? l3 dul? ;9~?. r arrival, they and other settlers

immediately commenced settling and cultivating the most fertile lands

in the territory, including the lands used or occupied by plaintiffs.

On September 9, l85O (c. 51, 9 Stat. 453), approximately three years
after the arrival of the Mormons, Congress passed the Act creating the
Te?Tit0TY Of Utah. That territory encompassed an area within which lived
various Indian.tribes in addition to plaintiffs. The territory was

defined as follows: '

“* * * bounded on the west by the State of California,
on the north by the Territory of Oregon, and on the east by

the summit of the Rocky Jountains, and on the south by the
thirty-seventh parallel of north latitude, * * *“

Utah Territory, as thus defined, encompassed that part of the future

Territory of Colorado [greeted by the Act of February 28, l86l (12 Stat.
l727 west of the Rocky Mountains. Certain portions of the original Utah
Territory were later included in the Territories of Hyoming, Colorado,
§rizona and Nevada. hone of these acts purported to affect the use or
occupancy of plaintiffs. No provision was made for the settling of the
Indians in the Utah Territory upon reservations until the Executive Order
of October 3, l86l (l Kappler 900), which established the Uintah falley
Reservation; the Act bf Kay 5, 1864 (13 dtat.i63), which confirmed the
Uintah Valley as a reservation, and the unratified treaty of June 8,

1865 (5 Kappler 695), all of which are considered separately herein.
Except for the trespass of the white settlers, the plaintiffs continued
to use or occupy the lands as they had in the past, and in the meantime,

government agents, territorial officers, Congressmen, and other interested vhite persons constantly urged defendant to tre

fl)
(‘*‘
71
Ho
f*
'0
|....J
I‘)
| In
'1

(‘P
'1;
* '3
,4

U!

..I-.:_'.!- ’

for the extinguishment of their title to the lands, and to place tuem
upon a reservation.

l2. Following demands of white settlers (urging some disposition

P5

of the Indians) and rumors that the Mormons were going to settle the
Uintah Valley on October 3, l86l (L Kappler, 900), President Lincoln
prom lgated an Executive Order establishing an Indian reservation in
the northeastern part of the Territory of Utah.
The reservation was described in a le ter, dated October 3, 1861,

from Caleb B. Smith, Secretary of the Interior, to the President, reading

I have the honor herewith to submit for your consideration
the recommendation of the acting Commissioner of Indian affairs
that the Uintah Valley, in the Territory of Utah, be set apart
and reserved for the use and occupancy of Indian Tribes.

In the absence of an authorized survey (the valley and surrounding country being as vet unoccupied by settlements of our
citizens), I respectfully recommend that you order the entire
valley of the Uintah River within Utah_Territory, extending on
both sides of said river to the crest of the first range of
contiguous mountains on each side, to be reserved to the United
States and set apart as an Indian Reservation. I

Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

Caleb B. Smith,
Secretary

Executive Office
October 3, l86l?

"The President

Let the reservation be established, as recommended by the
Secretary of the Interior.

. A. Lincoln

Despite this action by President Lincoln nothing was done to encourage the Indians to move to that reservation and nothing was done to care
for additional Indians who might move. As a result, those of the plaintiffs
not already residing in that area did not then remove to the reservation.

As more white settlements were developed in the Territory of Utah,
demands increased, from whites and Indians alike, that the Indian title be
extinguished and the Indians confined to a reservation so that the white

settlers might acquire title to the lands and the Indians adopt civilized

pursuits.

13. On May 5, 1861+, “An Act to Vacate and Sell the Present Indim

Reservation in Utah Territory and to Settle the Indians of said Territory

- +1-A TT-'.---L.-.‘x.. 17..'1'1......u ..-.._. -.-..- .. 4'. .- /'3‘ --~.' . -_ °
-nu:-:6 In-our ‘O1-§J%'c-‘.5-Q O 3.3.-LUJ “ah:-J  \‘-:0  , J.)  Q U I O   . 1 ’1

Section 1, required that the Secretany of the Interior cause certain Indian
farms, which had been termporarily and unofficially established by one of
the Indian agents, to be surveyed into tracts or lots and sold. It was

further provided, in Section 2:

* * * That the superintendent of Indian affairs for the

Territory of Utah be, and is hereby, authorized and required

to collect and settle all or so many of the Indians of said
territory as may be found practicable in the Uinta Valley, in
said territory, which is hereby set apart for the permanent
settlement and exclusive occupation of such of the different
tribes of Indians of said territory as may be induced to inhabit
the same.

However, since no agent resided on the Uintah Reservation, and no
farms or other means were provided for their subsistence, plaintiffs continued their ustom of hunting and gathering over the whole of their

original lands. This proved a conti

‘"5

. Q *0‘
.uing an.cyance to the settlers,

. .
"W,-. _ '. ..| o

and it ‘as decided to begin treaty negotiations to achieve the cession
of plaintiffs‘ lands and their confinement to the reservation.

The Uintah Valley (Uintah and Ou_a;) Reservation as established

.by the Executive Order of October 3, l861 (Finding 12) and confirmed by

said Act of May 5, 185%, comprised 2,h87,h7#.83 acres.
14. On February 23, 1865 (c. #5, l2 Stat. #32), Congress passed
an act "* * * to extinguish the Indian Title to Lands in the Territory

of Utah Suitable for agricultural and Mineral Purposes." Under that

act, the President was authorized and directed, with the advice and

consent of the Senate, to enter into'treaties with the various tribes

of Indians of Utah Territory. It directed:

* * * [The treaties shall be made] upon such terms as‘
may'be deemed just to sa’d Indians and beneficial to the
government of the United States: Provided, That such
treaties shall provide for the absolute surrender to the
United States, by said Indians, of their possessory right
to all the agricultural and mineral lands in said territory
except such agricultural lands as by said treaties may be set
apart for reservations by said Indians; And orovided further,
That all such reservations shall be selected at points as
remote as may he practicable from the present settlements in
’tah Territory. (Section 1).

   

Pursuant to the Act of February 23, 1855, several treaties (none of
‘which was ratified) were negotiated with the Indians resident in the

Territory of Utah. One "as the Treaty of June 8, 1955, with the plain 

Hhen Congress passed the act of ?eo-aary 23, l855, sucre, Colonel

O. E. Irish was Superintendent o? Indian a”airs for the T

; |
at A 1

(D

rritory of

irected to act as the official

representative of the United States in the negotiation of the treaties,
and was to have the assistance of the then Governor of Utah Territory,

John Duane Botv, and ex—governor Frigham Young.

15. Pursuant to the act of February 23, l865, suora, on June 8, 9,
and 10: 1555. a treaty was negotiated between defendant and the plaintiffs.
That treaty is commonly referred to as the Spanish Fork Treaty. By its
terms the plaintiffs were to cede "all their possessony right of occupancy"
to a described area of land, reserving to themselves a designated area as
a reservation. The pertinent provisions of that treaty are:

Article 1. AThe said bands of Indians hereby surrender and
relinquish to the United States all their possessory right of
occupancy in and to all of the lands heretobefore claimed and
occupied by them, as hereinafter mentioned, within the defined
boundaries of the Territory of Utah as follous—-to nit. Commencing at a point formed by the intersection of the thirty second
degree of longitude west from Kashington with the forty first
degree of north latitude; thence due west on the forty first
degree of north latitude to the thirty eight degree of longitude;
thence due south on the thirty eighthdegree of longitude to the
thirty eighthdegree of north latitude; thence due east on the
‘thirty eighth degree of north latitude to the thirty second
degree of longitude thence due north on the thirty second degree
of longitude to the forty first degree of north latitude to the
place of beginning. U

Article II. There is however reserved for the exclusive use and
occupation of the said tribes the following tract of lands; viz
‘the entire valley of the Uintah River within Utah Territory

range of contiguous mountains on each side‘ which said tract shall
be, so far as is necessary, surveyed and marked out, set aside
and.reserved for their exclusive use and occupation nor shall any
white'person, unless he be in the employ of the Indian authorities
be permitted to reside upon the sane, without permission of the
said tribe, and of the Superintendent of Indian Affairs or United
tates Indian agent. It is however understood that should the

President of the United "tates hereafter see fit to place upon the
reservation, any other friendly tribe or hands of Indians of Utah
Territory, tc occupy the same in connon with those above mentioned,
he shall be at liberty to do so.

Article III. The said trioes and bands agree to remove to
and settle upon the said vation within one year after
the ratification of this treaty, .rovided the means are
furnished them by the United States to enable them to do
so-—ln the meantime it shall be lawful for them to reside
upon any land not in the actual claim and occupation of
citizens of the United States, and upon any land claimed or
occupied if with the permission of the owner.

#1"
H
(D
U‘)
(I)
H

The lands occupied by plaintiffs as described in Finding Ho. 3

supra, were well within the limits of the lands described by the Spanish

Fork Treaty as within the occupancy'of plaintiffs.

16. Commencing immediately after negotiation of the Spanish Fork
Treaty, plaintiffs were removed to the reservation described in that
treaty. The movement of the plaintiffs to the reservation had progressed
sufficiently by September 20, l866, that the Indian agent at the Uintah
Valley Reservation, and the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Utah
Territory were able to report to Heshington that "the Uintah Utes
occupy the country set apart in ldél as a reservation for th ndian
tribes of Utah."

Nothing further was done by the United States with respect to the

formal extinguishment of plaintiffs‘ original Indian title to their

lands in Utah Territory, or by way of compensation to the plaintiffs

U‘

therefor. De pite repeated requests and protests of the Commissioner of

"1 “ dial‘: -5 ~ in . so an . ‘ ‘VII-D . . P
Indian affairs and of the Government agents in charge of plaintiffs,

interested white citizens of ’tah Territory, and the plaintiffs themselves,

‘\99 v... . .c as V .f‘‘,._‘ ' " -_.
the Spanish :or? Treaty was never rati-led, cut, on_ha-Ca ll. 1959. was

17. By the Treaty of Earch 2 1868, I5 Stat. 6L9; II Kaopler 990,

i

between the United States and representatives of certain Confederated

Bands of Ute Indians, negotiated in Yascington, D. C., there was established for the said bands a reservation, wholly withi. the Territory of

Colorado. ‘

The Confederated Bands referred to in the treaty were named therein

as "Tabequache, Kuache, Capote, weeminuche, Yanpa, Grand River, and Uintah

Bands of Ute Indians." By a ticle III of the treaty it was agreed that the
Indians "parties hereto" relinquish all claims and rights in and to any

portion of the United States or territories except such as are embraced in

the limits of the reservation established by the treaty. By the 4th article

the treaty, the United States agreed to establish two agencies on the new

\

0

reservation, "one for the Grand River, Lanna, and Uintah Bands on the Hhite

River,“ and the other for the other named bands, on Rio de los Pinos.

l8.

Plaintiffs, at the time of the making of the Treaty of Eriarch 2,‘

V

lP68, lived on the Uintah Reservation in Utah, and made no claim to lands

R0 representatives of plaintiffs took part in negotiations

to the signing of the treaty, and as originally concluded, the

Q

agreement bore only the names of Utes of the various Colorado bands named.

After ratification of the treaty by the Senate, with an amendment which

‘R n

did not relate to the land cession, the ratification was assented to by

4.‘...

,number of Utes than had executed the ori

:........ ‘ ° .. ' I_-: -0 "
five are cesianatec ’cintan Ute_

"L74-‘an an y-an
- cu .-.'.’l:'.;;"'. ad o

and

aooeareo elsewhere in the evidence. ne last named Indian was a Ehite

River, from Colorado, and ‘as not associated in any way with the plaintiffs. fn—tro was, no doubt, a Uintah Ute, but he was at no time the
principal chief of the plaintiffs. Be did not sign the 1855 Spanish Fork

Treaty.

%

The designation "Uintah," on March a, l858 treaty did not
include the plaintiffs. The Government agents who negotiated the treaty
recognized that the plaintiffs were a separate and distinct group of
Indians. who had no interest in the subject-matter of that treaty.

19. Neither the plaintiffs, nor the Government officials in the
Utah Suoerintendency, were contacted or consulted with respect to the
official transactions leading up to the l?68 Treaty or the amendment
thereto.

Instructions with reshect to negotiation of the lE68 Treaty were
sent only to Governor L. C. Punt of.Colorado Territoryu. after the treaty
was negotiated, in Fgshington, D. 3. and the Senate had ratified it with

an amendment, the amendment wa

U}

sent to the Governor of Colorado Territ0IY Oily; with a letter directing him to present it to the In"ans for

their assent. Cnly names of Colorado officials appeared on the certification of the treaty amendment.

20. It was understood by the of icials of the United States, at

the time of and following the Treaty of l?53 with the Confederated Bands

j-it

C9SSiOn of lands outside the Territory of Colorado provided by article 1:!

—I-.1.-&

‘ G

had no reference to the lands of plaintiffs

Both the executive and legislative branches of defendant consistently

and uniformly regarded plaintiffs as in rightful occupancy of lands within the Uintah Valley Reservation in Utah and as not having been relinquished
by plaintiffs. The agency at Uintah, in existence prior to 1868, has been
maintained ever since. Appropriations for the Uintah Utes in Utah were

made in years following the Treaty of 1968, and special legislation affecting that reservation was adopted, whereas appropriations pursuant to the
1868 Treaty'were intended, and expended, for the benefit of Colorado Utes.
Persistently, to 1882, the officials of the United States, under whose
authority the Treaty of 1868 had.been negotiated, interpreted it as relating only to the Colorado Utes, and as neither burdening plaintiffs wi h
its provisions for cession and removal nor entitling them to the money and
other consideration paid from rear to year.

21. Following negotiation and ratification of the 1868 Treaty, the
agent at the Uintah Valley Feservation was hard put to explain to plain
tiffs why the Colorado Utes were favored with large annual payments whereas plaintiffs were not entitled to payments. Then, in august 1881, pursuant to the act of June 15, 1880, c. 223, 21 Stat. 199, 200, approving
an agreement with the Colorado Utes, the fhite River Utes were removed from
Colorado to the Uintah Valley Reservation in ’tah. The consequent embarrassment over the fact that no treaty .ad ever been finally effected with plaintiffs and that they were not entitled to annual payments, whereas the Khite

Eiver Utes, even after they came upon the same reservation as the plaintifls,

4| I .._I ._."’
‘~*!'.‘-:5?"

were receiving annual oavments in cash and provisions, ultimately led a

llater Commissioner of Indian affairs, on July 7, l88 , to express the

opinion that “the Uintah Ute lndians on the Uintah Valley reservation in
Utah, should have participated in all the benefits of the Ute Treaty of
harsh 2, 1868, * * *." "* * * should have received a proportionate share
Of * * * [Eh§7'twenty-five thousand dollars annually * * *" provided by

the Brunot Agreement with the Confederated Bands of Utes, ratified.by act
of §PFil 29. 1874, c. 136,218 Stat. 36, and "* * * entitled to share
proportionately with the other Ute Indians, in the twenty-five thousand
dollars Specified in the 5th condition of the Ute agreement of l880, * * *"

(ratified by Act of June l5, 1880, c. 223, 2l Stat. 199) and that they

th=W**tP?iver Utes in the other hencshnxwlri .=:‘r1.-,=1~:_= c_=r_-.n:_:l_'_I_v :_.'a‘§: ]_:;.~g2=:+ 2..--2+

ficial provisions of said agreements.

22. Pursuant to the foregoing letter of the Commissioner, the Secretary of the Interior, on July 17, l882, instructed that in a forthcoming
semi-annual distribution a sufficient sum should be withheld by the agents
at Gufay (for the Uncompahgres) and at Southern Ute agency (for the Huache,
Capote, and Eeeminuche) to give the Uintah Utes their "due and praper share"
of the benefits due under the Colorado agreements, not attempting to make

2

up the amount due them on former payments. The Secretary specifically

O
*5
(J.
I'D
H
‘D
D(-0'
13‘
{U
¢ 1‘
U)
1.:
h
(D
H...

t n_ll doubtless create same dissatisfaction on the

nu: X-v

an L P as A.‘ n 0 0 Q . 4. In 0 I-_! ‘I...
part oi the other Indians, if their [the Uin.ans'/ rights are now recogV‘-E ‘ t * . . '|I- III ‘win.-In an 0- dis :1 I: . . db 0n-zec, * it is not t all necessary, at this time, to enter into any

ca?-x7----" -L. ~ ~ -' -- -- ~ - - ~ ,_-_ -.
-l,-anation to the other lncians, and the Agents siouia be crutionec

against any mention of this affair at this time. Not only was this
ruling directed to be withheld from all the various Indian parties at

the time, but there is no showing that it was ever communicated to plaintiffs or to the other Ute bands, or that it ever received the concurrence

of any of them. Fifteen years later, upon a review of the whole history
of the Utes, as then understood, the Commissioner of Indian A fairs reported to the Secretary in l897 that, “Iotwithstanding the positive statement of several officials I am convinced that the Uintah Valley Indians

were not parties to the treaty of l868, or to the Brunot agreement [of

1873/.”

23. At the time the Spanish Fork Treaty was negotiated, to induce
the plaintiffs to consent to the treatv. defendant enoloved the services
of the former Governor of Utah Territory, Brigham Young, whose influence

over the Indians was well recognized bv the defendant. Brigham Young held

‘was specifically invited to participate in the negotiation of the treaty

0
am

by Colonel O._H. Irish, on the advice the Secretary of the Interior.

ans that

',..h
II

Young specifically told the Ind

* * * If you do not sell Your land to the Government, they
"will take it, whether you are willing to sell it or not. * * *
and it won’t make one particle of difference whether you say
they may have the land or not, because we shall increase, and

we shall o cupy this vall y and the next, and the next, and so
on_until we occupy the whole of them,* * *"

1-‘ ‘ at u I‘ . g... 9 4-5 -‘I III. ‘ .
statements of the same tenor and meaning REF: made at other times

I 0

by Colonel Irish and Erign*n Young.

e‘?‘_3¥’;;éi‘ .,_.~

U1
} -1

binding instrument, until ratified ov the Senate,

If

explained to the olaihtiffs at the time of the he otiation of the
treat;. The whole treaty was read and interpreted to the Indians one

time during the entire course of the negotiations, and Colonel O. H.

Irish stated:

* * “This treaty, after being signed, is to be submitted
to the great Father's counsellors at washington, for them
to agree upon it aiso * * *.

There is no showing that the necessity for ratification was explained

to the plaintiffs subsequent to the treaty, and it does not appear that

the plaintiffs were informed that th Senate formally rejected the

treat}? 1.2‘;  .

f 9
5
I

dear E. fitt
nief Commis

M

¢—u:-Isioner

0

Louis J. O'Marr
associate Commissioner

9  f1
{.31. 1.2.9 .'.":{'_‘lt

Associate Commissioner

 

