3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 501; \ SleBEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIES CCKHISSIOH

THE KOOTENAI TRIBE OR BAND OF
INDIANS OF THE STATE OF IDAHO,

Petitioner,

v, Docket No. lSh

THE UNITED STATES or ANJBRICA,

“-/'\....0'\.....r'\-../‘Ru./"-../‘N-..-"nu/"s-.-’ \-......-I‘

Defendant .

Decided: April 25, 1960

Appearances:

Robert W. Barker, with whom were
Glen.A.'Wilkineon, John'W. Cragun,
and Donald C. Gormley, Attorneys
for Petitioner. I

John D. Sullivan, with whom was
Mr..Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,.Attorneys for

Defendant.

OPINION or 'I‘H.EZ <;.t_'g1_~:='~1:r.s==.::='fce:-I _

5 ‘LI

 

‘Watkins, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case is now before the Commission for consideration of a
proposed settlement of thegclain of petitioner tribe.

In a prior determination, after hearings on the issue of liability,
this Commission concluded that petitioner's ancestors, The Banners Ferry
Band of Kootenai Indians (now known as The Kootenai Tribe or Band of I
Indians of the State of Idaho) exclusively used_end occupied a certain
area of land in what is now the northeastern part of the State of Idaho
and the northwestern part of the tate of Kontona. The Commission further

found that these lands were acquired by the Unitei States on.Haroh 8, 1859,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. go: o 511

Wfgithout the payment of any compensation to said Indians for their lands
:(5 Ind. Cl. Comm. *§§, Findings of Fact 8,9, and 10). Accordingly, an
Interlocutory Order was made by the Commission which provided that the
defendant was liable to petitioner for the value of said lands, aboriginally
held by petitioner, as of March 8, 1859.

The parties to this action have now filed a Joint Motion for Entry
_of Judgment which is based on a Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment
(Finding 11). The effect of the granting of such motion would be
approving the settlement of petitioner's claim based upon the terms of
the stipulation entered into by the parties. By the provisions of the
stipulation, the parties agree that there shall be entered in this case,

after all allowable deductions, credits and offsets, a net judgment of ‘

$h25,000.00, in favor of the Petitioner.

 

The steps and requirements which are generally to be taken in cases of

settlement (see The Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, et al v. The United States,

“--‘i_ 97'

         

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 392, hlé-h19) have'been followed in this case. A hearing
was held on.April‘l8,il9éO, on the Joint Motion for Entry of Judgment and
documentary evidence received in support of the proposed settlement, as
set forth in the Findings of Fact herein made. Since the petitioner tribe
was without funds, the Commission did not require the presence at the

hearing of tribal officials. The Commission, however, did submit written

T’

int9TT0aatories to Mr. Simon Francis, Ciairman of the Tribal Council, and

Mr. Moses Isadore, Secretary of the Tribal Council, which were answered

proposed settlenent was caioiully aid Full; ;rg;;;F»

8 Incl. Cl. Comm. 5011

by the neznbers and the Tribal. Council through the passage of resolutions
unanimously adopted at a general mem‘:Jershi.p mec'ti.‘7g§ and a meeti ng of the
Ti~_ibal Council.

The proposed stipulation oi‘ settlem-.:;nt was signed by counsel for the

‘parties, by the Chairman and Secretary’ of petitioner tribe who were duly

authorized. to sign for the tribe, and by all contract attorneys or their
heirs or repre sentatires.

Counsel for the parties at the hearing on the Joint I-Eoti on for Entry

p of Judgment stated that they were 01‘ the opinion, in ‘view of the remote

location of the lands involved, the early date of valuation and former
determination of value- in other cases in the general area, that the
amount of the proposed settlement was fair and reasonable. The Commission
is also of the opinion that under all the circumstances the compromise
is fair and just.

Final judgment will accordingly be entered in cozaformity I-zith

this opinion.

Arthur V . I'Iatkins

5'12

' kill-H-)-bLQd--‘I'D’-I-§'|-'¥$b1 ‘CO9. -$$C"$\-I"‘~'mTC“KIm

A ssociate Cozroiis si oner

Concurring :

Edgar E. lrlitt

hi-j--Jinn--XI:-ug-51...;

Chief Commissioner

 
 

Wm . M . Holt

9"’ ‘*1!’ T ‘gnu.-.,o-_?....

As sociate C omissioner

   

