'f'\-:\ F!‘ I 11-1 -1-‘C-I-In-III-v.-‘T -II‘;  Cfq-,f‘r'S-Qpq-f-O‘
.';‘L..t“~.2-..3‘  .1_.":.J.£..*'.i‘a Cl.-“..£.:';D t.J;'.'i“;.I.L'.:D.'.. INT

 K10‘.-EA, .._. 
APA  raises or IN"‘;_.~1 =

Petitioners,
v.

Docket No. 32

TH“ UNITED S A??? C? ‘VTDTCA,

A-1-h_J' L -I-un&J—I.Lb.g

\..../\._/\._.w-._,..-v~c../°~._../-._./-.../-...I-../

-Defendant.

Decided: Harch l2, 1957

Appearances!

.10

William C. Lewis, Jr.,

J. Roy Thompson, Jr. and
Frank Hiskovsky,

Attorneys for Petitioners.

nalph a. Barney,'with when
was Mr. Assistant.Attorne"
J

rr

OFMarr, Commissioner, delivered the opi-ion of the Commission.
This Commission, on December l3, 1955, made an interlocutory award
t 4_h v 9 ‘A A A y can :5 Is 6 -I pp 9;
or» e Kiona, Comanche and.”9acne Trioes LOT e2,067,l6 .00, _ess 0; subs’

if an , which defendant mi_ht be able to establish.as deductible under

Section 2, 60 Stat. lOh9. Since s id date of the interlocutory award,

defendant has amended its answer setting forth claimed offsets, hearings

D)

have been held with respect thereto, evidence and testimony received by
this Commission.as oresented bv the sarties herein and reou=sted.findiras

and briefs have been filed in support of the contentions of the parties.

Defendant claims total offsets in the total sum of $2,111,315-0
against petitioners, of which sum defendant would have the Commission
aP?1Y $2,067,166.00 in satisfaction of the interlocutory award. The
items upon which the claimed offsets are based are contained in the

General Accounting Office Report (Def. Ex. 26), which was prepared by

said office at the request of the defendant. From the record of disbursements made by the United States as detailed.in the G. A. 0. Report,

defendant presents'claimed*offsets of two typegt (1) those indicating

"direct charges against the petitioner tribes, and (2) charges which

defendant asserts should be offset according to the proportion of the

population of petitioner tribes to the total Indian population of the
Kiowa Agency. The direct charges claimed by defendant consist of two
categories: (1) payment of depredation judgments involving petitioner

tribes -- $1,561,368.00; (2) cash payments to indigent Indians of petitioner tribes -- $396,8hh.96. The charges which d fendant asserts based up.n;oa.population basis are also set forth in. to categories: (1) those

disbursements where the vouchers or invoices indicated that the items
involved were for issue to the Indians, and (2) those disbursements
where the vouchers or invoices did not on their face indicate whether
the items were for the Indians or agency, educational or other use.

Depredation Judgments

 

comnitted by the niowa, Comanche or Apache), being the aggregate of

W
T3
Q4
(L
(D
l";
(D
U
D.
[D
:3
cf‘
""3
O
'1
D.
(D
*0
H
(D
I.)

‘ations committed by the petitioners herein prior

The Act of March 3, l89l, 26 Stat. 851, the so-called Indian Depredations Act, authorized suits in the Court of Claims for damages sus' tained by United States citizens resulting from property taken or

destroyed by Indians belonging to a tribe in amity with the United States.
By Section 6 5f the act the amount of each judgment was to be deducted

and paid in this order: (2) from funds due

(1) from tribal annuities;
the tribe, arising from the sale of their lands or otherwise; and (3)
appropriations for the benefit of the tribe, other than appropriations

for their current and necessary support, subsistence and education.

In final analysis, the cuestions here presente

are:
the amount of the depredation judgments are subsisting charges against
the petitioners and (2), if so, whether they may be paid by deducting
the amount thereof from the interlocutory awcrd we have.made herein,
without action.of the Secretary of the Interior directing the deductions

therefor under statutes herealter to be discussed?

(The first question must be answered in the affirmative. Section 6
of the Indian.Depredation.Act expressly provides that the amount of any
judgment rendered against the tribe by which, or by the members of which,
the Court of Claims shall find committed the depredations, shall be

0

charged against such tribe and deducted from

Fat

ts said tribal annuit es,

funds or appropriations, and where the judgment is paid by the Unite

GS-15.!

D.

States, as it is required to do when the tribe has no available tribal

\o

annuitlies, funds or appropriation moneys of the character specified in

that the amount so paid

(H
(D
(3
Cf‘
‘.10
O
C5
O\

3 it is expressly further provided

0‘!
‘:5’
I1)
' _.J
|,...J
*1
go
.4

.ain a charge against the tribe and shall be deducted from any
of.‘ the designated tribal resources that may become due thereafter from
defendant. Thus, the charge for reimbursing the Government is a continuing one, but one that can only be satisfied by deductions from the
particular tribal resources mentioned above. This liability W35 Cre?-ted
by statute and its enforcement must be limited to the means provided by

the act creating it, namely, by deductions from the designated tribal

resources, and only those.

33 Co 0150 E763 E799

While Section 6 of the 1891 Act directed the payment of depredation
judgments from the Treasury of the United States, they were not paid

until special appropri tions therefor were made. The reason appropriations were deemed necessary was perhaps to comply with Sec. 126, ~25
U. S. C. A., (R. S. 2098), "which requires special appropriations to pay
depre ‘ation claims.

But when the appropriation acts were passed to pay these judgments,

(for list of the appropriation acts and disbursements see P'et...E‘.x. 126

and pp. 78 and 3.81-2 G. A. 0. Report, Def. '53- . 27), theacts (see Fdg.

3
for text of a statute which is tmical of the provisions of all such

“ppropriation acts, except that of.‘ A gust 26, 1912, 3? St"*t. 617-618)

4-1made radical changes in the method of reimbursing defendant for Lu; judgInstead of the mandatory reimbursement of the C-overrment

Q

by

I4;
0
H
(‘I
:3
(3
in
F5
.3‘

it through deduction from available tribal

; :*
‘anus pa;C

annuities, funds or appropriations for tribal benefit, other than for

their support and education, as was required by the 1891 act, each Of the

0

several appropriation acts (w'th the exception noted above) for pa}_ng

rthe judgments provided that -"such deductions shall be made according to the discretion

of the Secretary of the Interior, having due regard to the \
educational and other necessary requirements of the tribe or

tribes affected; e~e."

These provisions must be considered as superseding the mandatory deduction

provisions of the 1891 act, or, as stated by the Court of Claims in
determining the effect of a similar appropriation act on the l89l act:
“The Act of July 28, 1892 (27 Stat. 282, 319), amended the
foregoing statute Llndian Depredations Act, 26 Stat. 8527,
and judgments in Indian depredation cases should be paid from
tribal funds in accordance with the discretion of the Secretary

of the Interior." Duwamish etc. v. United States, 79 C. Cls.
530, p. 612.

The A torney General on February 6, 1895; reached a similar cpn.clusion in holding that an appropriation act, similar to those involved
here, vests a discretionary power in the Secretary of the interior to
determine which depredation judgments be paid and the manner of payment.‘
(Pet. Ex. 1&0),

We next consider the actions taken by the Secretary of the Interior
under the various appropriation acts for pagnent of the judgments against

these petitioners. .As to each appropriation, the Secretary of the

interior certified to the Seoretarv of the Treasury5 as reouired by the
several acts (see F-g. 2?-c and Pet. Exs. l2? to 139), that there were

oners_from the United States nor any

}...I'¢

no annuities or funds due the netit

"?PTCpriations for their benefit other than the appropriation for their
I

4 O ' 6 C Q
Current and necessarv sucoor . subsistence arc ecrcation avswlahle tor
a ‘ ‘ ' urn: on Co E‘ .-p no ' 1 j £ 1 111-' &

Cf‘

3" up ¢'. 9 Q
Pefment o_ the gudcments renc

1-(1!

red against them or -~

“out of which the same should be paid, due regard being
had to their educational and other necessary requirements.”

Thus, it is plain that the Secretary of the Interior exercised his discretion as to reimhurement of the Government out of tribal annuities,
funds or "ppro riations for the judgments it paid, and decided there
were no such annuities, funds or appropriations out of which they should
be paid. The implication of the above language is that there might have
been annuities, funds, or appropriation.moneys of the character specified in Section 6 of the 1891 act, due the petitioners at the times of
the judgment appropriations and certifications of the Secretary, but
if there were, would such facts make the amount of the judgments an offsetable item? For the reasons hereafter stated, we think not.

As we have before stated, the charge against petitioners for the
depredation claims exists but its form has been changed, Instead of
owing those who suffered the losses, the Indians owe the Government

which paid them by satisfying the judgments therefor. This charge was

not one that was voluntarily assumed by the Indians, but one created by
an act of Congress and in so doing the Congress did as it pleased and
adopted.plain rules to govern the payment of the claims. -The original
plan, as appears from Section 6 of the 1391 act, was to deduct the
amounts of the adjudicated claims from specific tribal credits or resources whenever they became due the Indians from defendant. Under the

act no other tribal resources could be used to satisfy the_claims and
e for reimburswhen the defendant paid the judgments therefor the char

ing the Government remained, as the act e

T51
(I!
L0
U}
[.1
*4
*o
w
0
<1
'4.
0»
(D
U)
to

O
:1‘
[U
H
U’!
(U
U]

against the specific tribal resources before alluded to



did not con‘.-.-3--3

Under the 1591 act the deductions to pay for the depreoaoions

stitute a general tribal obligation, for, whether the statutory liability
was to the victims of the depredations or the Government, it was one that

could only be discharged by deducting the amounts from the designated

tr'bal credits.
in examination of the acts appropriating money for payin the

depredation judgments (Fdg. 27-2) shows that the provisions of Section 6
of the 1891 act respecting the deductions from tribal credits for reimbursement purposes has not been changed, in fact, those provisions

are expressly recognized in each of the judgment appropriation acts. But

in place of the direction in the l89l act to make the deductions from the

three tribal credits, the appropri tion acts modify such mandatory

sham -d ‘U-st

J-14-upit.-run enthu<.-J \.ILa..1.J' s.zO

"b§fN."l'f": a-It-\ 4-Tan-3-»
U .5-HAM: £149-"' I-9 \Io-I-\-i~f 14A

191

0
1+
‘Jo
'3
(0
ID
'3
[L
'u

direction: rncnariino cnnh HnAn
1‘ - up -I-—----('‘ —--I-I-I-- '—I-I-I-II--pu & A u

%_n

made “according to the discretion of the Secretary or the Interibr %
Parenthetically, it may be suggested, that if the Congress could fix the
rules for reimbursing the Government, as it did in the 1891 act, it could

‘modify those rules, as it did in the judgment appropriation acts. So

‘s could not be made available for reimbursesuch tribal funds or credit
True,

ment purposes until the Secretary acted and made them available.
the acts require that in exercising his discretion he shall have due

the educational and other necessary reqtirements

Ln-0.4

regard to

(D
|».Ja
U}
U
0

affected, but he was also made the sole judge of that and ther

the deductions to reimburse the GovernU71

intimation that, in not allowin

\9

ment, he acted other than in the best of faith

9'! ,..L. ___. ‘
the p8Clul~“E?S or the £33183 Serv‘ce, and in
by the appropriation acts under which he

creticnary powers granted him

‘HI

cf)

the designated sources of

acted. .and, in so acting, the existence of on
tribal credits at the times he acted, or thereafter, was immaterial, for,
as we have already stated, the reimbursements for defendant's outlays

for such judgments could only be made from the tribal credits specified

in the 1891 act, and the action of the Secretary applies to the use of
these credits, and none oth r; he could withhold them or make them available for such purpose as he thought the interests of the Indians, or the
Indian.Service, required.

.t is obvious that we have been granted no power to review the action
of the Secretary and excerpise for him, or in his stead, the discretionary
powers vested in him, and none other, by plain law, a discretion, it may‘
be remarked, that has never been questioned by the Congress during the
upwards of sixty-five years the Secretary has sinilarlr acted in thousands
of depredation cases under identical statutes. Nor, as we have said
before, can we treat these statutory deductions as general obligations of
the petitioners.

In 'ew of the above, we must hold that defendant is not entitled to
offset any of 1lO3 of the judgments against the award heretofore made.
The remaining judgment for $719.00 for which an appropriation was made by"
the Act of August 2d, 1912, will be considered later.

Counsel for defendant calls our attention to two cases in which the

Court of Claims allowed offsets for depredation payments; Shoshone Tribe vs

United States, 82 C._C1s. 23, S6, and Duwanish et al. V. United States,

   

0

79 0- C18» 530, 612. In the Shoshone case, the offset for e1hOO was included with gratuity payments aggregating over a million dollars; It is
not shown by the reported case that the eluoO item was called to the

runs:--'— .L.: ’ e g ..
attention of the court and no comment of it

"u'§lv‘-I7



A

The Duwamish case is inanoosite, for as the Court of Claims stated

in its opinion:

tnat a_pears is that no deductions for the judg‘e

re made bv the Secretarv from the annuities
("\a-it-’

dians under the treaty of loss. We include the
same in defendant‘s counterclaim under the theory that in
the absence of some affirmative record.from the Interior
Department, some direct action with respect thereto, the
act of our jurisdiction comprehends then as set-offs. The
language of the jurisdictional act is broad and does, we
think, intend a disclosure of all sums of money disbursed
by'the United States for or in behalf of the Indian claims
ants. The set-off is a legal one and not a gratuity.

{.1

Obviously, the facts there shown are entirely different from those here

under consideration. In the instant case, the Secretary of the Interior

took affirmative action (Fdg. 2?-c) in accordance with the power vested
in him by each of the appropriation acts and certified that there were
no funds or appropriation.moneys out of which the depredation judgments

should be paid.

Included in the pleaded offsets of 1,561,368 for depredation judge

ments is an item of $719.00 which was for depredations committed by
members of the Comanche Tribe and for which judgment was rendered in
that amount and included in the Apppropriation Act of August 26, l?l2,
37 Stat. 595, 617, and paid by defendant.

The pertinent part of the text of this act is set forth_in Finding

27-c. It will be noted that it differs from the other acts appropriating

money to pay the denredationi

?
n
(.1.

udgnents only in that it does not give the

Secretary the discretionary power to make deductions for the amount of

all.»

such judgments paid by the defendant, or the time and proportions of such

Juaément pagnents, but it does contain this significant language in re_fr="""""""E I"’.L' ‘L0 *3‘: "Wm --11n-3- -C‘ ‘vs :3 ;:.n--=‘L -- -'~-§ ' ‘H-.r H::>*.7'-"*.-~ "1'-v- ' o H vs.-3 ting -7-; -;---5- Q
"4' ‘-' "" "3 L’ b&‘\If t:.OL4.i..;‘JS  J  4;-  Liv‘ Mn-Had. &;C\:.A--d-it O 8.J.J..\..-L 3.-'---r C.I.Ou-. LJ1-J

paid shall be reimbursed to the United t tee: a e.". This quoted language

of the 19l2 act merely says that the defendant must be reimbursed for the

,$7l9 judgment it paid and nothing mo e; but can it be paid from any resources of the tribe, that is, from the award we have made, or must it
be deducted from the tribal annuities, funds or appropriation moneys
‘designated in Section 6 of the 1891 act for such purpose? The other
appropriation acts did not affect the defendant’s right to make the deductions in the manner specified in.that act, they simply deferred them

until the Secretary should determine that they should be made, and then

°only from the annuities, funds and appropriation.moneys specified in

Section 6 thereof. Hence it would seem to follow that by the direction
to pay in the 1912 act it was not intended to do more than require payh
ment from the tribal sources designated in said Section 6.

Since the defendant‘s position is that this judgment claim fdr
$719.00 must be s*tisfied by deducting it from the award we have:made,
it must be determined whether such award comes within any of the three
categories of Section 6 of the 1891 act from which deductions can be»
made to reimburse defendant. The award was for additional compensation
for the petitioners’ lands acquired by defendant under the l9oo act.
Obviously, the award is not an "annuity" or an ”appropriation.for the
benefit of the tribe," as those terms are used in Section 6, so it would
have to be considered as a fund due petitioners from defendant "arising
from the sale of their lands, or otherwise." Assuming that the award
is for money payable, or that should have been.paid, under the 1900 act,

it would be a fund.made available for _eimbursing defendant. _In fact,

unless it is such a and, there “spears no way for reimbursing defendant.

. ..-p—u-;...._:|:-I-ut-u.nP.'-,. '

what, then, is the effect of the provisions of the l9CO act? These
provisions (Fdg. 27-e) beyond question, exempt all money, or interest
thereon, payable thereunder from being "pplied to the payment of any
judgment that had been or might thereafter be rendered. Of course, all
depredation judgments, including that for $719.00, against petitioners
would be excluded.from payment out of such fund, so by the express provision of the l9OO act that judgment cannot be allowed as an offset,
and is disallowed.

As an alternative position to that claiming the amount of the depredation judgments as an offset, the defendant would have us consider
the amount of such judgments, $l,S§l,368.00, as a payment on the claim,
that is, that amount plus the $2,000,000 the defendant paid in cash
should constitute the consideration for the ]and it acquired by the

1900 act. Nothing in the act or the circumstances of its passage lend
support to this contention.

Indigent Indians - Cash Payments

 

Defendant claims an offset of $396,8hh.96 for cash payments to
indigent Indians of petitioner tribes from fiscal year l9hS through
fiscal year l9S6.i Petitioners admit (Pet. Reg. Fdg. 28) that these payments were made to identifiable individual members of petitioner tribes.
Petitioners urge, however, that these payments should be denied as offsets because, (I) these are "relief" payments specifically excluded by

Section 2 of'the Indian Clains'Commission-Act, (2) the paaments were

made to individuals and there was no tribal distribution, and (3) there
should be a cut-off date bevond which offsets claimed should not be

‘ . ‘ ‘:5 ‘g. -In an In Q I 0
considered. Defendant urges the offsets be allowed, eitin

U’!
‘J
I
S...
lrfj
rs:
11.
P3
H
|.JI
U
(D

 

v. nited States

$
I

 

118 C, C15, 290, 316, in which cases that court allowed offsets for

J.U stated above, petitioners contend (Pet. Br., p. 59) that these
payments are within the exceptions of Section 2 of the Indian Claims
Commission Act, 60 Stat. IOLL9, as "relief" payments. The act provides
with respect to offsets and gratuities thrtz

6-‘ *3-’* -2- monies spent %- ’n’' -1- for expenditures under any emergency
appmpriation or allotment made subsequent to March 1:, 3.933,
and generally applicable throughout the United States for
relief in stricken agricultural areas, relief from distress
caused by unemployment and conditions resultin therefrom, the
prosecution of public work and public projects for the relief
of unemployment or to increase employment, and for work relief

L (including the Civil Works Program) shall not be a proper offset against any are .

(H1- - _..-...

.L.LJ.C ::u.m:3 disbur-sed as cash payments were made under the provisions.o:I'
appropriation acts for the Bureau of Indian. A-i‘fairs, Department oi‘ the
Interior, authorizing expenditures for "health, Education_and -581-5?-I‘9
Service," "Welfare of Indians,“ “Support and Rehabilitation of Needy

Indians" and "Education and ‘.-Eelfare Services.“ These appropriation acts

50-!

are not within the exception "any emergency appropriation or allotment

Q

made subsequent to March [1, 1933, and generally applicable throughout t

C ‘ ‘I

United States for relief ¢- ’£- 41-" as provided in the Indian Claims Com1

rriis s ion Act .

Petitioners‘ counsel cites Pottowatonie Tribe et al. V. United

 

States, 3 Ind. Cl. Conn. 51:0, 566-568, as "utnority for holding cash payments to indig-e.t Indians not to be proper offsets. In that case, the
United States claimed offsets (on a percentage basis) of $l8l,377.}.:.5 for

‘i!
H

indigent Indian expenditures. Of “‘t'::e total amount-, S;ll7,l;..;;.O3 was

5 IO7

128 C. Cls. *5, 72, and I-Eenorrzinee Tribe v. U..ited States
 ?'?—':1 *”—“—*'j 

V

disbursed as cash payments in 1951 fmm the appropriation for ”-health, baucation and Welfare Services, Bureau ofilndian Affairs." Of the 3-23
vouchers showing these cash payments, only six Indian reci?5-311455 were
identifiable as members of the Citizen Band of Pottawatomie and they received but a total sum of $502.57. In view of the proof offered, this

Commission held, with respect to offsets for the cash payments and other
aid to indigent Indians, on a requested percentage basis that was a
questionable estimate, that, in view of the few members receiving cash
payments and the advance state of civilization of the’ Citizen Band of
Pottawatomie, it would be unconscionable to charge such individual
benefits against the Citizen Band as a tribal benefit.

In the present proceedings, however, the facts are different. In
addition to cash payments, defendant seeks to offset other aid to, indigent Indians on a percentage basis against petit'oners. 'These expenditures in the amount of $3LL,7LtLt.26 have been denied (Fdg. 36) because of
the failure of defendant to identify the individual Indian receivin
the assistance with petitioner tribes, "since the record indicates such
can be accomplished with respect to these items. Each and every cash
payment made to individual Indians, however, has been ‘traced to members
of petitioner tribes and is claimed as a direct charge and not a percentage of the total sum. The following cash disbursements were made by

the United States:

19hS 296.00
19h6 85.00
19h? ho.oo
19h9 hh7.h3
1950 25,971.97

—-air.» ; fl 1951 58,853.50
1952 h3,179.00

1953 ?9,60h.31

195h ’h6,97h.75

1955 68,2h1.00

1955 73,152.00

Tot 1 $396,8un.95

The disbursement of such large sums in cash.paymentS to individual m€mb¢?S

of petitioner tribes, especially within the past Six Years: undoubtedly
has resulted in a tribal benefit.

Petitioners further contend that there should be a cut-off date
beyond which this Commission.should not consider gratuities sought as offsets'by” defendant. Petitioners contend that if any of the alternative
dates they propose in their brief (pp. 73-78) were taken as the cut-off
date for considering gratuities, then $311,151.06 of the cash payments
c1aimed.as offsecs (for the fiscal years 1952 th ough 1956} would not
be before the Commission for considerations Petitioners urge, alternative1y3 that either the date of the Indian Claims Commission Act
(August 13, l9h6), or the date of the fi1ing.of the petition, or the date
beyond.which no claims could.be filed before this Commission (August 13,

1951), should.be the cut-off date for allowable offsets. Counsel for

petitioners during the hearing on offsets stated he knew of no case
wherein the law was set f0rth.pertaining to a cut-off date for gratuities
and conceded.that the Indian.C1aims Commission.Act itself does not provide
forisuch a cutaoff;‘até Cfr. 1307-1308). In their brief on offsets

(pp. 76-77) petitioners cite Sioux Tribe vs United States, 105 C. Cls.
725, as authority for the position that offsets should not be charged in

this proceeding beyond June 30,p19Sl, the close of the fiscal year immediately preceding the date,.August 13, 1931, which was the termination

5 109

date for the fili. g of claims before this Commission. _ In the Sioux case,
Supra, the G. A. 0. Report includes disbursements through June 30, 1925::
The petition in that case was filed on May , 1923 afld the Period ‘*7.-thjll

which to file claims under the jurisdictional act expired June 3, 3.925.

So we see that in the Sioux case the court did consider offsets beyond

' the date of the special jurisdictional act and the date of filing of the

petitionthereoin. In that case the court did refuse (105 C. C18. 725,

811,. 812) to order further proceedings to determine on fu¢her accounting the status of accounts between the parties beyond the date of the
G. A. 0. Report in that case. The court said:

$1’ ’»’r ii‘ In other words plaintiff says that after we have
decided the issues presented we should order a further
‘ accounting as to the balances and allow plaintiff another
opportunity to raise further issues if it should so desire.

There must be an end to cases. We canno keep them open
indefinitely for- plaint,iff‘s convenience in order that it may
have several trials and decisions in each case as to its legal

right to recover on the issues presented and which may be later
presented before closing the case on final accounting as to the
offsets, if any, against such amounts as may be due under the
decision on the issues presented iqhen the cases were prepared,

' argued. and submitted. Rule 39(a) was not intended to authorize
or provide several trials on questions as to legal rights of
an Indian Tribe to recover, or to permit piecemeal trials in
chief. Plainti..f knew when it received the accounting report
on April l9, 1932, that the accounting ended on June 30, 1925,
and no mention was made of the matter unt& the briefs in the
seven cases were filed. %' fr 4-"

As previously’ stated, if a cut-off ‘ate for considering gratuities was
adopted as proposed by petitioners it would result in the Commission
reiizsing to consider the clam for offsets of $311,151.06, representing
cash payments to indigent Indians of petitioner tribes. The General

Rules of Procedure of this Commission, Section 12, relating to counterclairrx, cross-claim, and set-off, provide for the pleading of offsets

of the interlocutory order of liability against the

ovides that "When the

'....J

United States.

W

Paragraph (b) of said Rule 2 p

United States fails to set up a counterclaim or set-off, through oversight, inadvertence, or excusable neglect, or when justice requires, it
may by leave of the Commission set up the counterclaim or set-off by
amendment.“ In the instant case, defendant introduced the supplementary
Ga A. 0. account of these cash payments (Def. Ex. 30aA) at the hearing
on offsets and so would.appear to be presented in sufficient time to
permit petitioners to ascertain their authenticity.

For all the above reasons the items making up the sum of $396,8hh.96
in cash payments are allowed as proper offsets.

DISBURSEMENBS UNDER VOUCHERS OR INVOICES
INDICATING ITEMS hEEEIISSUED»T0 INDIANS

The G..A. 0. Report, Part III, consists of two sections. Section A
covers disbursements under vouchers or invoices indicating thereon that
the items were issued to Indians of the Kiowa.Agency. Indians other than
members of petitioner tribes have been under the jurisdiction of this
agency but in.view of the findings herein.made and the number of other
Indians reported.under the agency“s jurisdiction in later years it is
believed that the finding that petitioner tribes consisted of 73% of the
total Indian population is lair. Petitioners admi that during the period

. , I
petitioners

&

1901 through l9l0, on the average, ancestors constituted

aPproximately'7h.per cent of the Indians under the Kiowa Agency (Pet. Rec.

tvdnnulun \

Fdgo hl)o ‘Under Section.A of Part ill, defendant claims that the United
to the Indians of the Kiowa Agency in the amount

of that sum be oh rged as offsets

S lll

lfor the benefit of the Indians for these nurnoses.
‘ . 3

against petitioner tribes, or $1o3,h15.oh. The items included within the

total sum in Section A are discussed herein in Findings 30 through E0

.and will be briefly considered in this opinion.

Clearing, Ereaking and Fencing Land - $h,877.S2

 

Defendant urges that $h,877.S2 be offset as having been disbursed
The G..A. 0. Report

shows that the entire sum was expended for barbed wire and staples. The

evidence shows that barbed wire was issued to the Indians (Pet. Ex. S1)6
at the Kiowa.Agency. The defendant is entitled to an offset of 73% of
said $u,8?7.52, or $3,560.59.

Seeds, Eruit’Erees and.Eertilizers

"" $2, 

 

In l9h2, the United States disbursed $1,966.99 for 37,9h2 pounds of
vegetable seed and 17,000 paper bags. These items can scarcely be considered for demonstration or educational purposes, and the sum of $1,h35.90,
being 73% of $1,966.99, is allowed as an offset. The items making up the

balance of the $2,626.62 are denied as offsets. Quapaw Tribe v. United

States, 128 0. 01s. h§..

 

.Agricu1tural Implements and Equipment - $7,011.h2

 

There is evidence that for the fiscal years 1901 and 1902 items of
this type were furnished Indians at the Kiona Agenci and that_after that
‘period a system of credit was established for the Indians to secure these
items. Defendant is entitled to offsets for*the sums expended on these

items, with certain exceptions (Fdg. 32), for the fiscal years 1901 and’

1902 in the amount of $l,6hh.08.

This item has been denied as a proper offset (Fdgo 33) f0T'th9

reason that the sum indicates an individual rather than a tribal benefit.

   

Expense of Indian Delegations ~ $370.31

 

The items under this grou_ing are denied since it appears that the
tribal affiliation of such delegations should be ascertainable.
Hardware. Glass. Oil and.Paints - $9hh.6O

Household Equipment and Supplies - $l,hO9.hh
Indian Dwellings - $l,h29.lé

 

 

All of the items in.these groupings are denied as proper offsets.
There is no evidence of receipt of these items by the Indians, and they

areq with the exception of Indian dwellings, of the type that may have

\

been for admiiistrative or agency use. Quaoaw Tribe v..United States,

 

l28 C. Cls. b5, 63. The expenditures for Indian dwellings are denied
because it would appear that the tribal affiliation in l9h3 of the individuals should be ascertainable.

Indigent Indians - $3h,7hh.26

 

These items are denied as offsets on a pro rata tasis since it
appears that the tribal affiliations of the individual Indians receiving
the items are susceptible of identification (Tr. l3S2-l3Sh).

Livestock - Feed and Care of - $3h8.1 , and;

Purchase or - $l27°33 '

The items under these groupings are de

 

I3

ied as offsets since they

1

appear to be of the type purchased for agency useo

Quapaw Tribe v.

United States, 128 C. Cls. ts, st.

 

I4

:31
I3
1.4
U}
in

ad Shops - $§§2.9h and
tockmen. Blacksmiths,
Butcl rs and Carpenters - $oo7.9u
**1—* 

The items under these groupings appear to have been.mostl7 Of the

kind for agency use or educational purposes and are denied as offsets.

Provisions - $86,509.07

 

The facts as found herein disclose that in the fiscal years l90l
and 1902 large quantities of provisions were issued to the Indians of
the Kiowa Agency. These facts also disclose that in September 1903

they were reported to be living on their own income. Defendant has

therefore been found entitled to 73% of the $h8,863.h3 expended in fiscal

years 1901 and 1902, or $35,670.30. Quapaw Tribe v. United States,

128 c. cls. us, oo.

Transportation - $583.68

 e ‘ -0-: --yiThe ‘tems making up the total sum.of $583.68 are set forth, and the

j»:

reasons for denying these items under this grouping as offsets, in Finding hO herein. ‘Where ioems within certain groupings have been denied

as offsets the transportation of similar items will also be denied unless

issue to the Indians can be determined from the record.

DISBURS nzavrs KIGWA AGENCY  vorfcnm
on nzvorcas no N022‘ INDICA.T:'3  T‘-V"

J-«la-J

ITEMS WERE FUR.THE INDIANS OR AGENCY
EDUCATIONAL OR OTH3 USE

Section.B, Part III of the G..A. 0. Report groups expenditures'under
the Kiowa égency for the fiscal years 1901 through 19h? where the vouchers

or i voices do not indicate whether the items were for the Indians or

agency; educational or other use. The total disbursements under Section.B

""1?-.*r‘—"L

claimed by defendant to be proper offsets amount to $68,065.80, and

defendant asks that 73% of this amount, or $h9,688.03, be allowed in

,this case. These groupings are analyzed in Findings bl through b7 herein. The groupings and.anounts expended for items within each group are

as follows:

 4.A..::..d.oaoo'ooo¢ooooooooo.oooOO¢  
Agricultural Implements
and Equipment....................o.oo 
Hardware, Glass,-Oil
andPain-E-JSGOOOBCOOOOIOGOOOOOQOOOOQQCC 
Household Equipment and Supplies....... 38.55
LiveStOCk°CCIOCQCCIQCC¢CGICCCCCOQCCDCUCI 
TMills and.Shops........;................ £13.60
Pay and Expenses, Agency .
Enployeesoocooooeooaooaoooaoooocooooo I-‘J-'+36§5a62 ‘
Sujeying   -g',;‘oocoooooaooooo¢o 73395006
" Tra-nSp0I't3-tianooooooooooeooeooococo!-00¢  - .

0 The items under the groupings; .Agricultural.Aid; Agricultural.Implements and Equipment; Hardware, Glass, 011 and.Paints3 Household Equipment
and.Supplies; Mills ard.Shops; and.Pay and Expenses,.Rgency Employees
(herders, stocknen, butchers, carpenters, harness makers, general mechanics),
are denied as proper offsets because these items may'well have been for

the most part, if not al_, expended for agency or administrat've purposes.
Defendant is allowed an offset of 73% of $l,S3b.68, or $1,120.32, under

the grouping “Livestock” for the feed.purchased for livestock in.fiscal;

‘I

years 1901 and l902, when defendant was suppl7-ng'provisions to the Indians

at the Kiowa Agency, and all other items for feed and care of livestock"

are denied.

Defendant claims offsets on a pro rata basis for surveying and allot"
ting expenditures in the total amount of $7,395-05- The items in this
grouping are denied as offsets since there is no proof that the lands
involved were those of petitioner tribes.

Of the $8,767.53 claimed for transportation of goods and materials
to the Kiowa Agency, defendant is allowed offsets of $1,197.25, for the
transportation of certain agricultural implements and equipment as set
forth in Finding h? for_the fiscal years 1901 and l902. All other items
under the transportation grouping are denied for the reasons set forth
in Finding b7.

To summarize, defendant is entitled.to offsets in the total amount
of $hhl,lSO.hl against the award of pet'tioner tribes. The allowable offsets are:

Cash Payments, Indigent Indians..........a $396,8hh.96 i~

Clearing, Breaking and Fencing............ 3,560."?
Seeds, Fruit Trees and Fertilizers........ l,h3§.9O
.Agricultural Implements and Equipment..... l,6hh.O8
Provisions................................ 35,670.30
'Feed and Care of Livestock................ l,l20.32
Transportation............................ 873.99
Total $«‘4i;1,1So.1h

The'Kiowa, Comanche and.Apache Tribes are entitled to recover from

the defendant the sum.of’$l,626,0lS.86 for which sum.a judgment will be

entered.

Louis J. O’Marr

Associate Commissioner
‘we concur:

Edgar E.'%itt
Chief Commissione

 

1i‘; o Iqo 
Associate Commissioner

 

