BEFORE TEE INDIAI\E CLMEES COPE-ESSION

THE SKOKOI‘-EISH TRIBE OF Il‘~';DI_A.I‘3S ,

Petitioner,

vs. Docket No. 296

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

\..../\..,.l\.../\./\.a"'u-/\-.-/\.../'\./

Decided: March 6, l958

FINDINGS Q3 
The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
1. The Skokomish Tribe of Indians, petitionersriherein, is an
identifiable group of American Indians within the meaning of the
Indian Claims Commission Act of l91+6, as amended (60 Stat. 10149; 25

U.S.C.A. 70(a) ), and as such is entitled to maintain this cause of

_ action.

The Skokomish Indian Tribe of the Skokomish Ffeservation was organized under the Act of June l8, 1933+ (14-8 Stat. 9814) having its constitution and by laws approved by the Secretary of Interior on May 3,
1938, and its corporate charter ratified on July 22, 1939.

2. The petitioner as the successor to and representative of the
descendants of members of the aboriginal Twana Indians claims exclusive
aboriginal use and occupancy of the following described area within
the territory ceded to the United States in the Point No Point Treaty
Of January 26,. 1855, subsequently ratified on March 8, 1859 (12 Stat.

933) .

Commencing at Hood Head, near the mouth of Hood Canal,
thence generally westward along the watershed of those
streams draining into Hood Canal to the watershed of the
Eugeness and Big Quilcene rivers; thence generally southwestward along the eastern summit of the Olympic range in
such a way as to define the watershed of those streams
emptying into Hood Canal on its west side, including the
Skokomish River and its tributaries, following the height
of land between the headwaters of‘the Skokomisr‘and its
tributaries to Lake Nahwatzel; thence generally eastnortheastward along the center of the height of land
between Oakland Bay and southern Hood Canal to Lake Mason;
thence east northeasterly along the heights of land between
the southern arm of Hood Canal and the southwestern inlets
of Puget Sound, in such a way as to include Lake Mason in
Skokomish territory, to a point half way between the head
of Hood Canal and the head of Case Inlet; then continuing
northeasterly to the summit of the Black Hills, west of ,
Bremerton, to include the entire drainage of the Union River
in Skokomish lands; thence in a general north-northeasterly
direction through the interior of the Kitsap peninsula, to
define the watershed of those streams flowing southward or

westward into Hood Canal, to a point on the eastern shore
of Hood Canal near its mouth approximately half way between

the entrance to Port Gamble and Foulweather Bluff, and

directly east across the mouth of Hood Canal from Hood Head;

thence west across the mouth of Hood Canal to Hood Head.

3. The Commission finds from all the evidence there existed from
earliest times and in 1859 a group of Indians, variously identified as
the "Twana," "Toandos," or Skokomish, who shared a common dialect and
way of life, and.who lived on both sides and along the entire length of
the Hood Canal in the State of Eashington. I

(a) In 1792, Captain George Vancouver, in the course of his extensive exploration of the entire Puget Sound area, encountered unidentified groups of Indians at several locations along the entire length
of the Hood Canal, (Pet. Ex. 2) In ldhl, Charles Wilkes, U.S.N. reported

in course of his survey of the Hood Canal,

After leaving the Suquamish, they met the Toandos, a

small tribe inhabiting the mountains; who, from their own

account, are able to muster one hundred and fifty warriors.
H Lieutenant Case reports them as the best looking men

they had met with. After passing further down the canal,

they found the Scocomish tribe, who inhabit its southern

end. These resemble in appearance the Toandos, with whom

they are in close alliance, and have one hundred and fifty

fighting men. (Pet. Ex. 4, Def. Ex. 24)

(b) An official report from the office of the Superintendent of
Indian Affairs, Oregon Territory, dated October 13, 1849, states:

The Twanoh and Skokomish Indians live along the shore of

Hood's Canal; number about 200; friendly and well disposed,

subsist by labor and fishing. (Pet. EX. 44, Def. Ex. I38)

An additional report from Indian Agent E. A. Starling, December 10,
1853, to Governor Isaac I. Stevens, Superintendent of Indian Affairs_
for the'washington Territory, places the "Sko-sko-mish and Tu-wah-noonK_
. . . from the head to the mouth of Hoods Canal,“ and their number at
"200" (Pet. Ex. 52). In this same report Agent Starling notes the
rapid decrease in tribal population throughout the area during the past
ten years as a result of widespread small pox. A map of the Washington
Territory of’l854, purportedly authored by Governor Stevens shows the
"Tooanhock“ situated at the northern end of Eood.Canal with the “Skokomish
placed at the southern end." (Pet. Ex. 36) No attempt is made to delineate with any degree of accuracy the actual area occupied by either
group. A map executed by Captain Stoneman in 1855 pictures the locations
of the’Toandcs tribe“ and"Scocomish tribe“ in similar fashion (Pet.

Ex. #0).

Other population estimates of the Skckomish and Twana Indians

varied considerably during this period. ‘Joseph Lane, Superintendent of

Indian Affairs, Oregon Territory, reported in 1850, "Twanoh, etc. 200"

6 137

-9(Def. Ex. l52). In 1851 Anson Dart, Superintendent of Indian Affairs,

Oregon Territory reported that the "Toanoh and Skckomish” tribes were

located along the shores of Hood Canal and numbered about 200. (Def.

Ex. 1145) . Hodge in this "Handbook of American Indians“ cites the Twana

as a Salish division living along both sides of Hood Canal with a population in 1853 of about 264 and Curtis in Volume 9 of his "The North
American Indian" numbers them less than 300 at the time of the Point
No Point Treaty in 1855 (Pet. Ebc. 21+).

(c) On March 14, 1851+, George Gibbs, who actively participated in
various treaty negotiations as a member of Governor Stevens’ treaty
commission and who is noted for his Indian writings, stated in a report

on the Indian Tribes of the Washington Territory:

Still above the Chimakum are the Toanhoock, occupying
the western shore of Hood's canal. They are a branch of
the Nisqually nation; but their dialect differs greatly .
from those on the eastern side of the Sound. They amount
to about 265. With them may be classed the Skokomish, upon
the head of the canal, who probably number 200. Neither of
them have had as much intercourse with the whites as most
of the Sound tribes. (Pet. Ex. 5. 58. Def. Ex. 6).

In his later work, “Tribes of Western Washington and Northwestern
Oregon“ Gibbs had the following to say about the Hood Canal Indians:

let. The Skokomish, of whom the Toanhuck seems to be
another name only, said to mean in the Klallam tongue
“a portage“ . . . . They occupy both sides of Hood Canal
above Port Gamble and number 290 souls. . . As already
mentioned, the Skokomish were embraced in the same treaty

with their neighbors, the Klallams and Tsemakums. Their
language constitutes a distinct one, differing so far from

that of the Niskwalli as not to be generally understood.
(Pet. Ex. 6).

Edward Curtis confirms Gibbs’ observations of the ’I‘1-:'*na in his

treatment of the North American Indian when he states:

1....)
Kn

The entire length of Hood's Canal, a body of water about
sixty miles long and two miles wide, and the valleys of its
tributary streams, were controlled by the Twana. The tribe
was divided into several distinct branches, yet all spoke a
common dialect, which was considerably different from the
dialects of their neighbors. Moreover, they possessed a
collective name for themselves-—Tuwaduk and in these two

respects they are much more properly classed as a tribe than

are those other numerous groups of independent bands to which

the usage of the whites has applied tribal names. (Pet. Ex. 24)

h. In December of 185$, Governor Stevens organized his Commission
to conduct treaty negotiations with the various Indian tribes of the
‘Washington Territory. The recorded minutes of the Commission show that
on January 25, 1855, treaty arrangements were begun at Point No Point

‘with the tribes consisting “of the Clallums or Skallums, Chemakums, and

Sko-komish or Too-an-hooch," and further that "on a careful enumeration

they were found not essentially to vary in number from 1200.“ (Pet. Ex. 59)"

The Treaty of Point No Point was concluded on January 26, 1855 and

the "Skallams . . . the Skokomish, To-an—hooch and Chemakum tribes"
ceded, relinquished and conveyed to the United States "all their right,
title and interest" in and to certain described lands on the Straits of
Juan de Fuca and Hood Canal (12 Stat. 933). In addition there was
reserved "at the head of Hood's Canal" six sections, or 3.8#0 acres,
"for the present use and occupation of the said tribes and bands.“
The treaty was finally approved and ratified March 8, 1859.

5. Thereafter, and in accordance with the provisions of the Treaty
of Point No Point, the Indians, with the possible exception of the
S'Klallams, removed themselves to the assigned reservation. There was

some dissatisfaction with the area allotted, but the Skokomish Indians

for the most part remained to make permanent their residence there.

6 139

(a) Agent W. T. Simmons reported on Eecember 30, 1855, that he
found the assemblied Skokomish Tribe at "Casie” Inlet and that he proceeded to number them . , . found 44 old and 60 young men, 60 young
women, 55 baby boys, 51 baby girls." (Pet. Ex. 67). Concerning his
subsequent visit to the reservation, Simmons reported that ". . . the
whole tract was densely timbered, and the Skokomish river so obstructed
with drift wood.that it was with difficulty I cound reach the place.
They are dissatisfied with this location and desire about two sections
of land at the junction of the Skokomish River and Hood's Canal."

(Pet. Ex. 70)

According to the report of B. F. Kendall, Superintendent of Indian
Affairs. Washington Territory, dated January 2, 1862, the S'Klallams
were dissatisfied with their lot on the reservation,

Not one half of the Indians included in the teaty will reside at the place, and.will only make annual visits to

receive their proportion of annuity goods, or to catch fish

at their old fishing grounds. (Pet. Ex. 70)

Sub-Agent Purdy reported on July 20, 1863 that while a considerable
number of the Skokomish Indians were cultivating the land within the
defined areas of the reservation, few if any of the S‘Klallam and
Chemikum Indians have ever been on the reservation to stop. (Pet. Ex. 78)

The annual report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the
year 1865 states that "The Skallam Indians refuse to live on the reservation, but the Skokomish do, and will improve when sufficient land

is cleared of its heavy timber for their use.“ (Pet. Ex. 81). An additional report made the same year by Sub Agent John T. Knox, states:

So far, it has been found impossible to induce the S'Kallams
and other bands of Indians belonging to this agency to reside on the reservation. The Skokomish band, all, I believe,
make this place their home, and seem to be well satisfied,
and take quite an interest in the improvements going upon

the reservation. (Pet. Ex. 82)

(b) Annual and supplemental reports during the years to follow
point to the acceptance of the reservation by the Skokomish or Twana
Indians as their permanent residence. These reports include: Report
No. 3 attached to the Annual Report of the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, 1870 (Pet. Ex. 91) . . . “All of the Skokomish and about one
fourth of the Skallam Indians reside permanently upon the reservation
. . .", Skokomish population given as 291; Report of subagent Edwin
Eells, Augustjl, I872 (Pet. Ex. 96) . . . "The Twanas number about
300, and make the reservation mainly their home.“ Agent Bells‘ report
of September 23, 1873 (Pet. Ex. 102), Twana population in l873 listed
as 275. (Pet. Ex. 105): Annual report Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
l8714- (Pet. EC. l06) . . . “all the T1-Ianas are now on the reservation,
wear citizen's dress, and live in houses.‘'; Annual report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 1875 (Pet. Ex. ll3) . . . "Twanas . . .:
they are a small tribe of 275 Indians who are on the Skokomish rese;r:~~»

vation in Washington Territory."; Agent Eells report of August l5,

.1876 (?et. Ex. ll1+) . . . "First. The Twanas or S'Komish Indians :.a.‘::<:r

live on or near the reservation."; Census role of the TX-:anas or 

komish Indians submitted by Agent Bells, July 31, I877 (Pet. Ex. 1:3,.

(c) Reverend Myron Bells, in recording his observations of ‘Twana.

Indians during his twelve years as a missionary on the Skokomish 

servation wrote in a series of papers published in 1887:

Twanas - Their name is spelled Too-an—hooch in the treaty‘
which was made in 1855 . . . They originally occupied both
sides of Foods Canal for its whole length. They were divided
into three bands, the Du-hle-lips, Skokomish and Kolsids.

. . . Fifteen miles below Union Creek the Skokomish band,
who lived around the mouth of the river of that name, where
is the present reservation . . . Dr. Gibbs . . . gives this
(Skokomish) as the name of the whole tribe, but it was originally only the name of one band; though now, as it is the
name of the river and reservation, the whole tribe are known
better to the whites on the Sound by the name Skokomish than
by their original one Twana . . . At present most of these
Indians live on the Skokomish reservation. About thirty live
around Seebeck and Quilcene. (Pet. Ex. l2)

Eells estimated the Twana population as 500 in 1855 (Pet. Ex. lb),
at 259 in 1875, 239 in l879 (Pet. Ex. 15), and 245 in 1880 (Pet. Ex. 16,
Def. Ex. 147).

6. The Commission finds from all the evidence that in l859 and
from the earliest days the maximum concentration of Skokomish or Twana
Indian activity was confined for the most part to both shores of the
entire length of the Hood Canal while extending inland for several miles
in those areas where the principal streams drained into the waters of
the canal. Confinement to this area was determined principally by the
topography of the region, and the dependence upon a fish eating economy
as the prime means of subsistence.

(a) Edward 5. Curtis in Volume IX "air his publication, "The North
American Indian“ (1913) places the Twana bands in five permanent villages.

Chlelapah (Tulalip) occupying both sides of Hoods Canal
from its head to about Union City, Washington.

Skokobsh (Skokomish), on Annas bay and the watershed of
Skokomish river.

Soatlkobsh, "Middle People", on both sides of Hood Canal
from Hoodsport,'Hashington to Dosewallips river.

 

6 l42

6 11.23 _g

Soulsedbsh (Quilcene), on Quilcene bay and Dabop Bay.

Slchoksbish, on both sides of Eoods Canal from Seebeck

and Oak Harbor,‘Eashington, to Squamish Harbor and Port
Gamble. (Pet. Ex. 24)

   

Curtis notes that the Twana rarely if ever invaded other tribal

country although they have at times clashed with Snohomish, Chimakums

and Cowlitz. In addition he states, “The Twana rarely undertook trading

expeditions preferring to remain at home and receive the visits of more

venturesome travelers."

Speaking generally on the Salishan Tribes of the Coast, Curtis
offers the following observations: (Def. Ex._38)

"The dominating cultural influence of the tribes . . .
was their dependence upon sea food.

The people were in the main sedentary. inhabiting well
made wooden houses; but the long summer was spent moving
from place to place where the food products of the season
were obtainable. Agriculture was unknown. The lands were
fertile, but heavily wooded, and the ease with which food
could be had from the sea left no incentive for the developA-: ment of an agricultural life. The majority of the tribes
hunted little on land. The forest jungle was difficult to

penetrate, and the flesh of land animals was not particularly’
relished."

(b) Dr. William Elmendorf who previously had conducted an intensive
study of the Twana Indians‘and who testified in behalf of the pqTE;f;v+~:
sets out nine permanent Twana village locations. These he terms WiJ%&f

villages and places them as follows: Dabob, at the head of Daboh Lag,

Quilcene, at the mouth of the little Quilcene River, Dosewalligt at ‘hr
mouth of the Dosewallips River, Duckabush, at the mouth of the Duckabush
River, Hoodsoort, at the mouth of the Skokomish River, Tahuva, at the

mouth of the Tahuya River which runs into the-northern shore of ‘i

arm of Hood Canal from the Kitsap Peninsula, Dukelao, near the head

of Hood Canal, Skokomish, at the forks of the Skolzromish River some

ten miles from the Canal, and one inland village, Vance Creek, located “on the southern tributary of the Skokomish a short distance

up from the forks where the stream joins the Skokomish River." (Tr. L111»,
#5, Pet. BX. 131).

Each of these village communities according to Elmendorf consisted
of a group of houses, two or three of which normally were large gamble
roof plank houses, some of them more than one hundred feet long. (Tr. 1+5)
Joint family households composed of four to six family groups all lived
together in one structure. (Tr. 146) Seasonal activity among the village
groups for food gathering and other purposes followed a pattern of
family group movements along both shores of Hood Canal with the bulk
of the food products being obtained from the water inlets and the
shore areas of the canal. (Tr. 51, 52, 53).

"The number and kinds of food, which is what this map (Pet. Ex. l35)
indicates, were very much greater for the water inlet or its shores than
they were for inland areas.“ (Tr. 7?)

In his dissertation on the Ts-Jana Indians submitted in l95O in
partial satisfaction of his doctorate degree, Elmendorf stated: (Def.
Ex. 132, p. 32)

Geographic location of winter village sites accorded with

patterns of food economy. Except for the Skokomish extended community and the Vance Creek people, all were

located at the mouths of salmon streams, on or near the
canal shore.

As to the intensity of land hunting inland from the permanent

village sites, he states in his same work: (Def. Ex. 132, p. 23)

Land game hunting was also a specialist occupation, as
usual on a guardian spirit basis, but the meat of land
animals played a distinctly secondary role in the subsistence of most Twana groups with the exception of the
inland Vance Creek people mentioned above.

In his testimony on this point Elmendorf said, (Tr. 80,81):

Finally I would conclude that a large amount of inland
territory was used for relatively few economic operations;
berry picking, bear hunting, deer hunting, and elk hunting,
supplemented by the hunting of other smaller animals being
the principal occupations that went on in any amount in

large inland territory. And I would further add that some
of this inland hunting was poor economically. This was

true of the deer and elk. . . . (Tr. 83) . . . The area
that elk were abundant actually extended closer to the
canal shore than the high mountain area of these spots.
They might be taken five miles back in this rough country.

Elmendorf has described the shoreline of the canal as consisting
of a rather narrow gravelly beach sloping off into tidal flats, which
in some area were quite extensive as in the Skokomish river region at
the bend of the Canal. The hinterland surrounding the canal is heavily
wooded. "He noted in particular: (Def. Ex. l32, p. 20)

The dominant landscape feature west of the canal in the

Olympic mountain range, peaks of which, 3000 to 6000 feet

high, parallel the west shore at a distance of ten miles

or less. Inland to the east and south the land is in few

places over 500 feet above sea level.

(C) Ihr. Carroll R. Riley, defendant's expert witness, confirmed for
the most part the location of Dr. Elmendorf's nine permanent village sites.
(Tr. 282) He describes the village community as the Pkincipal political
and land owning unit and that the location of these permanent village

SiteS‘waS governed by strictly economic considerations. (Tr. 263, 265, 271)

Exclusive right to use non village areas was unheard of (Tr. 268). In»

tensive use in the area was along the Canal near the permanent'winter

villages with some use of prairie area extending two or three miles

back from the Canal shores (Tr. 291). Dr. Riley stated further: (Tr. 302)
Your feeling of exclusiveness inasmuch as there was a

feeling of exclusiveness would be in the village area, the
winter village area or perhaps a tiny spot peripheral to the
village area such as choice berry fields and the like that
would be utilized by families from a village community.

In describing the Hood Canal area, Dr. Riley stated: (Tr._303)

There is a long stretch of water and there is a very
rich stretch of water. You had a topography of very rugged
country. The hills rise rather sharply from the Canal

itself and behind them the main mass of the Olympic range . . .

Great, vast portions of the region probably were untouched
by human foot for the simple reason that you could not get
into them. The underbrush and the very thick timber and
the like prevented travel.

(d) Dr. Erna Gunther in her'work, "The Klallam 'thnography“ (1927),

compared the economic life of the Klallam Indians in general terms with
the Northwest Coast tribes in.the following manner: (Pet. Ex. 26)

The Klallam, like other Northwest Coast tribes, depend
for their subsistence principally on sea food. The villages
are always situated near some fishing grounds; still most
people find it necessary to move several times each year to
follow the various runs of salmon or to gather vegetable
products. Although a village in one way may have severalt
different abodes during the year, the one where the permanent houses are built is considered the real home of the

group.

According to Dr. Gunther, the Klallam, whose territory lay immediately“
to the north and northwest of the Twana Indians, were in intimate conduct
with the latter group. They frequently migrated down the Hood Canal

following the salmon, going frequently as far south as the permanent

Skokomish villages at Tahuya and Union City.

lb

0

(e) ‘Dr. Marian w. Smith, in "The Puyallup Nisqually“ (19%) noted
six main Twana villages situated along the shores of the canal, and that
the village sites were determined by strictly topographical considerations
(Def. Ex. 1). In this regard Smith describes the topography of the area
lying between the cascade mountain range to the east and the Olympic

range to the west as follows:

The section is one great watershed. It is honeycombed
by creeks and rivers which flow from the mountain ranges on
either side, and from the high lands of the peninsula between
Hood Canal and Puget Sound. ‘west of the Sound and on its
headwaters to the south the slope is precipitous, seldom allow, ing of more than one or two miles, and frequently not nearly

so much of relatively level land between the shore and moun_ tains. Under these conditions the steams are fairly short,
often without important tributaries.

Dr. Smith notes that on the village level, territorial boundaries
were not important and that hunting territory was shared in common by
members of other villages. Exogamy was common practice between the
villages.

7. In addition, the Commission finds from all the evidence in this
case that in 1859 and from earliest times, the native concept of exclusive possession and control of land in the Northwest-Puget Sound area
was relatively unimportant where the area concerned embodied the vast
hunting region and open country away from the permanent village sites.
These hunting regions for the most part extended into the mountain
ranges and were shared in common with other tribes. As a result, any
delineation of territorial boundaries to include an area held in exclusive possession poses a vexing problem, and frequently leads to a

speculative if not arbitrary determination.

6 1&8

(a) In his work, "The Structure of Twana Culture;" Dr. Elmendorf
describes the Twana attitudes toward ownership of land as depending upon
"the degree of use and geographic configurations and drainage areas."
(Def. Ex. l32).

He states further in this regard:

The Twana did not look upon land surface as something to
be divided up into definitely bounded and exclusively owned
areas. Territorial interests were indistinguishable from
subsistence interests, and these adhered to usable stretches
of territory. The environs of a winter village community‘s
settlement.were used intensively by and regarded as property
‘of that community. Away from the village environs meant
away from the local watercourse and the feeling of group
use ownership faded out as watershed drainage area boundaries
were reached. Similarly the whole drainage area was Twana
country, but the portions of that area felt as most definitely
Twana-owned were the intensively used shoreline and river sites.
Concern with an exactly established watershed boundary between
Twana and non-Twana never entered anyone's mind.

In general the land-holdings of the Twana-speaking groups
can but be defined in terms of water-frontage and river-drainage
areas. Such areas contained village and camping sites and
localities good for fishing or mollusc gathering. Hunting
territories were inland and therefore vaguely defined.

On the question of outsiders trespassing on Twana territory,
Elmendorf states:

Since territorial limits of the speech community were not
clearly defined and corresponded only in a general'way*with

the Hood Canal watershed, there were considerable inland areas

‘where tjua question of trespass by neighboring non-Twana did
not arise.

'. And further,

Neighboring Puget Sound hunters wandering over toward
the canal in pursuit of game were disregarded--after all
there was not a set frontier--unless they persistently
carried their hunting activities too close to one of the
Twana wintex'settlemcnts. '

(b) Other writers on this general area seem to confirm Elemndorf‘s

1&1“. Ab ¢-up-um-o vol. .. an

observations. For example, Berryman in his, “Tribal Distribution in
Oregon“ speaks of tribal boundaries as follows: .(Def. Ex. 82)

In mapping the distribution of primitive peoples one is
continually confronted with uncertainty as to exact boundaries.
Indeed it is probable that they were not exact in many parts
of the country, but consisted instead of ill defined marginal
areas. Uninhabited lands were doubtless extensive in mountaing
ous and desert regions. It is probable that most of these were
claimed by various neighboring tribes as hunting grounds, but when
the territory claimed by a tribe is known only from the location
of its chief villages, the ownership of these unoccupied lands
becomes an unsolved puzzle.

(c): In a comparative analysis of the boundary lines set out in
the treaty of Point No Point with those boundaries setting out the
petitioner‘s claim, Dr. Riley made the following observation. Noting

that generally the treaty boundaries followed the drainage areas, he

states the following: (Tr. 307)

I will say this about the treaty and the treaty boundaries
as a whole; it was the duty of Mr. Stevens, the governor, to
establish title to this area of Washington, and in order to
do it with a series (Tr. 308) of treaties, he had to have
the land, that in the treaty boundaries all joined together,
joining one another. There were no blank spaces.

One line of the treaty follows the crest of the Cascades
and another follows the crest of the Olympics, and so forth.

So the boundaries were more or less arbitrarily drawn and
within the drawn boundaries Stevens and his associates, Mr.
Simone} and others, would go to this area, visit many of
the villages or send messengers to many others and ask the
people to gather at a collecting spot . . .

Certainly the boundaries, the treaty boundaries.xhich are
watershed boundaries in large part, very little (Tr. 309)
attempt or no attempt was made actually to establish the
realities of any native concept of ownership of land.

8. From all the evidence and the findings made herein, the Commission finds that in l859 and from earliest times, the Skokomish or Trey;

Indians have f ollo;-zed the same politically autonomous village life, which
the Commission on prior occasions has found to exist among the other

Salishan speaking tribes. (See The I-{uckleshoot Tribe V. United States,

3 Ind. Cl. Comrz. 658, The Snohomish Tribe of Indians v. United States,
LI» Ind. Cl. Comm. 519). Their economy rests primarily upon the seasonal
uses of the bays and rivers, and their family and social life revolve
with seasonal regularity around the tight little village communities
anchored along the shores of the Canal.

9. The Commission finds from all the evidence that the petitioners
are the successors in interest to the Skokomish or Twana Indians, who,

on Iviarch 8, 1859, the effective date of the Point No Point Treaty, held
atoriginal title to the following ceded area:

Commencing at Hood Head, near the mouth of Hood Canal, thence
due west to the northwest corner of Lord Lake; thence due ’
south on the eastern side of the Cuilcene range to Walker
Pass; thence south-southwest to East Rock; thence directly
south-southwest across Lake Cushman reservoir to Lake Haven,
thence directly south-southeast to Lake Nahwatzel; thence
generally east-northeastward along the center of the height
of land between Oakland Bay and southern Hood Canal to Lake
Mason; thence east northeasterly along the heights of land
between the southern arm of Hood Canal and the southwestern
inlets of Puget Sound, in such a way as to include Lake
Mason in Skokomish territory, to a point half way between
the head of Hood Canal and the head of Case Inlet; then
continuing northeasterly to the summit of the Black Hills,
west of Premerton, to include the entire drainage of the
Union River in Skokomish lands; thence in a general northnortheasterly direction through the interior of the Kitsap
peninsula’, to define the watershed of those streams flowing
southward or westward into Hood Canal, to a point on the
eastern shore of Hood Canal near its mouth approximately
half x.:aj_\—' ‘oetneen the entrance to Port Gamble and Foul‘.-reather
Bluff, and directly east across the mouth of Hood Canal from

Hood E-fead; thence west across the mouth of Hood Canal to
Hood Head. ‘

l

O

10. Any rights which the petitioners or their ancestors may have
retained or acquired to any lands within the boundaries set forth in
Finding 9, may be made the subject. of inquiry at the further hearing
respecting the consideration paid to petitioner or petitioners‘ predecessors in interest and the value of said lands as of the effective

% date of the Point No Point treaty, March 8, 1859.

Edgar E . Witt

Chief Commissioner

Louis J. 0*Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

|..J
,\r1

