ea
in
In
C.)


5;
3
-4
-t
1
"D
-—l
_.I

SJ

_“\\C--»r-‘_"""'_"""""' 1-?
rr . .(\,._‘,

L/[..?1".£ ‘._L -Q2 ‘J ..L. L21

V.

THE UNITED TATES OF ”“QTCa,

¢.— L."'...*J I...._!..

Defendant.

\....J\_../'~.._.../\__.x-~._....r -.._...~"-...../*-...../\.../
C?
O
V)
("1
-4.
--;
O
we
F0
Ox

Decided: January 22, l9oO

ADDITIONAL FINDINGS F ?iCT

4.
u-—-n--n_—. _-u-....—-—-u_.....-—.. -—-—u— q-:—.

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact which are
supplemental to the findings numbered 1 through l2, heretofore made
herein:

13. Earlier in this case the Commission ere_ded that the plaintiffs herein, the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma, et a3,, held Indian title

[to certain lands situated in northwestern Louisiana and the extreme

southwest portion of Arkansas; and, that, on the effective date of the
Treaty of July l, 1825 (7 Stat. h70), the United States extinguished
all of the plaintiffs‘ right, title, and interest to the said lands,

The tract found to have belonged aboriginally to the Caddo Indians is
described in Finding 12 of the Commission‘s earlier decision of March 8,
1956. Thereafter by the Commission's order of January 2, 1957, Finding
12 was amended to make more specific the bounded area described therein.

lb. (a) A greater portion of the subject area is situated in

Caddo Parish, Louisiana, and is bounded on the north by the Arkansa--_

Louisiana state line, on the west by the Lonisianawzerae s*%te line,

on the east bf the Red River, and on the south by Cypress Bayou, Hallace

Iake,'Wallace ayou, Bayou Pierre, Alligator Bayou and Pascagoula Bayou,
The smaller portion of the tract extends north into Hiller County,
Arkansas, as far as the Sulphur River, and is bounded on the west by
the Arkansas-Texas state line, on the east by the Red River and on the
south by the Arkansas-Louisiana state line,

(b) Both sections, as set out above, comprise one tract and bear
similar topographical characteristics, In that portion of Miller County
south of Sulphur River the elevation above sea level varies between 200
and 370 feet. In Caddo Parish the average elevation is about 180 feet
above sea level. Numerous bayous and other minor streams lace the entire
tract and all flow eventually into the Red River, which river affords the
principal means of drainage for the entire regiono, Many lakes dot this
region, and much of the bottom lands was subject to periodic inundation
through heavy rainfall when the Red River and its tributaries would overflow.- At the time of the Caddo cession there was little or no protection
from the overflowing streamsa Levee protection for lowlands did exist
along the Mississippi River which lies considerably east of the Caddo
country. It was not until 1892 that levees were constructed within
Caddo Parish as to permit gainful cultivation of lowlands,

150 (a) Caddo Parish, Louisiana, was created by the state legisw
lature on January l8, 1838, and may be divided physiographically into
three categories: the Red River bottoms, the lake region which comsmaller

prises the basins of Cross, Ferry, James, Clear. Soda and

lakes, and, the uplands which are separated iron the bottom lands and

355

the lake region o. a low hliff line.

‘_ the northern part of the

I’

parish where it becomes frequently rough hilly, the surface 0; the

uplands is gently rolling. The upland soil is mostly an alluvial deposit

C0nt3ininS 3 800d 5”?‘ It is more coarse than the valley soils.

-..-\_A....&..

.’." ,_‘ 4
OJ. SCLn‘mo

'''‘-L
M:

is classified as one of the Norfoln, Orangehurg and Susquehanna series

of "fine sand” or “fine sandy loam,” and clay. The early settlers pre~

4‘ a

timber. The

ferred this rolling upland area with its clear springs and
valley soil, which proved more fertile, was topsoil washed down from the
uplands and is classified within the Miller series of "Clay," "fine sandy
loam," "fine sand” and "silt loam.“
(b) Miller County, Arkansas, which is the extreme southwestern

County of that State, was originally organized in l920. At that time

its area included considerable parts of Texas and the Indian Territory.

he history of Miller County shows many territorial and jurisdictional

‘changes from the time Arkansas was admitted to statehood in 1836, until

l87h when the present Miller County was organized with Texarkana as its
county seat.‘

Four distinct types of soil are in evidence in Eiller County. Two
types are sandy loam, one is a loam, and one a clay. Of these types three

are found on the flood plain of the Red River and Sulphur Fork, the other

on the upland or hill section.

16. The total acreage for the subject lands as based on a computation of the township surveys in Caddc Parish and Eill*r County comprises
535,321.25 acres and may be broken down as follows:

That portion of Miller County, Arkansas, lying south and west of
Sulphur River and Red River, north of the Louisiana Si?te Lin— and east

the Texas state lin :

Kin)

\
-Jr‘ 1.,

8 Ind, Cl, Con, 35h

 

Total Land Area ~ 9O,150o59 acres
Total Water Area — l,3h?o5§ ggres
Total 9l,SO8c2h acres

That portion of Caddo Parish as set out in the Commission‘s Finding 12

as amended by the Commission's order of January 2, 19572

   

Total Land Area — h83,958o07 8CT€3
Total Hater Area - _§9,8Sh.9h agggg
Total Shh,8l3.0l acres

Breaking down the total area even further the subject lands may be

divided as follons:

Land area not subject

to overflow - W 515,707 acres
Land subject to overflow — S7,hl2 acres
Water Area - 62L?02 acrsg
Total ' 636,321 acres

From the total acreage it is necessary to subtract the two tracts
comprising the Francois Grappe claim of l?,7l3.6 acres and the Larkin
iEdwards claim of 6&0 acres. Both tracts were reserved under articles
supplementary to the 1835 Caddo Treaty, the United States having at the
same time relinquished any interest it may have had in these lands.
Therefore, the net acreage, consisting of uplands, lowlands and water
acreage to be valued as of January 26, 1836, the effective date of the
1835 Caddo Treaty, is 6l7,967.h acres,

17. Climatically the winters are cool for thiS.araaand the summers

only relatively warm. Rainfall averages slightly more than MS inches '

(0

annually. The average length of the growing season is 25h days with th

(D

first killing frost beginning around the second week in November and th

last date ending in the first week of'March,

357

. '-" '3
F ino,

ropulationz

-__..._..— -.-..._- -_—-._.. -1. 

_ . an -r 9 0- A "__' L‘!
. -.-- 4 -1+ '|- V-2 11'“; C“ "WP, ,_ -, ‘r
laraese C1,, ;- LOu*mLaJm .auJ

territory approvirated

-5-an _...a. 'Louisiana attained statehood on April 12, and the United States
census in l820 placed the population of Louisiana at lS3,h0?. New Orleans
inhabitants numbered more than hl,030. Of LOuiSiaHa
reached 215,000 and 352,000 in 18b0,
The earliest Caddo Parish population fifuren are reflected in the
” as white males numbering

1 Bit.

l8h0 United States Census reports which show
lhlé and free white females numbering 958 for a total population Of Qhlho

The Caddo Parish slave population in l8h0 tote 2‘

(b) At the time of the Cdddo cession'the £rFansas territory was

“rthinly settled. In 1820 the total population 1'IEi.S just over 1h,000e By

1830 it had reached 30,000, and in 18b0, four years after statehood, the
United States census figures show a total poprlation of 97;57h.

Transportation and Accessibility

4--jun-I

       

19.

Due to the numerous lakes, rivers and bayous throughout northwest Louisiana and within the Caddo lands, which ior the most part were
navigable only by canoes and flatboats, water travel between different

points predominated. Prior to 1833 the Indian villages were
Indian trails and other overland routes

river banks and lake shores,

-..‘..J.  k.nO‘?:n 4:Were relatively few and Notes taken by surveyozs in

conducting early Government surveys of tee

to the Caddo Agency,“ an old Tndian

8 Ind, Cl, Com, 35h

Coushaita Indian village, and the “Shreveport Road,” which was the
road due west to Texas passing south of Cross Lakeo

20, Prior to the Caddo cession, and before Shreveport was founded
in 1837, the Red River was freely navigable above the old town of
Natchitoches as far as the mouth of L-ggy Bayou- From that point on a
continued passage could only be accomplished by using various connecting
bayous and streams in order to by~pass the raft infested channel. The
"Great Raft" of the Red River is one of the most extensive examples of
a natural log jam in any river, It owed its existence solely through
the peculiar characteristics of the Red Rivera The Red River channel is
composed principally of rock free alluvial deposits of rich loamy soil,
easily moved and carried along by normal flow of the river, The river
thus was contained within fragile banks which, when the river was subject to sudden and excessive rises through heavy rainfall, would disintegrate and cave in, Trees lining the banks would be carried into the
stream, and, when this flow of floating trees became lodged upon some
impediment, the accumulation of floating drift would back up and grow
rapidly in length, breadth, and depth, The density of the accumulated
debris and drift was so heavy at times that_the whole mass would in
turn support new growth of vegetation, The raft was in fact a series
of rafts with open water between the accumulations, It extended in
length some one hundred fifty miles up the Red River,

Besides creating a formidable obstacle to free navigation of the
of the

upper Red River, the raft greatly diminished the rate of flow

river, and thus increased the rate of alluvial deposits upon the floor

359

”clear it took him five years in all to complete t

— -....'\

q‘ " I -- oi . -- 4 N "' '.__. ‘I v, \ -of tne river channel” Tnzs nrtrvaigg" raise: th= has of the riipr aid

"3 I '4 0 .. , ha ___ __'_L
Dreatly impeded the amount of water cra“nege ini, ,Ln

1

-o

‘-* ' .2. - v _ = A ., ,J._,,...L.
oeing diverted into the smaller streams and bavons, Csvslng vh€~ b0

In?

back up, overflow and create new lakes. Kore and more land was being

subjected to overflow, nartieularlv during flood stages“

IWith the increase in the number of steamboat: complete removal of

the raft was imperative in order to achieve free nevieation of the upper

\_

1

Red River. Steamboats in l82O had gone as far up as Raohitoches, I ich is

I
I -t
9-,-4
....,
")

considerably south of the Caddo cession. Captain anry'Niller Shreve, a
legendary figure in the founding and early deveirt tnt of Shreveport,
undertook the prodigious task of removing this intense obstacleo According
to early reports he removed seventy-one miles of the raft in the first year
which brought him up opposite the Caddo lgenoy'Vithi the subject lands.
‘lthough he estimated there still remained at least seventy miles more to
he job.

While for all intent and purposes the Red River was then open for

navigation, the persistent regrowth of parts of the raft continued to

P'intermittently block the channel until its final and connlete removal,

'9

and the conditions that created it, was accomplishee in 1

no

3?8o
21. In 1836 there were no railroads west of the Mississippi River,

nor any immediate prospects of railroads beine built thereo The first

C.)

....... _J...railroad west of the Alleglenies was constructed in l3?l between New

Orleans and Milneburg, a small village on Lake Poniabnrirafna It ran

. '-‘ 9 . ' ‘. 0"‘ "1-"“"" I‘: . -L /- 14- -"- r 1- — an -1 0"‘a distance or flVB miles and Cdr¢L§¢ oooh Erelgn. _ pa - :"35o in-- . 3 R ‘\-''I 0 3 0 , . . gn. . ' ca-:alrst railroad west of tee nississippi was oonstrustew in ;;j5¢ it was
a privately owned plantation railroad and ran for 3? I¥;§ tilt El nileso

J ‘ . . —£.

 _. ‘.3  

2  1/

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 353 361

Natural Resources

22. The upland areas of the subject lands originally contained
pine timber and hardwoods along the bayous, streams, and lakes. In the
swamp areas could be found cypress, cottonwood and willows. While there
may have been a market for lumber at New Orleans in l836, the timber areas
of the subject lands were economically inaccessible. The Red River was
closed by the great raft and other methods and means of moving merchantable
‘dumber overland had not been developed. The evidence points substantially
to the fact that there was no market in 1836 or in the near future for
the timber within the subject area, and a hypothetical purchaser well
acquainted with all the facts would give little or no value for timber
in buying lands within the subject area.

23. As of the effective date of the Caddo cession there was no
mineral development within the subject area, nor were there any immediate
prospects of such development. Therefore, mineral resources were of no
economic value as of 1836 and play no part in arriving at a proper valuation
of the Caddo lands.

Agriculture

 

2h. As the Commission.has indicated in its earlier findings, the

Caddo Indians were sedentary agriculturists who showed remarkable ability
E to cultivate and.grow'within the adjacent village areas extensive fields

of crops comprising chiefly corn, maize, and pumpkins. These village
garden.spots would be worked until exnausted, and then new areas would
"be selected and put into cultivation.

After the Caddo cession, and after the white man had taken possession

of the Caddo lands, cotton became the staple crop. While some corn and

5 Ind. 01. com, 3st

potatoes were grown for home and local coneunsticn, generally production
was not suficient to satisfy the ordinary dcxands,

A8 late as 1907, over seventy years after the Caddo cession, a
Department of Agriculture report on the soil conditions of Caddo Parish,
Louisiana, points out that while cotton is still the staple crop it is
grown under a "one crop system“ whereby eultivaticn of the crop is continued year in and year out until the soil is exhausted. when this
finally occurs new areas are cleared and put under cultivation. In
addition it is noted that (besides cotton), corn, potatoes and vegetables

and forest products are the principal items produced; that agricultural 0

methods employed as of 1907 were those used pricr to the Civil war; that

tenants do the bulk of the farming, and that farm labor, which is made upi

for the most part of colored workers, is a sericus prcblem.

According to the same 1907 report, out of a total of 528,000 acres
or land in caddo Parish, only 180,00 acres are improved farm 1ands.i
This leaves about 66% of the parish in unclearcd lands as cf this late;
date. (Pl. Ex. 209).    

25. Considering the topographical, soil and elimaticconditions
zelative to the ceded area, the highest end best use fer thessladsin

1836 is for a8”icu1tura1 purposes incident to sbsistencehoaestesd1ng.;

:men the inadeuatetransportationfacilitiesbothoverlandand.by gage}

are coupled with the la¢g_ef gdequate means of flced ccntro1,there’ig?@

m>immediate prospect of aqysextsnedgcemeréial-§39°fth€s3s3d§”15§d§:l

 

362 

41- *' .2 .:....r=;,.._' ._ « ,-_- . -_ -,n',  .1‘ .L"*
iar into the iuti_e LG oe an imeoitant facts? 1L 1a-iueneiu3 the onen

   

26. Shortly before the Caddc cession the United States had ex~

tinguished Indian title to several large areas within close proximity

of the subject lands. Under the treaty of November 10, 1808, the Great

and Little Osage in Arkansas had ceded a large area .orth of the Arkansas
River (Royce Cession 67), while on August 2h, 1818, and again on November 15, l82h, the Quapaw relinquished their title to a vast area south

of the Arkansas River and extending down into Louisiana (Royce Cessions

9h, 121). In 1825 the Choctaws ceded back to the United States their

lands in Arkansas which had been granted to them under the Treaty of
October 18, 1820 (Royce Cession 122, ? Stat. 23b), and on May 6, 1828,

s

the Cherokee Nation of Indians ceded their lands in'Arkansas to the

United States. As of the effective date of the Caddo cession, Indian

title to all lands in Arkansas had been extinguished, and within a
relatively short period of time a vast landed area had now been annexed

to the public domain subject to sale and disposition under the Government“s
prevailing public land policies.

f7. Hith the accumulation of huge areas of public lands the Government tried various methsds for disposing of ihem. Between 1781 and 1853,
well over a billion acres had been added to the public domain, which acreage

included among other things, the west rn cessions bv those s“ates cast

of the allegnenies, th

e Louisiana territory, the Oregon territory, and
the public lands in California.‘ Rights of preemption had been recognised

as early as 1801, and within the next forty years sore sixteen seosrete

arcenpticn acts Vere passcc by Tcngrcts. Frccwjfion res 2 premier CfT?£€
*0 those who would actually till the soil are construct r<”’S 3P3‘ 15”
land: B? 1835 the minimam suboivision offered For Sal“ "T 311?? hel 557'
reduced to 50 acre parcel: at $102; pe: acre. 2 twi 'e:ly 4:30 S 1“?

Government‘s policy behind disposition of public

for revenue, but shortly thereafter it changed to a plan Of 515F05it193
for homes and settlement purposcsa This char; in pclicy pits some
competitive sales of state lands, which were coins 83 PTi099 T838133 fT0m

seventeen cents to sixty cents per acre, kept the minimum statutory price

for federal public lands at $1925 per acreo In addition, there was the

5

change from strictly cash land sales in 130% to credit sales: with ad51“

tional relief being granted to purchasers on otrer occasions in the form

Q

C1116 9

of time extensions on the purchase money

289 ‘Hithin the four year period of l83h through l837 Over forty-two

c

million acres of public lands were sold, the sales peak being reached in

l836 when twenty million acres of land were transferred t0 PTiV3i9 3399?‘

shipc The price paid per acre for the total acreage s:ld was slightly
more than $1.26 per acreo From 1785 to as late as 1880 the United Statrs
had sold agricultural lands at rates of
and at 31000, $1.25 and $2.50 per acre. 0081 atd
millions of acres of timber land have been sole ;y the cash sale and

preemption acts at the abcve rateso

0 e _ _‘_‘;‘ I ___ _ __\_"___
299 Other methods utilized by the 8OVErUHE4u -n dis;-sang of ?mCi_P
- . .. ,-. ‘ ‘ .._,‘ ° __l,.. ' ,..,.._ .3... -— -..-— T-—-_- -- -v F; ,-u-—--.—-- - A- Am _r1
lands included lana DJuHll$o to t=os; Ludlxlnaaio :4» is- E;)3f1Cho€¢

special private sales,
l826 to enact legislation granting

public lands located in swamps cr subject to

periodic o"erf1c«, it was not until lLh9 that Congress enacted such
legislation peculiarly applicable to Louisiana, By an act of Congress

there was granted to Louisiana as a reclamation prsject “the whole of

those ramps and (9 State 352, Ch, 87) overflowed lands which may be,
or are found unfit for cultivationv“ In the following year, Congress by
statute extended the grant to Arkansas for similar purposes (9 Stat. S19,

Ch. 8h).

30. Federal land sales within Caddo Parish and in neighboring Bossier
and De Soto Parishes during the years 1839 to l8hS indicate a firm minimum
average price of $1025 per acre for tracts as small as a single acre to
those of over 600 acres, Out of more than 300 federal sales placed in
the record amounting to just over 6?,OOO acres, only 28 were sold for
better than the minimum price per acre (P10 Ere 69)e

31, as of the effective date cf the 1835 Ceddo treaty there were no
sales comparable in size, location and character of the subject tract.
In lieu thereof the plaintiffs have introduced computations and lists
of private and public land sales within and without the subject area in
Miller County, Arkansas, and in Caddo Parish, Louisianau

(a) Plaintiffs? exhibit 66 is a
from every 10th page of an abstract of the Private land

taken off the records in Cadda parish for the

to the plaintiffs the o2 sal

O\
\J'L

..+\-'-.--. r—, F’ / Ah _ ‘L
:1 ‘x_I_C’, (:);)¢3O pl at EH1

-..-~.. ' .4

acres which were sold for a total consideration cf
average QL o9¢9S per acrei The Commission finds from an examination of

the transactions that the resultant price of $9095 PET &CF€ @095 D0t
actually reflect the fair market price of these lands as unimproved
propertya Merely removing only those sales showing a per acre price of

$10 or more (there being 19 such sales) the total acreage is reduced by
one~third and the total consideration by over tvo~chirds3 The remaining
sales which are valued at $10 an acre or less average out to $3039 over
this same period.

Of the 19 high priced sales (these over $10 per acre) CV8? half 8T9
obviously sales of improved property or town sites or are sales which
include personalty such as slaves, farm equipment, crops, etco when all
82 sales are plotted on a map by township and range (P10 Ex. 20h) the
majority'are situated within the urban influence of the existing towns of
Shreveport or Greenwood, Louisiana. The marked appreciation in land values

within these areas is even more pronounced in those sales recorded after

18h0°

(b) Plaintiffs” exhibit 66~A is e tabulation of all the sales in
the aforementioned abstract of the Caddo land records for the years lEhS-SOC

This tabulation purports to show that during this period some 239,7l9.hh acres

}

of land changed hands at an average price of =?¢1hg Only the bare statement

"J

of the witness who prepared the exhibit that he selected only what he thorght

F} ""' .—..- '‘H'’‘.L‘ indo C]...-o Cu in- _,-"_‘,—‘L

. __ . .—I 15"» /
the dites sh‘ Vila’? 2? cf ihe izesiy date of 35;: or lxjv

exhibit 6? is an abstracted list of l8O private
and public land sale: far the rears lo35 to l8LO in snddo, Bossier, and
Red River parishes, Louisiana, Despite plaintiffs‘ claim the only two
of the listed sales involved in,=r
improvements or include Over 330 Of the private
sales are duplicated in Plaintiffs’ exhibit 197 which is a more comprehensive list of land transactions and is discussed hereafter. There are
25 public land sales as high as 39,00 per acre, mostly within the
vicinity of the towns of Greenwood and Shrevcpcri and also lh sheriff
sales in execution of judgment, several of which involved improvements
and chattels.

(d) Plaintiffs’ exhibit 68 is a compilation of private and public

land sales in Lafeyette Csunty, Arkansas, between l835 and l8hO. Only 59

sales are listed amounting to 9)S67nSl acres at a total price of
$10l,339o10 or at an average price of $10078 per acre. -One sale of

five individual tracts totaling hhO acres went for $30,000 or almost

$70 per acre which places considerable doubt on the unimproved status

of these lands being that this one sale alone accounts for 30% of the
total consideration involving all sales, but less than 5% of the total
acreageo As far as could be determined all sales listed are east of the

Red River in Arkansas are lscated upon the lands which were ceded by the

lands were surrsved between l8l9
C’

years prior to the Caddo cessien.

surveys in that portion of the

367

31. Plaintiifs hive glaced o gooi deal of rmnhaoie on the con~
temporary treaty statements of the legendary “Davy” Crockett and Captain

Henry Shreve, as throwinu oonsidorahle light on the then value of Caddo
lands,

Davy Crockett reputedly expressed a desire “t* settle on Bodark or
Choctaw Bayou of had River that I have no doubt in the richest country
in the world, good land and plenty of timber and the best springs and
good mill streams, good range, clear water, and every appearance of
health, game plenty.” (Pl. Ex. léh). "Bodark” or ”Boio D‘arc creek can

be located in what is now Fannin County, Texas and flows northward

\,s

just east of Bonham entering the Red River near the Fanninwlamar county

line. Farther west in Grayson County, Texas, is the "Choctaw" Bayou

'10? creek, which flows northward east of Sherman and Donison and enters

the Red River near the Grayson-Fannin county line. Davy Crockett therefore
had in mind an area situated almost l3O miles due west of the Caddo tract,

In 183b, Henry Shreve, while engaged in removing the Great Raft from

_‘5'-.

the Red River wasfreouested by the Comm‘ssioner of Indian Affairs to
submit an estimate of the quantity and value of the lands in the Caddo
country “which will be reclaimed by the removal of the obstructions in
~Red River." Shreve estimated that the reclaimed area would consist of a
tract of alluvial bottom land approximately 2% miles wide and some hS
miles long stretching from Coates Bluff southward between the high

ground and Red River.

It would contain approximate, 8oO acres and

P! ‘J
~<
---Cl

;_..:

its “probable value will be about an average of E

(Pl. Ex. 13a).

8 Indo Cl. Semi ;Sh

.v

‘1

reclaimed land did in fact become one of the most valuahl; sections in
the Caddo tract, It encompassed the entire Shreveport district besides
extending southward for some distance and doubtless referred to sales in
small tractse

32- (8) Mr. John Killian Trycg, a former employee of the United

U

States Forest Service appeared as a witness for the plaintiffs on the
question of value. According to Ere Trygg, in addition to making a
personal inspection of the Caddo tract, he examined, analysed and
considered all pertinent historical data, public records such as original
survey maps and the accompanying field notes oi the surveyors, soil
classification and agriculture reports, as well as general economic data.
He topographically divided the area into three general classifications:
the valley lands, the small stream lands, and the uplands. He testified
that as of the date of the valuation the highest and best use of the Caddo
tract was for agricultural purposes. He gave no special significance to
the size of Caddo tract as contrasted with the sale of small parcels of
land in weighing his valuation figure. It was Mr. Trygg‘s opinion that
in 1835 the Caddo tract had a fair market value of $2.50 per acre.

(b), Mr. Trygg's attempted valuation of the standing timber on the
subject lands as of 1835 was rejected by the Commission as not supported
by satisfactory evidence (Tr. p. l3hO). In like manner the Commission
rejected Mr. Trygg‘s ccm'etations which resulted in his $2950 per acre
estimate of the fair market value of the Caddc tract (Tr. p. lh22).

(C) In reaching his valuation figure Kr. Trygg relied primarily

upon plaintiffs‘ exhih t 19?, which document was admitted in evidence as

8 Ind. Cl. Con.

Jyh

a resume of over £03 private real

3 _I_' _,_: ('1 ,1 '
l"1.‘."::‘:C“-"C-J.OI'1S 853 l"€.‘x.-OIKJGL1 In

~c:"-'1-?-;:. ~*
CL»...-'KJ'§.__L \.'\.: ‘JJ(Tr. lhOO). The

Caddo parish, Louisiana, and Killer County, Arkansas

majority of these transactions averaee 160 acres and were located both

\._)

within and without the subject tract. Those sales abstracted from Caddo

Parish cover the period from l83S through l8hS, and in Killer County they
begin in l83h and extend through 1862. These transactions, as set out in
plaintiffs’ exhibit l9?, are in fact a collection of dissimilar sales
involving both improved and unimproved property, quitclaim sales, sales
in fee, sales of preemption rights, mortgages, and land floats. In addition there are listed innumerable sales of land for which the stated consideration included the purchase of such personal property as fazn

equipment, machinery, livestock, and slaves. The deductions applied by

witness Trygg in order to reduce these various transactions to a common

:denominator as would represent as nearly as possible the sale of unimproved lands, were for the most part speculative and arbitrarr and

not supported by the evidence in the record. A flat 15$ deduction for

improvements on all property was given since the nature and extent of

many of the improvements were impossible to determine. In sales involving

personalty and "slaves", an unknown deduction was applied.

33.

Plaintiffs also offered as an expert witness on value, Dr.

Garnie'william.McGinty, a professor and historian. However the Commission
ruled that Dr. McGinty was not qualified to render an expert opinion on
the value of the Caddo tract (Tr. llB9-ll90). as shown in his report
Dr. NcGinty's principal approach to valuing the Caddo tract involved

what he designated as a “value in use.” By this method the

370

. *4 e ‘W . .m " ; -, ._ L, ~ = - M - , _,‘ . i ,: °_
sctgylo U0 iuputm cu; lua, .2Jiu- to tan; sutgrxrt lanCw tn J12 detl&s;in1n

f‘u L)

of the “yield of cotton per acre” which those lands would have produced.

 

   

(Pl. BX. 195). The Commission has on prior occasions rejected somewhat
similar theoretical ani injndicious methods asto:»sfcculative and con~
conjectures. Sec Ehemioog ac}_:ri§e V. Enite§_:jato§, 5 End. Cl. Corn. 578;
Ihg_KnckleshootmE£ihe V. gniteg States, 6 Ini. Cl. Conn. 603; The_punanish
Trihe_of Indians v. Enited_Stat;§, 7 Ind. .1. Comm. ?2S.

   

3h. appraiser of Hew Orleans,

Mr. J. Burrows Johnson, a qualified

Louisiana, testified as an expert witness for the defendant. Mr. Johnson

rs
Q
‘J
.6
0

prepared a detailed written valuation report ,» hh) Uhich contained
an abundance of material covering both the s*bject area
Parish and that portion situated in Miller County. Hr. Johnson adopted
the market data approach as his method of arriving at the fair market

value of the Caddo tract. He concluded an examination of over one

thousand land sales within the tract and the adjacent area as were recorded

in the period of l830—l8hO. ;xanining the land records in neigh~

1-» .- 1
DGSLCIBS

boring counties and parishes, defendant“s appraiser personally inspected

0

the entire area. Mr. Johnson limited his final compilation of sales to

a four year period between l833 and 1837 and included onlr sales of 6hO

acres or more. As shown in his report, sales of land within the four

year period of l333—l83? involving 6hO acres or more inaicate that 71

per cent retailed at 31.00 per acre or less. Besioes vloxing the pLr~
‘L 3 Pf: . -H """f‘-1 ‘'I'\' F‘ ‘V
chase of the entire CduGO tract as one com,l t: sale. Ki: Johnson oon—

sidered many other important factors in the subject lands,

such as its accessibil‘tr transoortation facilities or elation, the

I..-.v.)

57

"I

8 Ind. Cl. Con, 35; 372

demand for available lands both public and private, pre'ailing interest
rates, taxes, markets, investments, cost of surveys, organisations and
promotional ei_enses, and a reasonable return on the purchaser's in—
vestment.
As of the date of valuation Hr. Johnson placed no value on the lands
as income property. He found no improvements thereon of a permanent nature,
and concluded generally that the highest and best use of the land would be
for colonization purposes with the entire tract being disposed over a period
of twenty years.
35. Upon the findings of fact made herein and upon the entire record,

the Commission finds that the Caddo tract, having a net acreage of 6l7,967.h
acres had a fair market value as of January 26, 1836, the effective date of
the 1835 Caddo Treaty, of $h63,h75.55, or at an average rate of $0.75 per acre,

36. The C mnission further finds that the amount of $80,000,00, which

"is the stated consideration under Article III of the 1835 treaty to be paid

for the ceded lands represents a payment of approximately $0.13 per acre,

and as such was an unconscionable consideration under the provisions of the

Indian Claims Commission Act.

EDGAR E.'WITT
Chief Commissioner

-junWM, W, HOLT

Associate Commissioner

 

%Commissioner'Natkins took no part
in the consideration or decision
in this case.

