THE DUWTEISH TRIBE OF'INDIA£S
Petitioner,
V.

Docket No. lO9

THE  smzm or .A.zv:I55>.:ci,

-»....-v\..z\../x...-Ix./x.../-...a-..x\..2

Defendant.

Decided: March 25', 1957

Appearances:

ederick W3 Post and
Malcolm.S. McLeod,
Attorneys for- etitioner.

Donald R. Marshall, with
whom was Mr..essistant
Attorney General Perry”w.IMorton,

ttorney for Defendant. \
OPINION E'THE.COMMISSION

O‘Marr, Commissioner; delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Petitioner, The Duwamish ‘rt-ibe,‘ filed this claim a_'Lleging that as
of the date of‘the Treaty of January 22, 1855, 12 Stat. 927, petitioner
exclusively possessed and owned certain lands in what is no’ the State

of Washington in the vicinity of Seattle; the Duwamish River and Lake

W3shington.(the claimed lands are described in Finding 2) and that said

0
(D

lands were part of a larg r area c ded by said treaty to the United.

States (Pet. paragraphs III, IV, VI). Petitioner further alleges that
tne‘United.St”tes by said 1853 treaty; commonly'known as tne”Poin?
Elliott Treaty, obtained a cession of'petitioner‘s lands for an‘uncone

I ‘ 0 1 " I9 I‘ I on .0.
scionaole consideration and that tne Unated.States in treating petitioner

and the other tribes, parties to said tres-1"'«3Y: in '53h° manna‘ ii‘ did:
acted unfairly and dishonorably and against the standards of equity
and conscience.

The parties to this action entered into a stipulation which limits
the present proceeding to a determination of the issues (a) whether
petitioner has the capacity to maintain this action and (b) whether or
not petitioner held origind. Indian title to the lands described in the
petition at the date of taking (Tr. 2-41., 2-3, Hearing: Seattle: T"335h'-L13‘
ton, June 9, l0, l3, l9S2).

Defendant contends that within the lands claimed to have been exclusively used.“and.'occupied?byipetitioner, :there:‘were aboriginally
several autonomous, political, social, economic land-using units, one of I
which was the “Duwaznish Tribe" and that this entity was the village near
Renton, Washington, k1'10'5-In as "Duwamish," "tuduwabc,” “twabco" or
"txwabgo." Defendant .f'.urther contends that there is no evidence oi‘ a
nerger ofithe autonomous villages in the area prior to the date of talc-n
ing and that there is no substantial evidence the petitioner Indians are
successors in interest of any particular aboriginal. tribe, tribes, band,
bands, identifiable group, or identifiable groups of American Indians, or
that they are the successors in interest of Indians signatory to the Point
Eiott Treaty.

Defendant urges that the claim is barred by the decision of the
The Conmission is oi‘ the opinion that the Dunamish case is not res
adjudicaca since that Court did not have jurisdiction under the jurisdictional act there involved to determine claims based on original

5 133

*‘=:e.;._.;a"

Indian t'tle. See The Nooksack Tribe v. United States, I Ind. Cl. Comm.

 

333, Muckleshoot Tribe v. United States, 2 Ind. Cl. Corrmo I-31¢; 3='10h0miSh

Tribe v. United States, 1L Ind. Cl. Co. 1 . 51:9; and Suquamish Tribe v.

 

United States, decided by the Commission this dai .

 

Defendant further contends that the Commission inadvertent...y sustained petitioner's motion to amend its petition to include additional

lands. In View of the decision herein made the contention need not be
considered in this case.

Although the first white contact in the Puget Sound area in what is
now the State of Washington came at an early period when Juan de Fuca
in 1532’ reached the Straits named after hm, it was not until long after
Vancouver‘s visit to the area in 1792 and the establishment of posts in
that vicirdty by the Hudsons Bay and Northwest Companies that the Duwanish
Indians were first mentioned in historical accounts. Apparently the
first mention a_ pears in an account by Indian Agent Starling who in l852
reported the "Nee-wam-ish“ Indians on "Nee-wam-ish river, bay, and
vicinity" andestinated their nu;r.'ber at 60 (E-‘dg. 11).

In 1853 Congress organized the Territory of iaashington out of the
north half of Oregon Territory. Isaac Stevens was appointed Governor
andtex-ofi‘icio Superintendent of Indian .i..*E':2‘airs for the newterritory.
Governor Stevens urged on the Commissioner of Indian Affairs the necessity
of making treaties with the Indians in the territory west oi‘ the Cascade
hountains. Congress in l85h appropriated money for the expenses 0:.
m ..ing such treaties and Stevens was appointed to negotirte with the
Indians and instructed to try to unite the numerous bands and fragments

Q

of trioes in the territory into tribes and to obtain cessions of the

lands t.ey claimed except for limited areas upoe which they Would be
settled. Governor ‘tevens proceeded to have his assistants prePeTe

the Indians for such negotiations and appointed Chiefs 50? the tTibe5
which were organized from the small groups or bands within the territory(Fdgs. 3, S, 6).

Governor Stevens reported in September l8Sh 30 the Cemmieeioner of
Indian.AfTairs that the group of Indians inhabiting the eeeree °f
Admiralty Inlet, from Puyallup river to Suquamish Head, including Vashon
and Bainbridge Islands, Elliott Bay and the Duwamish river were generally
known by the name Duwamish although the Duwamish themselves were by no
means.

the more numerous. Stevens stated that the proper seat of the

Duwemish was

.-.-L
C-LU

the outlet of a large lake (Lake'Washington) emptying
into the Dunamish river and not on the main branch of that river. ‘Most
of this Duwamish group, tevens stated, were nominally under a chief
named Seattle. Included within this grouping Stevens names the "Luqua-mish tribe" (Suquamish) and a ‘_‘clan"' of the Duwamish, the "Sa-::1amish."

én January 22, l8§5: a treaty was entered into between the United
States'with.Governor Stevens as treaty.commissioner and certain tribes
and bands of'Indians of'washington Territory represented by their chiefs
and head men.nherehy a large amount of land in the Puget Sound area was

ceded,:relinqdisned and conveyed to the United States by the Indians,

parties to the treaty; Among the parties named in the preamble to the

treaty were the Duwamish, Suquamish,-S‘-tahl-mish, Sam-hhmish, Smalhkamish,

Skope-ahmish, and St-Rah-‘dish.

Seattle signed the treaty as chief of the

Duwamish and.Suquamish tribes and other signatories sppear for the Duwanish

5 13

r"
/'

.:.{._:§ii"

and Suquamish but none for the other parties mentioned above.

he Sn danish, party to said treatyg have been found to be an identifiable group of autonomous villages living on the peninsula between Hood
Canal and.Rdmiralty Inlet and their area of exclusive use and occupancy
has been defined in this Comnission‘s decision in Docket No. 132, this

day decided. The Skope-ahmish were the Indians who lived on the upper

Green River and the Smulkamish on the upper White River and these in

more recent times have become known as the Muckleshoot Tribe (Huckle   

shoot Tribe v. United States, supra). ‘The St-kah-mish were the Indians

 

living on the lower White River and the Sa-ma--mish lived in the vicinity
of Lake Sammamish. .Although all of these have at times been grouped
under the term.Dunamish it is clear that they were all distinct groups
and were so considered as separate entities at the time of'the treaty

of 1855.

The Duwanish proper were those who lived in the vicinity of the
south endrof'Lake'washington and on.the banks of the Black River; It
was in this locale that agents of the Government reported many of them
still residing following the treaty and it is the area that they reportedly considered their homeland and refused to leave to cross the
sound to Fort Madison reservation. .As lcte as 1863 the Duwamish continued to live on the Black River and to claim this land and the lands on

the Duwamish river and the Indian agents urged a reservation be set aside

4* .1. -»

lor than in.that vicinity (Edge. 10, ll and.l2). No reservation was so
+ ' ‘ '7 H ' -- L‘ ' ~'- ' ' ' ' " .seo aside for then, hCw€V€T, and they conoinued.oo live in the vicinity

evidence

0
re
d.
U
(D
‘Jo
+1
P
J
()
( D
U?
C?‘
O
"3
{I}
I--’
:3’
O
1‘!
(D
H:
O
H
‘<1
(I)
W
H
O
|...J
I
O
11
H:
F3
{N
C‘
kw,‘
(D
C!‘
"1
C0
03
<1
‘*1
I
I-3
33'
(D

It is difficult to ascertain from the evidence the exact number

of villages the Duwamish proper had within the area claimed at the

f

time of t.e 1855 treat‘. There were apparently UWO or three ermanent

*0

villages in the vicinity of Black River and the southern part of Lake
hashington and either permanent or temporary sites at the mouth of the
Duwamish River and on Elliott Bay.

The evidence in.this case clearly is in line with the previous

findings in Puget Sound cases, such as in.the Muckleshoot, Nooksack,

 

Snohomish, and.Suquamish cases, supra, that village autonomy prevailed

 

ahoriginally in this region of'wh*t is now the State of Washington and
that the village was the landeusing unit; lThe villagers did have a
feeling of ownership of the lands around their villages and the outlying
areas conticuous to their villages were shared with other villages of
their group for gathering, fishing and hunting. The Duvamish proper
obtainedimuch of their subsistence from the water and did raise large

amounts of potatoes.

Although Doctor June M. Collins, petitioner‘s anthropolQgist, would.

linclude Samamish and.S‘-tah--mish (lower'White River.Indians) territory

within her Duwamish boundaries, the evidence will not sustain such an

all-embracing applicotion of the term.Dunanish. Mr.-Arthur C. Ballard,

'4.
U‘

pe*ieioner‘s other expert, who spent a lifetime studying the Indians of

this area was not quite as certain that the Samanish should he included

[13
U!
vo

n)
'1

(.1.
O

H»
cf‘
:3‘

e Duuamish Tribe although he believed that the Samamish
Village at the northern end of'Lake Washington was "oriented" to the
Duwamish and that the ‘vo "SK-tah-nish" villages on white river were

The evidence indicates that at the time

of the 1855 treaty the Samanish and Sktahnish were Coneidcrté as distihct
groups: There is no substantial evidence that there was a mer23T of
these two entities with the D wamish proper either before or after the
treaty or that the petitioner, the Duwamish Tribe, is the Successor in
interest to the claims of the village-groups that were called Samamish

and Sktahemish.

This Commission concludes that there existed at the time of the
Point Elliott Treaty in l8S§ an identifiable group of autonomous
villages with ties of kinship and having a common culture and common

language exclusively using and occupying lands in the vicinioy of the

southern end of Lake‘Washington, the Black and Duwamish rivers, and

D

‘I-‘ .  ‘I . ‘ 1.9513: A -—-IA--—-I-—s 191- II--1 C-91- G? 9.‘ '. " _  ‘
?‘1-110'-"—' B :7  C  ‘$33.3 Z}-\..:-¢I\'4L&l4..I-u3&L kJ.l..\.i:.)7.3J. axiu .L.LJ.'-..-3.1. DGJILC DU U‘:

1

known to the agents and officials of the Government as the Duwamish
Tribe. The Commission further concludes that the petitioner, The
Duwamish Tribe, consists of descendants of said entity and as such

has the capacity to maintain this claim.

The Commission, therefore, based on the findings of fact herein
made, and.all of the testimony and evidence of record, concludes that
as of the date of the Treaty of January 22, l8SS, petitioner's ancestors
held original Indian title to the lands described in Finding 20, and
that the United States acquired said Indian title to said lands on
March 8, 1859, the effective date of the treaty. Such questions as

the consideration paid to petitioner, the acreage and value of said

lands, an the rights of said peizitioner or their ancestors acquired

in such or other lands must await a .€\1r'i:her hearing and additional

evidence.

Louis J. O'I~Earr
Associate Commissioner

We concur:

Edgar B. ‘Mitt .
Chief Commissioner

Win. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

'...J
Ks}

