Ta: PITT RTJER ::=mn;1\:s
or CILLIFORNI. ,

Petitioners,
v. Docket No. 3&7,

UNITED sures or nvzw LICIL,

\~.../\.../\«./\._/\~_/"&..4-’\.....’\..../\..../"~..../

Defendant.

Decided: July 29, 1959
Appearances:

Louis L. Phelps, A. B. Dunne,
Dunne, Dunne & Phelps, and
_Charles Lederer,

Attorneys for the Petitioners.
Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
associated Kr. Assistant Attorney

pGeneral Perry'E.IMorton,
ttorneys for the Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COI-‘E-EISSIOI-I
Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This is an action to recover for the alleged taking of land in northieastern California without the payment of compensation therefor. The
petitioners have permission of this Cbmmission.to present and maintain their
claims separately and apart from Consolidated Dockets Nos. 31 and 37 which
are pending on behalf of the Indians of California.

t the conclusion of the receipt of evidence the defendant.moved for

a dismissal of'this action.upon the grounds that: First, the so-called

"T

 

? Ind. Cl. Core. 815 851

Pitt River Indians are not a tribe, band or other identifiable group of
A:::erican Indians authozised to maintdn an action before the Coraraission;
Second, the villages nithin the georaphical area referred to as Pit
River country were ahoriginally autonomous units, and there is no evidc.-1';-Ce of their amalgamation for other _ than tenmorary purposes or that
there was ever a political association or unity between them; Third,
that the nine Achomawi villages never acted collectively; and, Fourth,
that the Achomawi and Atsugesi were two distinct dialectic groups, in
no way politically related to each other. Defendant also moved for disIrdssal on the ground that there is no evidence that the defendant deprived the so-called Pitt Fiver Indians of any land allegedly claimed by

them prior to l81;8. _

Q
Q

Defendant's ‘motion todismiss thus presents the question of the
petitioner's capacity to sue.

The petitioner isian organization of the descendants of eleven
separate autonomous bands or I groupings of Indians whi ch were found by the
wT::i_te men during the forepart of the nineteenth century within the watershed of the ‘Pit river, and which had no history or mytholog of having

ever dwelt elsewhere. ‘It is not organized under the Indian Reorganization I

A‘-‘-‘5 Of 1931;, and neither it nor the original eleven bands or groups of
which it is formed are parties to any treaty with the United States. The
petitioner says that the aboriginal land owning, land using unit i-zithin
‘C-‘Inc Claimed area was the band; defendant asserts that the land claiming

or land utilizing group was the village" group. This dist'nc"'ion_ is, we

|-I.-J
av

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 852

think, immaterial for the evidence is that while there were more than eleven
villages, there were actually eleven autonorwus groupings of village Indians
dwelling I-:1 thin the claimed area when the white man arrived. Their country
was geographically isolated, rough and dii‘i‘icult to penetrate; the Indians
were relentlessly hostile. It was thought that Htpey comprised but one tribe
and because they used pits tc captureeild game, the name "Pit" or "Pitt“ was
applied to the riyer along which they lived and to the Indians themselves,
collectively, even after it was kl’10‘.'.-III that two distinct dialects of the
Shastan language were spoken within the area.

_ The nine northernmost groups or bands spoke Achomawi, the 17.-Io southern
groups spoke itsugewi. The Atsuge:-xi learned and spoke Achomawi, thus establishing comrunicaticn between them. They possessed a similar culture,
habits and mythology, and exogamy produced strong ties of kinship. They
were anthropometri cally distinguishable from all of the surrounding tribes
but the Yena to the southwest. Each band or group claimed a separate tract

but they welcomed others within ‘ it for trading purposes or for restricted

hunting and food gathering. They possessed. a more or less economic cohesion,

and an embroyonicsense of overall unity; etidencped, particularly in united

defensive movernents. All of the Indians found within the claimed area in

3.859 who could be compe_.led to, or persuaded to do so, went upon the Round

Valley Reservation, where they remained until 1863. While some members of
petitioner organization still reside upon this reservation, many oi‘ then:
are scattered throughout the clainedi area, residing upon indiwidual allotments or on tracts set aside by the defendant for their use.

 

'..._I
\n_

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 8 853
The Indian Claims Commission Act (10 Stat. lOb9) gites this Commission
authority to hear actions instituted by any member of an Indian tribe, band
or identif'able group of American Indians (Section l0) and to determine
claims brought on behalf of any Indian tribe, band or group of American Indians (Section 2). we think the evidence discloses that while no political
unity existed between the Pitt River Indians as a whole or within either of
their two linguistic divisions, yet from the earliestpenetration of the claimed
area by white man, the geographic isolation, similarily'of‘culture, economic
life and united defensive action of the Pitt River Indians presented them as
an identifiable unit and the defendant has so considered them even while
recognizing a dialectic distinction between the northern and southern residents. The pet‘t'oner is composed of individual descendants of each of the
eleven ancestral land-owning groups or hands within which these early people
‘were divided. The Commission is of the opinion that, for jurisdictional pure
poses, the Pitt Hirer Indians form an identifiable group, and that its authority extends to hearing and determining the claim here presented as as
representative claim. on behalf of the living_descendants of the member-'

Ship of each of the eleven aboriginal land-holding units. Eorthern Paiute

 

vs. United States, Dkt, 87, 7 Ind. Clms. Conn. 388. sine record discloses

 

that the defendant has not been at»a loss in the defense of this action to
identify either the true parties in interest or the real estate involved,
and there is at the present time no tribal organization in existence which
has been recognized by the Secretary of Interior as having authority to

70DPcscnt all the autonomous bands or groups of ‘tt Eiver Indians. So

there e:r:f_sts no bar to the institution of this representative action;

The defendant's motion to dismiss for want of petitioner‘s ca__ acity
to sue is therefore denied, and the questions of what area the orignal
groupings or hands occupied, together with the possible destruction or
taking oi‘ their original Indian title thereto by the defendant, if such
title existed, and the date oi‘ such taking if it be found to have occurred,
are, therefore, for consideration by the Commission.

t While the evidence does not shot: an exclusive use of the claimed area
by any one of.‘ the aboriginal units, it is shown that said units were
situated along the Pit river and its tributaries in such manner as to form
an inner core oi‘ occupancy, usage and control so that we have for determination the question of the outer limits oi‘ the area held by said units

" and,- secondarily, t the inner divisions between said units or groups within

as-;t‘tthe“h outeryperimeteruiof what we find comprised Pitt River country.

  The claimed area‘ is markedly volcanic in origin. It lies between the
Warner Range on;_the-r east and the Sierra Nevada Mountains on the west. In
% p the northtreste corner Mt. Shasta rises abovethe timberlinea East oi‘ it

a”re,”a«largeeelava flour; and broken lava beds.__ Lassenis Peak in the south-_ 

v-'---u'"'--‘G.-A-«-1-In r .,;_-...-.

westacorner‘ is surrounded by cinder-cones. In the southeast corner is

Eagle Lake with a lava flow to the west and a barren mesa known as the
Madeline Plains to the northeast, adjacent to a smaller region called Grassh0PP§-I‘ Valley, which lies west of the Plains. The North Fork of the Pit
rises near the south side of C-oose Lake. The South For}: of the Pit drains

the west slope of the Warner range in the south; From the junction oi‘ its

 

7 Ind. Cl~ Corn. 815 855

Q

forins the Pit river winds westward about midway between “3assen's Peak and
. .. . . t

.t. Shasta. it has cut deep, wisting canyons along its route, but there

are several overflow and swamp wees along it and its tributary streams.

The Pitt River Indians wintered in these valley areas but seasonally

traveled to other sections of their country for fish, fowl, game and
e 4

vegetables. - ,

White traffic through the region ran through the more fertile sections, began in the 18303, and was quite.heavy during the 18503. By excluding the Indians from many of their food areas, and by driving the wild
game into the least accessible regions, this traffic seriously disrupted
the life-pattern of the Indians who were so exceedingly and continuously
hostile to th: ‘:':‘:::’..t::s that little was 1ea.L‘.::c:{i about them by the early
traders, trappers, ‘explorers, or  passing through this country.

It was not until 1876 that it was known there were two separate dialects
spoken by these Indians. All of the data subsequently obtained by the
numerous ethnologists, anthropoloa'sts and otherswho have worked with
them and their neighbors since then should make ‘task, of determining
the area to which they may have held original Indian title a relatively simple one in comparison to the usual cases involvingsuch title, but unfortunately that is not so. There is not one single geographical feature
along the outer boundary of the claimed area which is accepted by each
one _of these researchers ‘as a boundary point for the territory belonging
to the Pitt River Indians.

.. , Little archeological work has been done in this reglon and the various

reports in evidence rest prim.arily upon oral accountings of tradition and

[...J
T1

. Cc-En. 81 . ‘ _ 55-'5

-~J
5’
CL
0
C3

\

history obtained from the Indians. Hu:.nan  can, however, be de.-*‘.‘ect"ve,
and we do not disparage recent or present-day research when we say that
while religious beliefs and practices, languages, ancestral dances and like
.arts may be kept fresh in mind by practice and by repetition accurately
passed from one generation to another, yet when there has been such a disruption of land usage and t..e hunting and gathering pattern of a people as
occurred among the Pitt River Indians within a span of some three decades
in the middle of the 19th century, we think the most dependable accounts of
the areas used and the extent of such use and control prior to that disruption are those which /obtained from Indians in being at the time and betblfore timemay have dulled their memow. For this reason we think greater
freight must be aver: to the earliest reports concerning hand usage. We
hair‘e,ll however, given ‘careful consideration to all the evidence before us in
 at our‘ final conclusions.
it ifhelltveilcisltence of a separate division of the Shastan linguistic family
 as the 01::-ranuchu is clearly evidenced by the record. It was extant
.i  ‘l8§7,cccupyingtheiiupper I-IcCloud river drainage and the slopes of Mt.
 fftherefel nothing suggesting its subsequentassimilation ,wi'_th peti-e
1“ The ?itt River Inchans occasionally visited Mt. Shasta as a "power"
Iillalcefiand hunted "elkrupon its slopes, but access was possible east of the
I i headwaters of 1*=ZcCloud river, and we think it a matter of common knowledge
that mdians marked their -ccmtozszai limits by natural. calls, but did not
Ordinarily cut across drainages. We believe the Oloranuchu held the McCloud

river drainage, and that the petitioners have not shotm an exclusive use of

that area.

7 Ind. Cls Corn. 815 ' 857

We do not think the evidence supports a bonnd:.:.r;,' line as far inorth as
is clazhned by petitioner, or that }'It. Shasta can be said to be their northwest l_:?.m.its. Many students of  life in this region have stated boundaries that are arrived at 1-xithout consideration to the elements of exclusive
use and occupanejr with which we are here concerned. Kroeber thorght it
only “likely” that Pitt hirer Indians went toint. Shasta and said their

northern linits were ”particularly vague and confusing." Kniffen considered

.I*Et. Shasta beyond the lindts of their utilization and said part of the area

 

he gave than was "never reached". I-Eerriaa:1‘s informants made allowance for
the O1<::«:a:mchu on the Mo Cloud river drainage and claimed their northern
country was east of a divide extendinrr north and south hetneen Bartle. California, and a peahimnediately east of it called Bear tiountain and south
of a point 16 1*.1iles' north-northeast of Bartle.

‘ Except for Herrian's ‘Wt‘>oundaries,in the evidence respecting user of the
Mt. Shasta area by Pitt Rivers is rather indefinite while there is much  

Sui-?'P0I"t for 01::-ranuchu usage of land south and southeast of that peak. So

tit hnist f0j_lOT.°}' that petitioner has failed to  the burden ofiproofi-:i'th

réépéét to this area.

wintn and Shasta Indians of the regions nest and stnlthwest of‘ Mt. Shasta,
l‘CLamath and Modoc tribes fromiOregon,  well as Pitt River Indians ‘visited
Vcciicine Lake and obtained obsidian at the Glass Mountain. The ‘.*F:.w‘_ntu be33-f?‘Icd the Modoc owned the county there which argues for Ijiodoodominance %
95 "5'? I‘<3£?ion, and Powers (1877), Dixon (1905), Powell (1907), Kroeber" (1925),

Q

' WL} .5 , ‘ ‘ O '0 o o 0 0 o q. I
3”‘: tthnolognsts or antnrojaologists who had studied Indians in tea v.Lc1n3_ty,

\

J

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 L 858

CLas well as Calvin Hall, who as a soldier and In ian -ighter at Fort Crook,

would have acquired some knovledge of the t_ibes, each suggest the Modoc
came south of the Medicine Lake. Their cession of l86h in which t-ey were
joined by the Klamath and the Yahooskin band of Snake Indians ceded area

below the lake and Curtis, who wrote after having traveled anon. the California and Oregon tribes, that Pitt River country did not extend north of

the southern rim of the lava deposits, favors the-Modoc. ‘we note that the

record shows no attempt on the part of Pitt River Indians to enforce any

,rights to this section in which their ancient enemy, the Modoc, seen to

have had a more dominant influence. In any event, the evidence suggests
onky a joint user with antagonistic Indians at most, and lends no support

to petitioner's claim of original title to the Glass Hountain4Hedicine

,lake area, which would require proof of exclusive possession.

‘Turning next to the Goose Lake countrp, only the more recent writers,

w. .

Ke11y_(1932), st‘e~;.:art (1937), Driver (1953), and Stewart, ‘(19L:1-191.6), extend Pitt River country beyond the south end of the lake, clearly'out of

s_d¢f§rence_tonKellyisgstatement that Sugar Hill, which lies east of the south

end of the lake,'was "indisputably Achomawi," and to Kniffenis and Merriam’S

d tillage sites about the lake. None of these sites are dated. It is questionable if‘those on the east could have existed while emigration and

? .

trapping parties were passing east of the lake,going south through Pitt
River country or turning northwest into Oregon, without some mention of _
them being found in journals, correspondence, and other data of the period.

It is also questionable whether the Pitt Rivers would have maintained village sites on the west side of the lake in outlying and rather exposed

 

7  Cl.  815 859

positions whenglfodoc parties 1-re-rep going south each spring to raid more
distant villages. E  event, early writers give the Pitt Privers a more
southern limit. We are of the opinion the 20 mile limitation north of
Alturas i‘i:=r.ed by Curtis is fairly representative of the understanding of
the lndians and d1~an our line accordingly.

Much of the disagreement existing in the location of the eastern Pitt
River boundary undoubtedly results from confusion as to the path of the
Warner range summit. Host references to Paiutes around Goose Lake do not
locate than with further definiteness. Other references are confusing due
to the similarity in pronounciation of the name "Paiute” and that of a
Pitt ‘River tillage near Bieher" in Big Valley. Although Powell's line follows the nest base of the range there  evidence the Pitt Rivers hunted and

gathered on the slopes and in the foothills. The range is visible from afar

P and Kroeber explained his adoption of its srannit as a divide by saying ”it

could hardly have been other than a recognized limit, " while Kniffen said
the range was “a climatic and cultural linenand a convenient boundary,"

which statement is adopted by petitioner's witness, DI‘. Ste-wart. It is

— also supported by Dr. Kroeber and there is evidence of usage of its slopes by

the Pitt Rivers. We conclude that the  is a reasonable boundary for

Or

the eastern limits of Pitt River country.

"i" That the Pitt River Indians hunted in the western portion of the Madeline

I ,1 _ ‘ " . . . .
«..a1n3 soo._th..est of the Warner range, and had a village there during the 19th

4. .____,, __ H _ _
°'=‘W<l+.r seems cel tain. They also made annual excursions to Eagle Lake to
fie‘

~23 and at some time had a village at the msuth of Pine Qreek on its

"'°3t'S'=l"I7 shore. However, Dixon‘s research aznong the I~Eaidu and "ti: Rciver

"1.’

7 Ind. 01. Com. 815 860

\

5

Indians prior to 1905 disclosed that haidu hunting parties continually
ranged Pine Creek and about Eagle Lake and that the Haidu made doubtful
claim on the east as far north as'Willow creek, beyond which they did not
go. Powell excluded the entire area and'Herriam excluded Horse Lake; Kroea
ber thought the country about Eagle Lake was “probably” Pitt River country.
Kniffen located undated village sites on Willow creek on the claimed boundary line. Garth, who made a special study of the Atsuge about l95'3, ran

the eastern boundary almost due north md south through Horse Lake.

Voegelin thought that Eagle Lake and Horse Lake were in a transition area,

with Paiute, Maidu and ‘tt River Indians all using it about 1850. Docu;

 mentm evidence ,,,originated by travelers through that region and official
i reports indicate t .e Paiute claimed and controlled Tdillow creek valley. g

is Efillow creek riseshitabout two miles east of Eagle Lake and flows southeast.
The. evidence is not convincing that any one of these groups controlled

 Eagle‘Lake.to the exclusion of the others.

It seems ‘certain that the Pitt River Indians went as far south as

 ;.IaaSSenS~: Peak and” that they shared with the lane at common boundary extend: northwest from that Peak along the drainage divide between the Pit

L and qsacramento rivers as far north as the headwaters of Montgomery creek.
It is fairly well agreed among students of Indian relations in this v:1cj'_n_it:.r

that Pitt River country’ ran west along the drainage divide north of Mont8°3'm“—‘TY creek and extended across the Pit river to the drainage divide bet:-:»'een‘

the Pit river and Squaw creek. with due regard to the Olcaanuchu upon the

h93d'~'aters of the }EcCloud river, the Pitt River country extended north‘; rd

'°-u—.....- 0' '

7 Ind. C1. Com. 815 861

east of that drainage.

Emile the evidence respecting their outer limits is far from deiinite
in all areas, it is evident that he Pitt Rivers occupied and controlled a
compact area radiating out from the more heavily settled areas along Fall
river, Pit river and its forks, Hat and Burney creeks. It is true that by
fixing an outer boundary for the area so held by them there is included
within it small sections which by reason of their barren, sterile nature or
inaccessibility, were of little if any use, but such use as their economy
and culture permitted and certainly complete control over such areas were
exercised'by the 'arious separate units into which the Pitt Rivers were
divided. Only Ivierriam, Kniffen and petitioner‘s witness, Stewart, gives
us information respecting the boundaries between these units, while Garth
has bounded the Atsuge and Aporige‘who comprise the southern linguistic
division. These interior lines are of no particular interest to defendant
but are essential in View of the fact that the autonomous units were the
1335- Wning, land-holding entities, rather than the Pitt River Indians as
a whole. In bounding the tracts which these separate units appear to have
held under exclusive control, as in bounding the outer limits ofVthe Pitt
River country, we have drawn the lines in detail from one topographical point
to another as the same appears upon the Petitioners‘ Exhibit No; PL9>A, to
enclose the areas to'which we believe petitioners have shown.satisfactory
W001" of original title and to avoid difficulty in identification of the

I‘ n _:l' I 0 0 up 1 4;
_ntond.d territorial limits we have nad to resort when necessary_to modern

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 862

The date of taking of Indian title to alliend in California'was discussed by this Commission in Mohave Indians V. United States, 7 Ind. Clms.
Comm. 219, Dkt. 295, and we deem it unnecessary to again set out our

reasoning in that respect. It was not until the Battle of the Infernal

Caverns on September 26-28, 1867, when petitioner Indians were decisively
' 3

otercone_and their power to resist white domination was broken. While
this probably as accurately as any date marks the physical taking of petitioners‘ title, the expiration of the period for registration of lands
titles in California under the Private Land Claims Act, 9 Stat. 631, on
March 3, l8S3, and the passage on that date of an "Act to Provide for the
Survey of the Public Lands of California and the Grantingoi Preemption
Rights to Settlers“-legally terminated petitioners‘ right to assert land
claims. effectively classed the land here involved as part of the public
domain and thus constitutes the date of taking of Indian title to the a
land described in our Finding of Fact No. 25.

- It is admitted that the Pitt River Indians have never been com" Pénsated fcr*the'taking of their original title to the land held by’?

said several groups-I-rand bands ,' nor is’ there evidence before thepCommis- "sion permitting a determination of the acreage held by said°several

Separate units comprising the Pitt River Indians. Further evidence will I
therefore be next received respecting the acreages held by each of said

, Separate , A
3¢V¢?a1/groups or bands, and the values thereof on the dates of their

acquisition by the defendant, together with the a.'nou:1t of offsets, if

 

C1, Com. 815

any, to which the defendant may be entitled under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

/s/ EDGAR E. WITT
Chief Commissioner

I concur:

/s/ ‘WM. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

863

 

H

