‘\".:i;§»4'

BEFORE THE resign CLATMS

A-bj

COI~E~EISSIO‘L€

THE I?" IELLUS L;..I'3E OF II*"DI.~C;'S , )
Petitioner, %
V. 3 Docket No. 263
TFE UNITED STE; TBS OF AI-Em. ICI3. , 3
Defendant. %
- Decided: April l3, l9S9

FINDINGS OF FACT

 

The Commission makes the folloning findings of fact:
1. The Kikiallus 'I‘ri"oe of.‘ Indians was an identifiable band of America..- Indians residirg ~.-::I...hin the territorial limits of the United States
along the nouth of the South.Fork of tie Skagit River, in.Hhat is now

the northwest portion of the State of ‘sfashington. t'l‘he,,identit_*§r. of this .
aboriginal tillage tribe or band of In"ans, as such, has been established

by the evidence herein as reouired b the Indian Claims Commission Act_;
.. t 3'

of.August 13, l9u6, (co Stat. 1on9; 25 U,s.c. sec. 7o(a)).

2. Petitioner is the tribal organization of Kikiallus Indians whose 1;.

ancestors ceded their lands, along with a large number&of other bands and is

£""‘|'.

tribes Indians, under the terms of the Treaty of Point Elliott to 
fendant (l2 Stat. 927, IT. Kapp. 669).

EVIDBECB SU'P?OI-?.'.?IE*IG F1?-FDEEG BIO. 2

 

(a) The Chief of the Kikiallus Tribe of Indians testified there are

about 150 menbers of the Kikiallus Tribe and that the position of Chieftain cazne to him ":3" ‘*

_;.. r;eredit;.* from an 1'.=ncle his predecessor, and Ecins;-nan

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 150 . 1:57

of the representative of the Kikiallus Indian 1.-Iho siged the Treaty of
Point Elliott (1 Tr. pp. iegivy.

(b) The Chairman of the Kikiallus Tribal Council, Alphonso Sampson,
(the record is confusing as to_his relationship, if any, to the person
whose signature appearedias the seventieth one to the treaty of Point 351liott: "Sampson, wskagit tribe, his 1-’; mark") testified he had seryed in
such position "continuously for many years past" (I Tr., p. 13).

(c) Dei‘endant‘s ethnologist, Dr. Carroll L. Riley, states in his
opinion, "The goupiof modern Indians that form the Kikiallus are presumably the descendants of villagers who once lived on the Kikiallus
River, probably the south fork of the Skagit"' (Dft. Ex. 1 at Ch. II, p. l).
' - (d) The "Kik-i-a4Ilus“ Indians are listed among the tnenty9two
tribes and bands whose names appear in the preamble to the Treaty of Point
Elliott (12 Stat. 927, II Kapp. 669). Also among the signatory chiefs
and subchiefs to said treaty appears, *Sdsso-mahtl, Kik-ial-lus band, his
X mark}; .I.".°‘is"“'.*- *."—‘ I I

(e)'i“.i' T:ri.e;;United States Court of Claims found the Kikiallus Indians

were partieshtto the Treaty of Point Elliott (Fdg. IV) and occupied eight

i houses an found theirvhouses nith a total seine es eé,eee.oo (rag. X:,ii

'bueamish!set;a1;iIndiens*vs. United States, 79 C. cis; S36; 193b, D¢cket  

F...27§)    .9 .; p
(1') Dr. C. L. Rileyihas summarized the) brief reports of Kikiallus
einong the authorities oi‘.)eIndia11stsi_n.i~ithis region  Ex. I), as-follows:
The group ‘fhodern Indians that forms; the Kikiallus are

presumably the descendants oi‘ v£_"Lagers who oncelived on the
Kikiallus River, probably the south fork of the Skagit. These

 

f..",“..:

Tlnd. Cl. Corn. 166 , 158

X."
I...

were mentioned several times in early accounts. Starling, in
1852, listing positions and populations of the various Sound
P8013138 sooke of a Kick-u-al-lis group of l6O merfoers that
lived at the mouth of the “Kick-u-== -lis River and vic:'..niuy".
Stevens reported the Kikiallis, living along the Kikiallis
River (one of the mouths of the Skagit) and Lower E~fid‘oey‘ s
Island with a population of 75. The Schoolcraft figures gave 'a population of ‘(S for the Kikiallus but did not indicate the
area inhabited. ’

Gibbs, in 1851;, had a more detailed report of the group:

Below the Sinahoznish come the Stoluckaquamish (River
People), or, as their name is usually corrupted, Ste£aquamish, 1-zhose country is on a stream bearing their name, and
still north of them the Kikialtis. I—-Io opportunity has afforded itself.‘ for accurate inqu:Lry into the numbers of either.
The first are said by some to amount to two hundred, while the
latter may perhaps be set dorm at seventy-five.

 

The name Kikiallus appears on the Point Eliott Treaty
Documents. After the organization of t..e Indians at "collection
points“ folloxring the treaty, the Kikiallus were grouped together with the other Skagit River Indians and were handled
through the Penn's Cove Agency headquarters. i

I Fallet, in 187?, calls the Ki-kia-loos, a "sub-tribe"

of the Skagit.

EeLLs, also classed the Kikiallus as Skagit (Bells is here  ...
quoting from Gibbs} . Later ethnographers have sometimes included Kikiallus with Skagit. The Handbook takes this View 
as does Curtis- Both of these sources, however, pointpouttgthatp
no political unity is izzlplied by the term "Skagit_.'f I:_ L. ; 

More recently, Spier subsumes Kikiallus under Skagit.
Spier, however, feels that villages were largely autonomous
in this area and he doubts if any of the Indians thought in _
terns of boundaries. Smith, employing her own tribal classi- 
fication, however, makes the Kikiallus (along with the *4-Jhidbey's
Island Skagit) a "sub-tribe" of the Sr.-rinomish. She lists two
villages for these people: one (unnamed) at the mouth of t.-..e
Carpenter Creek, between Conway and Fir, and Uts.5Lladi at
on Caraano Island. '

 

Smith's groupings are based on cultural grounds and do not
represent political organizations. Smith points out that in

this area the village was the autonomous land holding unit.

In the same‘ year, Gibbs, and a few years later I I I

tsalady '

In another publication S.-7*?
south to the effect that the Eli
water goup on Skagit Bay.“

h cites inforrants from farth
iallu(s) was “an mportant s

4.
U
K

Informants used by Dr. Riley in prepaing his report filed as Defendantis Ex. l, stated the Kikiallus ranged widely. Theyused som of

the areahbetween the north and south forks of the Skagit River, parts
of northern Camano Island from near themouth of the Stilllaguamish
River to the totem of Camano, and the eastern projection of I-Ihidbey‘s

Island, east of Point Poinell. Informants knew of only one village on

‘South Fbrk.- This probably is identical with Smith's site on Carpenter

Creek (Dft. Ex.1, 1"-‘tr. Req. Fdg. 6).
3.- Thlewpetiitioner and defendant stipulated at the opening of the
initial of this case as follows:

“Therérlshall be first a determination in the matter of the
Kikia.'L'Lus Tribe of Indians versus the United States of America, ,
Docket Ho. 263, the question whether the Claimant, under the law
and facts to be adduced, had, at the time of the alleged wrongful
acts by the Defendant, saboriginaldi or Indian title, 1-zithgtz the A
meaI1i:ig”of the Act, to the lands described in the“; Petition, or
any partthereof, and if so, whether the Defendant unla?—rfully deprived the Claimant thereof, postponing until aftersuch determination,‘ should such determination be favorable to Claimant, proof
as to‘?-5'the‘ value thereof, or as to any otherquestions_ of _fact1‘ f a
raised by the pleadings not heretofore determined by, the (hams§i°n'n (Tr..'-MI: Pf 3) C ' H

_1J,. J Petitioner claims Indians title by reason of exclusi've7 aboriginal use and “occupancy during aboriginal" times of the following described territory 1-zithin the area ceded to the Unite_d States in the Point

Elliott Treaty of January 22, 1855, 12 Stat. 927, II Kapp 669:
Beginning at Point Demock on the Northwest tip of Camano
Island in Township 32 North, Range 2 E3’-F.I'i.3 thence in a north- 
easterly direction to the Eshrthwest corner of Section l7, Tot ship 3? North, Range 333..-:,'~' - thence East along said" section line

4.1-Q ,

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. has h60_

to the Northeast corner of Section 111, -.’fot.+nship 33 N01"th,-, R&1_g—3-. 3
E.E-3.1%.; thence in a Northeasterly direction in a straight lme

to center point of Section 35', Township 31.: North, Range 1'. 3.?-3.3*5.3
thence in a .South*:~Iesterly direction in a straight line to the
Northwest corner of Section 18, Township 31 Eiorth, Range 3 E.’.-3'.M. ;__
thence in a .=‘:Iort westerly "direction in a straight line across
Point Susan" Flats and on across Livingston Bay and Camano -Island
to Point of beginning, situate in Island, Skagit and Snohomish

Counties, State of E-.Tashi.ngton.

5. The Kikiallus Indians had a permanent village site in pre—treaty
times located near the mouth of the south fork of the Skagit River some
five miles south of the present site of the city of Fit. Vernon, Washington at about the point where Con:-Iay Fir Station appears on the Great 
Northern Railroad as shown on the Deception Pass Quandrangle I-iap, Defendant‘s Exhibit No. 3. The Kikiallus ranged through the delta and utilized parts of Skagit Bay" and also used and occupied a portion of the

 

north coast of Camano Island. Their principal village on the Skagit A
River was on somewhat of a main thoroughfare if tie Indian (canoe)

traffic between upriver settlements and those along the coast (Pet.e,lEZx.

‘, .

2; Def. Ex. 3).
 6. Dr. Carrol L. Riley's report, Defendant's Exhibit  contains

s— a concise account of the early history of the Puget. Sound area, a small
portion of which includes petitioner’s claim. The earliest history bf
Western ’.-:'ashi_ngton began when the California area to the south was Edis:-_-u
covered by Spaniards, Ferrelo and Cabrillo, in 151:2, and was visited 
Sir Francis Drake in 1579. : It is ‘possible Drake actually may have reached;
the latitude of present Trlashmgton State.

In the 17th century Spain made reaches sporadically northward.

Russia by the ‘mid 18th century had explored parts of coastal .»!—L'!_aska and

7 Ind. Cl. Comrn. }456 I 1.161

was beginni.ng to tap the rich fur trade. Both England and France had
taken new interest in the discovery of a northwest sea passage, a dream
already centuries old.

Juan Perez from Mexico began intensive exploration of the 1‘Ia.thw"est‘"-'
in l7'?h, reaching the Queen Charlotte Indians before turning back. Naceta,
the Spaniard, discovered the mouth of the Colurrbia River and Bodegay
Quadra reached Alaska. In succession the Straits of Juan de Fnca were
plied probably by the fur trader Barclay in 1787, by I-ieares in l788,
by Martinez in l789, and by an American fur trader named Gray in 1790.

In that year Quinrper and Lopez de iHaro, sent from the Spanish Base at
Nootka-, sailed as far as the San Juan Archipelago and, in ‘the succeeding
two years-, Spanish parties under Eliza, then G-aliano and Valdes, also I
visited_;_this region. These were their last activites in the Puget Sound,
for threat; of war with England forced uithdrazlral of Spanish forces from
the S, northwest . S

_The most important British exploration of the Puget Sound area was
thejvoyage of Vancouver in 1792." In 18014-1806 Ler.~ris and Clark employed
byggghe American Government, crossed the plains and floated down the Columbiaalthough they did not actually visit northwestern Washington, they
gathered Indian reports of I this area. ‘

In 1832 Hudson‘s Bay Company post at Hisqually in the upper Sound
carried on a fur trading activity in a systemized manner ,’ maintaining a
Way’ station between their Frazier and Colunh ia River headquarters. The
Sound was also thoroughly explored and rrappedby an American naval ex»pedition "under Wilkes in ldlzlo

Several thousand whites were settled by 1833 and the Territory was
then organized. This i_ru"lu:< of pioneers impinged on Indian Territory

and Territorial Governor Stevers in l8S}.t.-1835 concluded treaties with

the various Indnns es=ta.blishing major reservations at Nisqually, Tul-T-S

 

,—v
.,alip Bay and on the I.u...*--uni River (p. 6). Dissatisfaction over the treaties
led some of thelndia-::«s to join the native uprisings oi‘ l8SS. Their total
defeat the next year, combined with intensive settlement of the area by
whites, caused great cleanges 31 the native life and rapid disappearance
of social and political autonomy.

7. I-‘iodern ethnological data treatin" with the Kikia3_'Lus other than
the testimony of the respective expert witness, 1~E:Lss Snyder and Dr. C.L.
Riley, E almost totally lacking in the record of this case. The reports
of treaty timesiare few and fragmentary in nature. 3-Ie observe the general
conditions at, the time :of-, initial white contact that there I-fere several.
thousand Indians scattered along the Puget Sound area, along the river.
valleys and coast from near the Columbia River to Northern Vancouver

Island. The Coast Salish dialects were spoken bymost of these groups,

S including the Kil-tiallm-3 who spoke Skagit dialect of  Salish.

In the south of‘ Puget Sound along sheltered inlets and extending

up the rivers were a number of villages sometimes collectively called
the "1*Iiso_ualli Nation". Squaxin (Southwest Sound) applied to  "3
from Olympia to North Bay." Niso_uaLLy and Puyallup referred generally
to the natives in the river valleys bearing those names. ther Indians
bearing names of rivers were Duwanxish, Snohomish, Stillaguardsh, Lower

Skagit, Samish, Snoqualmie, Skykomish, while a number of the sites on

7 Ind. Cl. cs-sss. use LL63
the White and Green Rivers are collectively 1~CI1OI-In as Iéuckleshoot.

West oi‘ the Sound, on H~eod's Canal were Sko-leeinish with Chhakums
and Klallan to the north, the letter on the south shore of the Strait
of Juan de Fuca and a series of vi..:l:lages on the Quillayute, Hoh, Quests,
and Quinault rivers-and the Iiakahs lived in the vicinity of Cape Flattery, although there were cultural differences among these Indians,
there were great sinilarities, in their political and social organization.

Fish constituted the principal diet or the Indians living in villages of one or more large multi-family, rectangular shaped houses along
the rivers Mend bays of Puget Sound. In the summer these canoe-using
Indians drifted away from and about these foci of their winter activities‘ to search for food by fishing, clamr:i_ng, berry and root gathering.

"Essentially a second major division, apart from linguistic differences,7 were the inland or hunting Indians from“ the fishmg or canoe Indians. Thecoastal groups had more pronounced social strata among that
own the inland B1dians. The Kikiallus are believed tobe an

3*-°€'Ption to this class system of coastal Indians here and held no‘ ’
Slaves"; iprobably because they were a relatively young tribe (Sally
5nyder,52 Tr; pl; 7).

The leaders of the Puget Sound Indians acquired their leadership
Pfestige by the size of their pot-lache celebrations. These winter
events were held in cedar lodges._ - The leader, as host , would invite
large numbers of guests , including other villagers and tribesw-*m_. and ’

distribute gifts among them as evidence of his generosity and i~:ealth.;'

.2!" 

7 Ind. 0:... com. L55 1461.:

tandard items of wealth anon? heat Sound Indians included blankets,
canoes, slaves, stored i‘oodstui‘.f.‘ ad, in the upper Sound, strings of
clam shells serving SOIIEE’.-.7f3.a‘{'. as a currency standard (Dr. C. L. Riley Def.

~ 1?x- I. pp- 1-27).

A In treaty times the north part of ilarzano Island was in the control
and possession of Kikiallus Indians although it was frequently visited
by the Snohomish, Stillaguamish, and Skagit Indians sith the consent of
the Kikiallus. The north end of Camano Island is claimed by petitioner
"north of a line from Point Demock to Livingston Bay“ as described in
paragraph two of the petition. (Snohomish, Dkt.l2S, Pet. Etc. 10, p. 60;
Stillaguamish, Dkt. 207, Deposition oi‘ Sally Snyder, last par., p. 68)

The canoe traffic between the upper and lower regions of the Sound would

 

around Camano Island. We found in Docket No. 125,‘ (Snohomis.h)‘
No. 17, that the Snohomish exclusively used the area, in Camano Island

south of Camano city. I I    

 

3. The Handbook of 9.3:‘-.erican Indians lists subjectMIndians as
f°?—1°W"s=l n 
*'KIKIAI.LU. A Skagit subtribe romerly imag on}-.'né' ‘N. end
of Hhidbey Id. and at the mouth of the Skagit r., ‘:=Iash., but now
on Swinomish res. ; They participated M the treaty of Elliott,
Wash., Jan. 22, 1855.“ a I I s S
9., "The Kikiallus probably branched off from the Skagit Tribe in
earlier tmes," reports I-Iiss Sally Snyder, candidate i'or"_,Ph. D.‘ degree
in Anthropology and expert witness for petitioner (2 Tr. 7),. The Skagit

and Kikiallus spoke the same dialect and their close proadmity lends

credence to her conclusion. lafhether or not her conclusion as to their

pass through Saratoga Passage on the nest, and Port Susan on the east, .¢

 _ ~; .Ev:Darca ste9oa$Iao»tLr:niTa tztnrao or root NO. 10 V

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. use to;

J.

origin in time is correct, the Kikiallus Indians were, at least, a
separate autonomous village situated on the south fork of the Skagit
River during treaty times (Def. Ex. I, Ch. II; Pet. Req. Fdg. 8).
10. The Kikiallus Village Tribe of Indians exclusively used and

occupied an area of land.in aboriginal times described as follows:
First Tract: (Along South Fork of Skagit River)

Commencing at the point where the Skagit and Snohomish

.County boundary line intersects the mouth of Tom.Hoore
Slough; thence due east on said county line to the point
of its intersection with t-e Great Northern Railroad;
thence northward along said railroad to the site of Conway
Fir Station; thence doe west along a line to a point where

. said line intersects Deer Slough; thence generally south‘westward down said stream.to its mouth; thence generally
southeastnard along the shoreline of Skagit Bay and encome
passing all of the unnamed islets along said shoreline between the mouths of Deer Slough and Tom.Moore Slough, to
the place of beginning. a A_ _ _- ~ S to a

Second Tract: .(Northern Portion_of Camano Island), _:_c

 

[91 :Beginning at Point Demock; thence due east toga point
on the ridgeline, which point is directly south of Utsaladdy
and.on line with Point Demock; thence southeasterly to the
center point of the shoreline of Livingstone Bay; thence
.generally eastward along the shoreline to the mouth of Davis
Slough; thence northward through Davis Slough; on the present
county line to the entrance of West Pass; thence generally
westward along the shoreline of Camano Island to the place oft
 b'egj_nning...-    _ . . _ . 

1...

  
 

 

See also evidence under.Edg. 2

(a) Contiguous Tribes and Areas

iMiss Sally Snyder testified that she had determined what tribes
bordered upon the area of the Kikiallus, as follow :
“To the east of the Kikiallus is the iookachamps; to

the south on the mainland is the Stilliguamish. To the
.south on Camano Island is the Snohonish. To the west on

 

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 12.56 1350

the mainland about a mile or so south and west of Mount
(Vernon is Lower Skagit, and at the northern tip of the
Kikiallus territory just south of Mt. Vernon to the nest
is 1‘-Iuwaha, and that is also north. I believe that covers
the contiguous area. "

(b) Subsistence and Areas of Kikiallus

 

The Ki’x:ia"1_'1.us used camps along the north shore of Camano Island for
clam digging, smelt fishing; duck huntmg, and land game hunting seasonally (2 Tr. pp. l2,‘ lb). Kikiallus fished for salmon on Dry Slough,
speared salmon and also took sturgeon from the South Fork‘ of the Skagit
Riter (2 Tr. p. 18)- Herring was taken from the west shore of Canano
and was used by all Indians in this area. Smelt was one of the staples
of Kikiallus (2 Tr. p. 19).

Deer were corraled by a fence leadmg to the '9: ater and hunters shot
them froinup their canoes on the South Fork near Kikiallus,-ala, also black
bear  elk) were hunted in this area. Seal nere taken on small islands
nearby as well as iracoon, pheasant, wild crabapples and loon, a large
fish-eating bird, supplemented their diet(2 Tr. p. 2h, 25).

 The Kikiallus seasonally burned their berry patches toincrease the
yield. The Kikiallus traded trout to the Nookachamps for mountain goat
hair (2 Tr. p. -27, 28). Salmon berries were gathered on the northern
end of Camano Island (2 Tr. p. 35). The Kikiallus gathered drift need
for firewood (2 Tr. p. 142).

(c) Dr. Carroll L. Riley, dei‘enda....t‘s ethnologist, testified upon
the location of Kikiallus, as follows:

He (Dr. Marion Smith) lists t‘:-so villages: one at -on the south, in the Conway Bay area , south of the

Skagit River; arri the other at a village in Utsaladx on

Camano Island.

7 End... Cl. Comm. 1:56 1&5?

The present report has one village listed on the
old Kikiallus area, in the Kikiallns River, in the
south fork of the Skagit River, and with the popuv
lation estimate it seems quite likely that there
was one village, the Kikiallus village; and there is
an implication that the Kikiallus used the area in the
mouth of the Skagit River, and also ranged as far as
Camano Island and Whidbey Island.hd Underscoring supp1ie"a'“"'; 3"‘T"'r. p. 35

(d) Also hetitioner‘s ethnologist, Miss Sally Snyder, prepared

 

a map of Kikiallus Territory (Ptr. Ex. 2) and estimated the number of
acres in same as 32,000 acres (2 Tr. pp. 38-39). Sally'Snyder'nene
tioned Kikiallus locations as follows: 0
Yulkeb - to the south on Camano Island
Xuytknb .
Hwigsupt
Tx:wiwiaiaqw (the aforementioned.all clam-digging, smelt fishing,
and deck hunting, land game hunting areas located on
c (L 2 Petitioner‘s Hap, 3;. No.   
  Shidokshib - : i‘isht dz-yang location (,2,T:-,_;_;.,:.,11;) _
tsiladdy 0 ll
“” °"*;Birch Bayii
~   Knasalad  
Oéoawalus (2 Tr. p. 23)
Will; The lands described in.Finding l0 were part or the lands ceded
to the United States by the terms of the lreaty of Point hlliott by the
Kikiallus Indians. Ehe date of signing this treaty'hy'the respective
parties was January 22, l8SS. This treaty'aas not ratified, however,
until some four years later on.harch 8, l8S9, and the date of such ratification.by the United States Senate constitutes the date of taking (12

7 Ind» C—. Comm. £56 h53

12. any rig.ts which petitioner, their ancestors and predecessors

in _.terest may have retained or acquired to any lands within the bound_aries as set forth.in.Finding 10 may'be made the subject of inquiry at

 

the further hearing of this claim.respecting the credits of the defendant and consiieration paid to petitioner or its ancestors and predecessors in interest, and as to the value of said lands as of the

effective date of the treaty, Hard: 8, 1859.

., /s/  E. wrrr
Chief Commissioner

/s/ WI-I. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

 

