BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE smm on PIUTE moinws or

FOR FORPER MAI;-IEUR RESITRVATION,. 3
IN OREGON, )
Petitioners , %
V59 % Docket N00 3;?
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ;
Defendant‘. 3 I
Decided: December 28 , 1956
Appearances:

Fr. C. B... McConnell, with whom
was Mr. Bernard J. Long,
Attorneys for Petitionerso
Messrs. Ralph A. Barney and
Leland L. Yost, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry 127. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION OE THE CO?t3\lII_SSIOI‘J

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission,

This case is now before us a second time. when originally considered, this Commission held that petitioners were not entitled to re«cover on either Count I or II in the petition filed therein because it
had not been satisfactorily established by the evidence with any degI‘€8
of certainty that any tribe, band or group of Snake or Piute India.1's
actually occupied and exclusively used and possessed any definite port?-5-On

of the area in southeast Oregon claimed by petitioners; and that we did

not believe the evidence submitted would sustain petitioners’ con.tcnti-C‘-3

that the Government_did not deal fairly and.honorably with them.in its
compliance with any obligation created under the provisions of the unratified treaty of December 10, 1868, and entered an order dismissing
the petition. The petitioners appealed to the Court of Claims and in
an opinion filed on June 2, 1953, that Court set aside our final determinations on both Counts I and II and remanded the causes to the Commission for further consideration and the making of additional findings
of fact. (12; 0. Cls. 2u1).

The Court of Claims, as did this Commission, construed the allegations
of the petition as presenting a claim in Count I asserting the right to
recover on the ground that the defendant had.taken in 1882 without the
consent of the Indians or payment of compensation, certain lands in
southeast Oregon which petitioners allege were exclusively used and
occupied by their ancestors at that date and for a long time prior
thereto. In the alternative, petitioners alleged in Count II that they
were entitled to relief under the provisions of Section 2, Clause 5 of
the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19u6 (6 Stat. 1on9), in
that the Government's course of dealings with these bands of Snake or
Piutes, at the time of and subsequent to the negotiation of the unratified treaty of December 10, 1868, was not fair and honorable. (125 CCls. 2hl, 2h3, 2hh). In remanding the case to the Commission for further
consideration, the Court of Claims with respect to Count II stated as
follows (125 C. Cls. Zhl, 253):

‘* % % If, upon reconsideration of the whole record and the

making of additional evidentiary and basic findings, the

Commission decides that appellant has established Indian
title by exclusive occupancy and possession, to some or all

of the land in question, the question raised in Count II
on fair and honorable dealings will not be pertinent, fbr

appellant can have but one recovery. (See also pp. 269, 270).
In.view of the determination herein.made by the Commission we will discuss
only the issues pertaining to Count I of the petition.

Subsequent to the remand of this case, a further hearing was held
before the Commission at which time additional evidence was received
and the proof is now closed.

The petitioners herein are a group of Indians known as the Snake
or Piute Indians of the former Malheur Reservation in Oregon who pree
sented this claim as descendants and on behalf of all descendants of
members of the bands or tribe of Snake or Piute Indians who were parties
to an unratified treaty under date of December IO, 1868, and resided
upon the former Malheur Reservation. The petitioners claim in Count I
that their ancestors held aboriginal Indian title to a large area of
land in southeastern Oregon described in Finding No. 3, consisting of
approximately 1,778,560 acres of land, at the date of an unratified
treaty of December I0, 1868, made with petitioners‘ ancestors. .Peti«
tioners contend that they and their ancestors were deprived of their
right of use and.occupancy of said lands in either 1879, 1880 or I882
without their consent and.without the payment of compensation therefor.
It is noted that while petitioners urge that there is some evidence
of enclusive occupancy and use by their ancestors at the time of the
1868 unratified treaty and prior thereto, of a larger area of land in
the vicinity of Malheur and.Harney Lakes in southeastern Oregon, they

have now limited their claim to the land within the boundaries of the

Malheur Reservation "as it was established by the Executive Order of
September 12, 1872, and as modified by Executive Orders ofIMay 15, 1876
and January 26, 1876" (Pet. Req. Find. No. 101(1)), the oundaries of
which are set forth in our Finding No. 3. ‘we shall therefore consider
the claim as applying only to that tract of land. The amount claimed
as compensation for the value of the land taken was $3,500,000 with
interest thereon from 1882.

The defendant contends that there is no satisfactory proof that
petitioners are the descendants of the Indians with whom.the unratified
treaty of December 10, 1868 was entered into; that petitioners have
failed.to prove exclusive aboriginal Indian title to any definable area
of land from time immemorial to the date of the alleged taking on
September 13, 18823 and, that there is no proof that petitioners constituted an aboriginal land-holding or other type of group or groups.

It is not seriously questioned by counsel for defendant that
certain groups of Snake Indians, now classified by some anthropologists
as Northern Piutes, were living in eastern and southeastern Oregon at
the time Oregon was established as a Territory by the Act of August lb,
18h8 (9 Stat. 323). According to the evidence the first recorded white
contact with Snake or Piute Indians living in the Harney and Halheur
Lakes region in southeastern.Oregon is that of Peter Ogden in 1826.
There seems to be little doubt among the authorities that in earlier
aboriginal times these Snake or Piute Indians comprised small groups

or clusters of families which ranged over wide areas in search of food.

Those Indians who ranged within an area where a particularly impOrtaHt

h 611

food was available were designated.by other Indians as “Eaters” of such
food. ‘l‘he Indians inhabiting the Harney and Malheur Lakes wea and on
the Malheur river and its tributaries in aboriginal times have been
classified as the "Wadatoda" or "Wadatika” band of Northern Piutes by
anthropologists. According to Dr. Beatrice Blyth Whiting in her study
“Paiute Sorcery" the Piutes now living outside Burns, Oregon (where some
of petitioners‘ ancestors settled on returning to Oregon in 1882) are
remnants of the "Wadadika" Cwada—Eaters). In these earlier aboriginal

times there seems to have been no real political organization among these

Indians and the basic socio-economic unit was said to be the individual
family or groups of families. Political organization to any degree and
land consciousness were apparently lacking until there was increased
white contact.

‘White emigration and settlement in southeast Oregon around l8LS

appears to have caused a gradual change in the native may of life of

the Snake or Piute Indians in that area. Bands of Indians in the area

were formed and with their expansion.between l8hS and 1868 certain of
the Snake or Piute chiefs became prominent in southeast Oregon and were
recognized by Government Agents and Military Officers in the area as
chiefs and leaders of bands bearing their name, and living in certain
areas. Among these leaders one'We-you4We4Wa became known as the prinm
cipal chief of the bands or “tribe” of Snake or Piutes inhabiting the

conntry around Malheur and Harney Lakes and on the tributaries of the

Malheur river in eastern Oregon. It is clear that white emigration

and settlement, the destruction of native vegetable foods, the resulting

2; (319.

hostilities with the whites, and the necessity of having leaders to

negotiate with Government officials resulted in the formation of bands
and loose, but evident, political organization. The growth of land

consciousness is also apparent such as We-you4We4Wa}s followers re'fusing to leave their own country for a reservation elsewhere following

the 1868 unratified treaty. (Findings 3, h and 5). This land consciousness will be shown as we now discuss the Government's dealings
with the Snake or Piute Indians of this area, as set forth fully in

our findings and as disclosed by the voluminous historical material of

record.

That Congress intended the extinguishment of all original Indian
title to lands in Oregon Territory was to be made the subject of a
treaty is shown by the Act of l8h8, supra, which made all land laws of
the United States applicable to said Territory, and provided in Section
1 that nothing therein contained "should be construed to impair the
rights of ersons or property now pertaining to the Indians in said
Territory so long as such.rights remain unextinguished by treaty between
the United States and such Indians."

The first authorization by Congress to treat with the bands of
Snake or Pints Indians in southeast 0regon.was contained in the Act of
March 25, 186k (13 Stat. 3h), which provided for the negotiation of at
treaty with the Klamath, Modoc and Snake Indians "for the purchase of
the country occupied by them."r The language of the Act indicates that
Congress considered these Indians had possessory rights to lands occupied by them, and since petitioners‘ ancestors, who were parties to the

1; 613

1868 unratified treaty, were among the bands of Snake Indians covered
by the Act and resided at that time in the area where the Malheur
Reservation was later established, we believe that Congress intended
their occupancy rights should.only be extinguished by purchase. It is
quite plain, however, from the letter of treaty instructions issued
pursuant to the Act to the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon
Territory, J. W. Huntington, on June 22, l86h, by Acting Commissioner
of Indian.Affairs, 0. E. Mix, the pertinent parts of which are set
forth in Finding 12, that at the time the Government wanted to avoid
admitting Indian title in lands occupied.by these Indians, unless the
lands were needed for immediate white settlement or development. It
preferred, if possible, the treaty “be one of peace and friendship, and
an agreemnt on the part of the Indians to reside upon a proper reservation to be selected.and distinctly marked," rather than a treaty of
cession requiring purchase of the occupied lands.

The Indians covered by the l86h Act were too scattered to include
in a single treaty so Superintendent Huntington first concluded a
treaty on_October lh, l86h (16 Stat. 707)~with the Klamath, Modoc and
Yahooskin Band of Snakes, obtaining a cession of land in south-central
Oregon and northern California and established a treaty reservation for

these Indians on Klamath Lake in southern Oregon; and on October 1h, 18

(lb Stat. 683) concluded a treaty with the'Woll—Pah-Pe Tribe of Snahes,

A 6.14

6h

obtaining accession of a tract of land in central Oregon, with the Indians

agreeing to reside on the Klamath Reservation. Apparently in justification

of negotiating the treaties as treaties of cession, Superintendent

Huntington reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs the country
ceded in each treaty was rich in minerals and contained fine grazing
lands that would be available to the whites for mining and agricultural
purposes.

There were small parts of the lands ceded under both of these
treaties which were later included within the boundaries of the Malheur
Reservation in 1872. We agree with the statement of the Court of Claims
in its opinion in this case that this does not necessarily establish
non-ownership of such lands by petitioners’ ancestors since land was
often purchased by the Government from one band of Indians during the
early days of the Government‘s contact in an area which was later found
to have belonged to a neighboring tribe and on some such occasions it
was found necessary by the Government to purchase the possessory title
of some part of the same land from that neighboring tribe.

é The evidence discloses that the remaining bands of Snake or Piutes
in southeast Oregon had resented the intrusion of the whites in their
country and they were continuouslv hostile after l8h8 so Superintendent
Huntington was unable to treat with them until after an aggressive
military campaign had been undertaken against them under General Crook
in 1866 which resulted in their being finally subdued in the summer of
1868. After their surrender, General Crook held a council on June 30,
1868 with the Indians whom he described "as the principal bands of
hostile Indians infesting the vicinity of Malheur river, Castle Rock,

Owyhee and Stein's mountains, under their principal Chief Wee-ah-we-W3:

and agreed that they return “to their own country" and establish their

H

h 615

..-m-u-no

headquarters in the vicinity of Castle Rock; The area.referred to by
General Crook:is in the vicinity of'the claimed land, with Castle Rock
being one of the northern.boundany markers of the Malheur Reservationo
On December 10, l868, Superintendent Huntington met in council
near Fort Harney with Chief'We-ahaweawa and six other lesser chiefs and
headmen of these bands of Snake or Piutes and there entered into the
Treaty of December 10, 1868. The treaty was signed by Huntington on
behalf of the United States and on behalf of the Indians by“We~y0u~we-wa,
Gsha~nee,'E-he-gant, Pen-ee, Chow-wat-na-ni, Oéwits and Tash—i-go, who
were designated in the treaty as “Chiefs and Headmen representing the
Snake or Shoshone Indians." As previously stated, the evidence shows
they were all northern Piutes. The treaty provided for a continuation
of peace, with the Indians agreeing toireside upon a reservation to be

thereafter assigned them and that another more complete treaty would

later be negotiated with them. This treaty was never ratified and no
other treaty was ever made with these bands of Piutes.

‘While the negotiation of the 1868 treaty as one of peace rather
than one of cession was in line with the 186k treaty instructions, the
evidence discloses that Superintendent Huntington.was fully aware of
the Indians‘ occupancy of land in.that area. In this connection his
report of December 22, 1868 to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on
the treaty and his recommendations for the proposed reservation con»
tain certain significant statements which are, in part, as follows:

The question now arises~—what disposition shall be made

of them? % % % First, by creating a reservation in their

own country %<% %. The arguments in favor of this course
are that it involves no great expense of removing them

 

and it will be more satisfactory to them than to remove

to some distant locality with which they are unacquainted.
The objections to it are that any Agency there must always
be enormously expensive owing to the great cost of transportation, and the climate being extremely cold is unfavorable to agriculture. % a a Second, by removing them

to some reservation already established. There is abundant
room at Klamath or Siletz. Klamath is open to the same
objection as the Harney Lake region * % % but if they are

removed there, they will be immediately upon the borders
of their own country and liable to:return to their old

haunts. (Underscoring supplied.)

Huntington recommended their removal to the Siletz on the coast of

 

dregon as he stated the distance would make it impossible for them to
escape and.return "to their own country." From the report it will be
seen.that Huntington.considered these bands of Snake or Piute Indians
‘with whom.he negotiated the treaty were occupying and claiming as "their
own.country," lands in the vicinity of Fort Harney which was in the

area where the Malheur Reservation was later established.

The primary object of the l8o8 treaty was to insure a continuing
peace, but its terms also show it was intended to obligate the Governent to later providing a permanent reservation for the bands of Piutes
parties to the treaty. No record of the treaty council is available_
but Superintendent Huntington‘s report that "the Snakes also agreed to
remove to and.reside upon such reservation as may be allotted" to them,
indicates that a.reservation for the treaty Indians was a subject discussed at the council. The minutes in evidence of a subsequent council
in 1859 also held at Fort Harney by Huntington‘s successor, Superintendent A. B. Meacham,'with'Ee-ahmwe-wah, Ewe-gan, Pon-ee and Ow-itz, four
of the Piute chiefs who had signed the 1868 treaty and the report by

Meacham.on the council, disclose, however, that the chiefs certainly

understood and believed when they signed the 1868 treaty that Huntington
had gomised them a reservation to be located in the Malheur Lalm-Malheur
River region which they claimed and considered was their home country.
According to the minutes of the 1869 council when Meacham produced the 1868 treaty and insisted its provisions obligated the chiefs
to remove to the Klamath Reservation which he observed was "near your
own country,“ the four chiefs acknowledged their signatures but despite
the demands of Meacham and Major Otis of the U. 5. Army who was present,
they refused to leave the 1‘~=Ia1he1n~ Lake-Malheur River area. Two other
Piute chiefs’, Ocheho and Chock-tote, who were not parties to the 1.868
treaty, were present at the council and Ocheho agreed to remove to the
IQ.amath Reservation and Chock-tote was then residing on the Klamath.
The evidence indicates, however, that neither of these chiefs ever
occupied or claimed the Malheur area as their original home country.
The bands of the Piute chiefs who were parties to the l868 treaty
and who refused to move to the Blamath Reservation apparently were perumitted to remain in the country around Harney and Malheur Lakes which
they claimed as their home. Meanwhile, Congress passed the Act of
March 3. l8?l (16 Stat. 566) prohibiting the making of further treaties
with Indian tribes. The evidence shows that Superintendent Meacham was
in Washington, D. C., at the time the Act was passed and there is not
much doubt but that it was principally these bands of Pintes Meacham
had in contemplation when upon his recommendation on March 8, 1871, the

southeast section of Oregon was withdrawn from the public domain by the

Executive Order of March lh, 1873., for the purpose of selecting a 85.138

I; 61

for a reservation for all non~reservation.Indians in eastern Oregon.

At that time they were practically the only bands of Piutes remaining
in southeast Oregon.who had not been established on a reservation and
Meacham was aware from the 1869 council that the chiefs understood they
had.been promised at the time of the 1868 treaty a reservation would'be

established for them in their home country.

Following the withdrawal of the large tract of land, T. B. Odeneal,
then Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon, was instructed.by the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs on July 6, 1872, to select a suitable
site for a reservation.for the "PiUtes or Snake Indians." In a report
to the Commissioner on August 22, 1872, Odeneal set forth the boundaries
for the proposed reservation to be located "on the headwaters of the
Na1heur:river" in southeast Oregon. The report was approved by the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the Secretary of the Interior and
by Executive Order of September 12, 1872, the lands were set apart as

a reservation "for the Snake or Piute Indians.“ The reservation was

‘modified by Executive Orders of May 15, 1875 and January 28, 1876, the
first order adding some land and the last order excluding part of the
land added andnredefining the reservation.

The defendant s ays that the boundaries of the Malheur Reservation
as fixed'by the Executive Order of 1872, or as subsequently modified,
were not selected.by the Government in the belief that the designated

area had been promised to any Indians by the 1868 unratified treaty nor

described a definable area exclusively occupied from time immemorial

by any tribe, band or group of Piute Indians. Instead, the defendant

h 619

insists the purpose and reason for creating the reservation was to

provide a suitable location.where all non-reservation Indians in southu
east Oregon and adjacent areas could be collected and controlled.

‘We do not believe that the evidence entirely sustains the argument

of the defendant. As previously shown, the Government agreed in the

1868 unratified treaty to provide a permanent reservation for the bands
of Snake or Piutes who were parties to that treaty and Superintendent
Huntington had reported at that time the Malheur area would be the most

acceptable site to those bands of Piutes because it was "in their_own

country.“ After the treaty, the chiefs of said bands continued to insist
the Malheur area.was their home country where they wanted to remain and
that Huntington had promised their reservation.would be established in
that area. It is also clear from the evidence that Government represenu
tatives and U. S. Army officers in southeast Oregon at that time who had

contact'with these bands of Piutes knew that said bands occupied and

~ claimed the lands in the Malheur area as a part of their homeland and

‘wanted them satisfied.with the location of the reservation.

In this connection the report of Major Elmer Otis of the U. S.
Army on April 15, 1872 (Finding 23) contains certain statements which
we think have a significant bearing upon the Indian occupancy of the

lands in the Malheur area. He was present at the 1869 Council with the

four Piute chiefs who signed the 1868 treaty and his contact with then:

dated from.l867. It was also his recommendation for the reservation

site which was adopted by the Government. Of the Snake or Piute bands

in southeast Oregon,IMajor Otis named Chief ”Wemahawa“s“ Cwealoumweawa

M 62C

was the principal chief signing the 1868 treaty) band of 500 to 800
roaming principally "on the headwaters of the Malheur river (where the
‘Malheur reservation was established) and Stein Mountain Country." He
recommended that the reservation be located somewhere in that area or
the country about'Warner or Harney Lakes, suggesting that as the country
‘was barren the reservation should be large to obtain sufficient land for

tillable purposes. He then stated:

Besides, this is a country which these Indians inhabited,
that they know, and where the majority desire to stay.
We-ah~wa's band in Council with the Superintendent of
Indian Affairs for Oregon, in the fall of 1869, which I
was present, premptorily declined.to remove from that
country, and I have no idea that they could be removed
‘without a strong force of troops involving a war.

~The statement of Superintendent Odeneal in his report on August 22, 1872,

‘to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on.the boundaries of the area

selected for the reservation "in the headwaters of the Malheur river"
that "this is the home of 'most‘ of the Snake Indians" is not without
significance. At that time the 1868 treaty bands were the principal

bands of Piutes in southeast Oregon who were not established on reser”vations.

‘We believe it is not unreasonable to infer from the evidene that
the action taken by the Government in selecting the Malheur area for
the reservation was at least partially in satisfaction of the promise
made in.the 1868 treaty, even though the treaty was never ratified,
since it was known.that the Piute chiefs who signed that treaty had
continuously insisted.they were promised a reservation in that area

which they claimed as their home and the Government appears to have

b 621

‘recognized the necessity of selecting an area acceptable to said'bands

of Piutes. It is true, of course, the Executive Order of 1872 established
the reservation "for the Snake or Piute Indians" on what was considered
to be public lands for use as a permanent home not only for the 1868
treaty bands of Piutes who claimed the area as their original home

but also for all non-reservation bands of non-treaty Piutes inhabiting
other areas in southeastern Oregon. However, the record indicates and

‘we have found that the tract of land “on the headwaters of the Malheur
river" was selected largely because it was known by Government officials
to be the original home of those bands of Snake or Piutes who were

parties to the 1868 unratified treaty and where they were willing to

live, coupled with the fact it was an area suitable for Indian reservation purposes. These bands under the leadership of their chiefs
‘We-youaweawa, Egan and Ow-its also went upon the reservation voluntarily
as soon as it was established while it was necessary for the Government
to persuade other non~treaty bands of Piutes inhabiting other areas

in southeast Oregon and adjacent areas in Idaho and Nevada to remove

to the reservation, and there were some such'bands who refused to leave

the territory they considered their original homes and so were never

on the reservation.

'With respect to the action of the majority of petitioners“ ancestors
on the Malheur Reservation in joining the hostile Bannocks in June, 1878;
and‘which resulted in their removal to Yakima, Washington, in January,

1379, the evidence discloses such action.was undoubtedly caused by their

dissatisfaction with the unsatisfactory conditions existing on the

reservation. ‘While not entirely excusable, yet it may be said.there

I was some justification for their course of action.when consideration is

given.to their semi-civilized status, the unsatisfactory conditions
existing on the reservation as reflected in the findings herein, and
their belief as expressed by Chief Egan that by fighting they might
induce the Government to give them more adequate supplies without trying
to make the Indians work for them as it did before they quit fighting

in 1868.

The Malheur Reservation.was reopened as an Indian reservation late
- L

in 1878 after the Bannock war and for two years the Government tried to
persuade the remaining bands of Piute Indians in southeast Oregon who
had formerly resided on the reservation or were entitled to reside there
but whose original homes had not been in the Malheur area, to go on the
reservation.and.make it their new home but they could not be induced to
occupy it. As for petitioners‘ ancestors who had been removed to Yakima,
the Government would never permit them to return although the majority
‘were never contented there and repeatedly requested permission to return
to their original home on the Malheur Reservation. This was the situation
with.respect to the Malheur Reservation.when.the Government discontinued
the Agency in.December, 1880, and informed the fiutes at Yakima the
reservation.had.been abandoned as an Indian reservation and they must
make Yakima.their permanent home. It is also significant that the
Piutes commenced stealing away from Yakima soon after their arrival and
over the years a substantial number eventually returned to their original

home area and settled near Burns, Oregon, located on the border of the

f0rmer Malheur reservation where they have continued to live to the

present time. One band of Piutes under Paddy Capp was permitted to

leave Yakima in 188k and settled on the Duck Valley Reservation located
on.the Idaho-Nevada State line where they or their descendants are now
living. The remaining band under Chief Oits also left Yakima late in

l88h and settled upon.the'Warm Spring Reservation in central Oregon
where they live at the present time. /,
After acareful study of the entire record now in this case, much
of which is set out in detail in the findings and opinion herein, it is
now our conclusion that the preponderance of the evidence establishes
that petitioners are descendants of the bands or tribe of Snake or Piute
Indians who were parties to the unratified treaty of December 10, 1868,
as did the Court of Claims (12; C. C15. 2143), and that at the time the
unratified treaty was made said tribe or bands held original Indian title
to and were exclusively occupying, using and claiming as their homeland
the area of land'where the Malheur Reservation was established, as set
forth in Finding No. 3, and that they continued to so occupy and use
said land until their removal to Yakima, Washington, in January_l879s
It is also:reasonably certain from the evidence that they were the same
Northern Piutes who were living in that area at least as early as 1826.
It is true that a small part of the land later contained.within
the Malheur Reservation was included in the areas ceded by the Klamath
and.Modocs and.the‘WollmPah~Pe tribes or bands of Indians, but the
record indicates that any use of the Malheur area by Indians other than

the bands who were parties to the l868 treaty was with the recognition

on their part that the land was the exclusive home of said Snake or PiUt¢

bandso

"we have next the question of the date these lands were taken by
the defendant. The petition alleges the petitioners were deprived of
their right of possession and occupancy of the lands on September 13,
1882, when substantially all the Malheur Reservation lands were restored
to the public domain by Executive Order, but in.their requested findings
the petitioners suggest two other dates to be considered, namely, in
January, 1879, when.they were removed.to the'Yakima Reservation in
‘Washington or December 23, 1880, the date the Malheur agency was discontinued by direction of the President. The evidence shows that
petitioners were actually deprived of their Indian possessory and occupancy rights or title to these lands in January, 1879, when they were
removed from.their lands and placed on the Yakima Reservation. ‘Whether
defendant intended the removal of petitioners‘ ancestors from their
lands was to be permanent or not, it was made permanent in fact, since
petitionrs were never permitted to return to the lands and they were

thereafter restored to the public domain and opened for public sale

and settlement, without the consent or payment of compensation to petitioners. The continuous and.permanent exclusion of petitioners‘ ancestors

8 from.their lands necessarily relates back to the date of their removal

therefrom. Shoshone Tribe v, United States, 299 U.S. h76; 81 L. ed. 360.

 

So, it is our conclusion that the original Indian title was held and
owned by petitioners‘ ancestors to the lands as specifically descrited

in Finding 3 and.was terminated and taken by the defendant in January,
1879 .

1: 625

.'.-.v.'v;_'-I

 

Erom the findings of fact made herein, it is the opinion of this

lcommission that the petitioners, as the descendants and representing all

descendants of the bands or tribe of Snake or Piute Indians whose chiefs

signed the December 10, 1868 unratified treaty, are entitled to recover

the value of the land included in the tract as described in Finding No. 3.

herein, as of January, 1879, less offsets and credits as the defendant
may be entitled to submit at a later hearing in this case. Otoe and
'Missouria Tribe of Indians v. United States, 131 C. Cls. 585 (Cert. den.
350 Uoso 8h8),

In.view of our determination of petitioners’ right to recover under
Court I in.the petition, and in accordance with the opinion of the Court
of Claims with respect to Count II as previously noted herein, the cause

of action in Count II should be dismissed.

wm, M; Holt
Associate Commissioner

‘we concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Ehief éommissioner

Louis J. 0’Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

