Petitioner,
vs. Docket No. 126

THE UEITED STATES OF AEERICA,

\..../\../'\...-?‘\...a’\...a/‘-_../\._.J'\...r‘\...../

Defendant.

Decided: July 30, 1959

FINDINGS gr FACT

%The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

"ll. ihe Osage Nation of Indians, petitioner, is the successor to
the Great Osage and Little Osage Tribes oi American Indians, and is a
trihal organization recognized hy the Secretary of the Interior as C
hating anthority to retresent the Osage Indians. The Commission finds,

._u ..

;as it hasiin a prerious action; that the petitioner, an identifiable;i

. um" .- 4..

gronp of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the

United States, is entitled to maintain this suit filed under the proiiisions of the indian Claims Commission Act of Angnst l}; 19u6 (60 Stat.

_ W __ __ . ......,.- ......-. .q‘..\gr'w ‘w.- 10h9)7§EThe%osagé é tied bf Indians v, The United states ofgimericagr

   

.4

1 Ind; Cl. Comm. h3.i o  V ’
2. The Osage Tribe of Indians having sold their lands in Kansas,

there was transferred from the proceeds of such sale to the credit of

the Cherokee Ration the sum of $1,099,l37.hl in payment for a tract of

the Cherokee’s land (Act of March 3, 1873, 17 Stat. 530). On June lh,

“\

D T Q Q 0 o O 0 0 ' D
_}93g,_the Cherokee nation ceeded the tract to the United States in

c-"1"‘.£.‘n:

comprises the present Osage County in the State of Oklahoma.

3. The Osage Indians occupied the acquired lands in common until
they were allotted to the members of the tribe pursuant to the Act of
June Q8, l906 (3h tat, 539). That Act provided, among other things,
that the surface of all of the land belonging to the Osage Tribe of
Indians in Oklahoma Territory, with the exception of an insignificant
amount, should be divided among the members of the tribe; that each
member should designate 160 acres of his or her allotment as a homestead, the same to be inalienable and non-taxable until otherwise
provided by act of Congress; that by a process of selection by the

Indians each Indian'was to select h8O acres of land, and the balance

 

of the land was to be divided among the Indians by a commission; that

the lands of each Indian, other than his homestead, should be inalienable
for 25 years and non-taxable for 3 years, except that an adult Indian
might, upon petition and proper showing, be granted by the Secretary of
the Interior a certificate of competency, in which case his lands, other
than his homestead, should become taxable and alienable by him; and that
“nothing herein shall authorize the sale of the oil, gas, coal, or other
minerals covered by said lands, said minerals being reserved to the use
of the tribe for a period of twenty-five years, and the royalty to be
paid to said tribe as hereinafter provided: and provided further,'That

the oil, gas, coal, and other minerals upon said allotted lands shall

Become the property of the individual owner of said land at the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86k 866

expiration of said twenty-five years, unless otherwise provided for by
Act of Congress." (Sec. 2, Seventh)

Pursuant to the Act, the tract was allotted to the members of the
Osage Tribe, which then numbered 2,229, with each person receiving an

average of about 657 acres.

h. ‘with respect to the oil, gas, coal and other minerals which

were reserved to the use of the tribe the Act further provided:

SEC. 3. That the oil, gas, coal, or other minerals
covered by the lands for the selection and division of
which provision is herein made are hereby reserved to
the Osage tribe for a period of’tmentysfive years from
and after the eighth day of April, nineteen hundred and
six; and leases for all oil, gas, and other minerals,
covered by selections and division of land herein pro- vided for, may be made by the Osage tribe of Indians
through-its tribal council, and with the approval of
the Secretary of the Interior, and under such rules and
regulations as he may prescribezi Provided, That the
royalties to be paid to the Osage tirbe under any mineral
lease so made shall be determined by the President of the
United States: And provided further, That no mining of
for prospecting for any of said mineral or minerals shall
be permitted on the homestead selections herein provided
for without the written consent of the Secretary of the

p Interior:, Provided, however, That nothing_herein conO tained shall be construed as affecting any valid existing
 ,lease or contract. a

SEC. hm That all funds belonging to the Osage tribe,
and all moneys due, and all moneys that may become due,
or may hereafter be found to be due the said Osage tribe
of Indians, shall be held in trust by the United States
for the period of twentyafive years from and after the

first day of January, nineteen hundred and seven, except
as herein provided: 2

First. That all the funds of the Osage tribe of Indians,
and all the moneys now due or that may hereafter be found
to oe due to the said Osage tribe of Indians, and all moneys
that may be received from the sale of their lands in Kansas
under existing aws, and all moneys found to be due to said
Osage tribe of Indians on claims against the United States,

 

\..J 3

'5' "N
1.2-‘:
'%
D

{D
ml
{)1
U)

be“; of the said Osag. tribe on 1- _ .
vision among the members of said tribe as shown by then
autnorized roll of membership as herein provided for, or to
their heirs as hereinafter provided, said credit to draw
"rived by law; and the interest that may

L

N.1
-La.‘-'8

‘no

interest as now autholis *
accrue thereon shall be paid quarterly to the members entitled
thereto, except in the case of minors, in which case the in~
ter st shall be paid quarterly to the parents until said minor
arrives at the age of twenty-one years: ‘fzofided, That if the
Commissioner of'Indian.Affairs becomes satisfied that the said
interest of any minor is being misased or squandered he may
withhold the payment of such interest: And provided further,
That said interest of minors whose paresE§“EE§"a§EE§§EE”EEEi1
be paid to their legal guardians, as above provided..

 

Second. That the royalty received from oil, gas, coal,

and other mineral leases upon the lands for which selection

and division are herein provided, and all moneys received
from.the sale of town lots, together wit the builrings
-thcreon,.and all moneys received from the sale of the three
reger ations of one hundred and sixty acres each heretofore
reserved for dwelling purposes, and all moneys received

from grazing lands, shall be placed in the Treasury of the
United States to the credit of the members of the Osage tribe

of Indians as.other moneys of said tribe are to be deposits‘
under the protisions of this Act, and the same shall be distributed to the individual members of said Osage tribe according
to the roll provided for herein, in the manner and at the same
time that payments are made of interest on other moneys held in
trust for Osages by the United States, except as herein provided.

. Third. There shall be set aside from the royalties re.rceivcd from oil and gas not to exceed fi'ty thousand dollars
per annum for ten years from the first day of Jenn , nineteen
phundred and seven, for the support of the Osage Boarding School
and for other schools on the Osage Indian Reservation conducted
or to be established and conducted for the education of Osage

children.

Fourth. There shall be set aside and reserved from the
royalties received fron.oil, gas, coal, or other mineral ‘
leases, and moneys received from the sale of town lots, and V
rents from grazing lands not to exceed thirty thousand dollars
per annum for agency purposes and an emergency fund for the
Osage tribe, which shall be paid out from time to time, upon
the requisition of the Osage tribal council, with the approval
of the Secretary of the Interior. S

Ind. Cl. Com. Bob S 858

SEC. 5. That at the expiration of the_period of twentyfive years from and after the first day of January, nineteen
hundred and seven, the lands, mineral interests, and moneys,
herein provided for and held in trust by the United States
shall be the absolute property of the individual members of
the Osage tribe, according to the roll herein provided for,
or their heirs, as herein provided, and deeds to said lands
shall be issued to said members, or to their heirs, as herein
provided, and said moneys shall be distributed to said members,
or to their heirs, as herein provided and said members shall

have full control of said lands, moneys, and mineral interests,
except as hereinbefore provided. (3h Stat. 539, Sh3-Sh5)

S} Thereafter leases for oil and gas purposes were made by the Osage
Tribe, through its Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of
the Interior. Producing oil and gas wells were drilled on the Osage lands
and royalties were paid to the members of the tribe., The headright shares

for the fiscal years 1913 through 1920 were:

June 30, 1913 s 320.1L
“ " 191h   799.88
 " 9 1915   ,272.68t
." " 1916 T 39h.93
" " 1917 2,719.96
" 9 1918 3,672.33
9   H 1919   3,920.00
-“ " 1920 8,090.00 p(Pet. ex. 12, p. 165)

, Thus in l92O a typical Osage family, consisting of an allotted hustied aud_uife and three allotted children, received an income from
héadright shares in excess of $h0,000.00. The.Report of the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs for the Fiscal Year ended June 30, 1920 stated,: .’ffIn
the northeast corner of Oklahoma is the Osage Indian Reservation; be1°n8in8 to about 2,100 Indians, who have been oalled the richest people,
Per CaPita, in the world. This section of the great State of Oklahoma
is one of the wonderful oil-producing fields in the country, and its

1 . ‘ "" ' '1"; 4* Y1 err: "
we 13 d3l1Y'pour g1cat nbaluh upon thes- Indians" (Def. Ex. 8, pt_hl).

C

3'-.
._‘v-:-‘I;

 

‘ .
-.l‘.‘h .

‘'‘*'-~-.
:4
4
L
C
r
L
E
‘N
KT
(n
0

Under the provisions of the 1906 act the total income credited

to the account of each member was required to be paid to him quarterly.

1

G

In a field report of the Osage auency, completed April 30, 1953, en~

Lne Osage People and The

‘J
w

Trust Property,” the effect of this
substantial income from oil and gas royalties was reported to have led
during the 1917 to 1920 perioc “to extravagance and reckless spending.
Many tribesmen became deeply involved in debt despite their substantial
incomes; guardianships under the County Court grew into big business;
and merchants and professional people took advantage of the Indian’s
ignorance" (Pet. Exe 7, ppc 16, 17).

6. (a) In 1920 a bill, S. b039, was introduced by Senator Robert
L. Owen; of Oklahoma, to amend section 3 of the 1906 Act. On March 3,
1920, an identical bill, H.R. 12886, was introdnced in the House of
Representatives. Both bills provided, among other thingsy that the
minerals coyered by the lands of the Osage be reserved to the Osage
Tribe for an additional 25 years from the original expiration date,
which.sould have been 1931, and further, that the State of Oklahoma be
authorized to levy a gross prodoction tax, not to exceed 3%; upon all
oil and gas belonging to oil and gas lessees produced in Osage County and
that the Secretary of the Interior be authorized and directed to pay
to Osage County 3% of the Osage Tribe's royalties, such money to be
used only for the construction and maintenance of roads and bridges in
Osage County.

(5) There followed lengthy hearings by both Senate and House

Committees on the proposed legislationc The Senate Committee on Indian

7 Ind. oi. Cor... +861; 870

Affairs submitted its report No. 70h on January l8, l92l. In that report,
which recommended passage of the bill virtually as introduced, the Comnittee stated that the extension of the mineral reservation period was
required in order that the Osage Tribe might have time to realize the
values of the oil under the lands, and to assure that each member of the
Tribe would receive his equal share. The Indians had expressed their
approval of the bill, and its passage had been recommended by the Indian
Office and the Secretary of the Interior.

The Senate Committee further reported that, since the original Act
of 1906 was passed before Oklahoma became a state, no provisions had
been made for the payment of taxes on the oil produced in the territory;
accordingly, the proposed bill included provisions permitting the State
to impose gross production tax of not more than 3% on the lessees‘ production and a payment oi 3% of theroyalties received by the Osage Tribe
to be used by Osage County only for the construction and maintenance of
roads and bridges therein. I

Théghfcvisions of the bill, the Senate Committeeconcluded,'nould
5¢7V¢ ihé better interests of the Osages, the oil and gas lessees, the
Suaté of Oklahoma and the public generally'(Def; Ex. 6, p. 3); é_

(C) The House Committee on Indian Affairs in its Reports l2?8 and
i377 T9Commended several important amendments to the bill. .A.recommended

§€?t'.".'

$103 was added to the bill which was designed to curb egtravagant

”3"“di“3 b3'lindting payments to Osages who did not have certificates
f '‘'’’‘‘| o o . .

0‘ °°“9“t°“CY and providing that the surplus income should_be invested

under the Superfision of the Secretary of the Interior forgthe benefit

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86:;

.94.
O..Lu

in

ae individual Osage.

In explaining the necessity for this sectio

the Committee wrote:

"Section h: In the hearings it was disclosed that, during
the past few years, the Osage Tribe has been receiving what
seemed to the committee fabulous sums of money;-far beyond
their requirements and beyond the desire of some of them-and so your committee has provided in this section a provision for the care and the responsibility of these Indians, and
the prospects are that the amount which would be received by
them under the present law would greatly increase, and so the
committee has thought it wise to prescribe methods for the
benefit of these Indians, and yet leaving them, it is believed
in the best judgment of the committee, a sufficient amount of_
money to properly care for their families and educate their
children. During the present fiscal year each of these 0sages-some 2,100 in number--will receive not less than $10,000 cash,
in quarterly payments.

It was disclosed that there were families, including asi

.many as seven people, each one of whom drew the amount above

mentioned, and the parent has the right of the disposal of
all this money. Your committee, after careful consideration,
has presented a section which will provide for the impounding

. of a large amount of these funds for the future benefit of

these people, particularly the minors. There is a provision

“in this bill which will automatically make these children

citizens, and at the time they will come into possession of

,_the funds which have been impounded for them and credited to
-their individual accounts.

It has also been provided that any of these Indians uho
are found competent, without regard to their quantum of
Indian blood, shall be declared, and in that event they wouldr

come into possession of any funds which had been so impounded.t

Your committee found that a very large portion.of the

money which is being paid to these Indians quarterly is being
wasted in riotous living, and much of it is being taken away
from the Indians by unscrupulous persons. In fact, it seemed
to the committee that the manner in which this matter is being
at present handled is almost criminal.“ (Def. Ex. b, p. 2)

The House Committee also amended the taxation provision of the

bill. ‘The Report stated:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 852 7 ' 872

"Section 5 deals with taxation. It will be noted that

it is provided that the Osage Tribe shall be taxed, beginning
with the passage of this act, as are all other citizens of
Oklahoma under the tax laws of that State. And it will also
be noted that the Secreta.ry of the Interior is authorized

and directed to pay to Osage County, Okla. , an additional
sum, equal to l per cent of the amount received by the Osage
Tribe of Indians from royalties from the production of oil
andgasw, which sum shall be used by said county only for the

construction and maintenance of roads and bridges therein.

It is believed that this provision, if properly applied, will
enhance the value of all Osage property, on the principle that
good roads and bridges enhance the value of property in every
other section of the country; and, since there is plenty of
money for ‘the purpose, it certainly will be a great advantage
to the Osages themselves as well as to those who must carry

on business relations with them. " (Def. Ex. 11, pp. 2, 3)

7. The Osage Tribe agreed to the taxation provisions as provided

in the original bill, i.e., that 3% of the oil and "as *‘c~""*“'"' cs """""""

.....-... g..... -...,,................ ..............
be paid to Osage County to be used exclusively f or the construction and
inaintenance of roach and bridges therein. In a supplemental‘, statement
by the Osage Tribal Council in support of  proposed legislation the
House Subcommittee of the Committee on Indian Aiifairs wasadvised:

"we, now desire to" say that the bill introduced by a
Representative Howard meets with our approval . and with

th? .3PPI‘_0V3l __c,>:f,  Osage people generally.“ :5    “The bill provides for a 3 per cent gross production tax
on the oil and gas produced from Osage lands, which belongs
to the oil and gas lessees. It is our understanding that
the oil and gas lessees have consented to this provision _ _._
of the bill and are giving the bill their support. The bill.
also provides that the Secretary of the Interior shall; pay to
Osage County, Okla. , an amount equal to 3 per cent of the ‘
royalties received by the Osage Tribe oflndians from oil
and gas, this money to be used by the county inroad and bridge
construction and maintenance. This is satisfactory to_,us and
to the tribe. You will note there is a distinction between
the 3 per cent gross production tax to be paid by the lessees
and the 3 per centof the Osages' money, which is to be "paid ‘
to Osage County, in this: All of the money to be paid by the_Osages goes to the construction and raintenance of roads and

C"

u  \"5,.c

.3.

7 Ind. Cl.

 

941,

\J\-in.

Com.

bridges in Osage County, while the money paid by the lessees
would, under the law, go to the State, and oneuthird of the
same would be paid back to Osage County, and one—half of that
one-third would be used in the county for road and bridge
construction and maintenance, and one-half to be used for the
benefit of the common schools of the county. *We feel that part
that the Osages pay ought to be used exclusively in the county,
as provided in the bill. .At no place in the State do the Indians
pay any tax on the royalty received by them from.restricted
lands, and, if this bill should pass, the Osages would be the
only Indians in the State that would be giving up any part of
their funds for the benefit of the public generally;

"we also desire to call your attention to the fact that
Osage County is a very sparsely settled county, having, perhaps,
the smallest population in proportion to its area of any county
in the State--especially the rural population. g . . “Your attention is also called to the fact that perhaps
as much or more very heavy truck hauling has been.over the
very bad, rough roads in Osage County than in any other county.
This heavy hauling is absolutely necessary for the development

of oil and gas production in the countyu Consequently a very
much larger proportion of ro:_a_d and brddae ‘fhmds are “en-°='°'"'"'

vacuum. -11 ‘W1 jhékhi $11 $5 Qtivffiw

in Osage County, in order to enable the development to proceed, than is necessary in any other county in the State, in
proportion to the population and taxable wealth of the county.
‘we feel that inasmuch as the operators are willing to give

up to 3 per cent of the gross production of their oil and L
gas, that we ought to be willing to give up 3 per cent of our
part of the oil and gas production for the purpose of bui1ding~
and maintaining roads. In view of the fagts stated above,W"
‘which we think can not be contradicted successfully, we-feel
that we are not asking anything unreasonable or unfair, when
we do ask that provision be made that all of the money paid
by the tribe be used for the purpose of road and bridge construction and maintenance. It certainly is to the public,
‘benefit that it be so used, and it will enable the county and
State to secure just that much more Federal aid, than would
be secured were this money to be diverted to other channels.
In.addition to aiding in the oil and gas development of the
county, it would be of great benefit to the rural population
in the county, which is very scattered, because good roads
‘will add to the land values in the county, and will bring
farmers upon lands where no farmers now live” (Def}lEx. 18,

p. L08, uo9).

..-.. —_ | 

73

n7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h A - _ 87h

8. The subsequent amendment in the taxation section to subject
‘the Osages to the sdme State tax on their oil royalties as was paid
by all other citizens of Oklahoma and the addition of a 1% payment
"from the royalties for construction and maintenance of roads and bridges
in Osage County, was not submitted to the Indians for comment: iNo formal
protest was filed with respect to the proposed amendment although J.

George'Wright, Osage Agent, stated that:

“The Principal Chief, together with several members of
the Osage Council, Mr. Leahy and myself, were in.Washington
at the time this legislation was adopted by the House Indian
Committee, and all objected and protested against such provision informally'to different members of the Committee,
nd that there was en" ‘orr"‘

although I do not underggg
hearing on the subject.“ \Pet. Ex. 16, Letter from Assistant

Secretary of the Interior to the Attorney General, dated
Feb. 1?, l9h2)_ g _ C “

---.4‘, an hi-p -StatuaImmediately after the passage of the.Act, on April 18, l92l, the
‘Osage Tribe.through its Tribal Council adopted a formal protest against %
the imposition and collection of the 1% payment. V A

§. lhe original bill SQ hO39 passed the Senate on January 26, 1921.

lit passed the House of Representatives on March 1; l9él, with amendments,

including one one mentioned above which included the 1%  A on  
the same date the Senate concurred in the House amendment to the bill

and passed it. It was approved by the President and became_the.5ct of
March 3, 1921 (kl Stat. 21h9).-/ ; -_::

nee 10; In accordance with the provisions of the Act the;§tate%o£

Oklahoma collected a gross production tax upon all oil and gas produced

17 The reservation of the mineral rig.ts for the use of the Tribe

;;_has been.£urther extended until l983 (52 Stat. lO3h).

., Q.
‘R

...w-.'—.‘

7 Ind. C1. Com. 86b 87;

in Osage County. Frou the date of passage of the Act of March 3, l921,
until April 1, l935, the rate of said tax was 3% and since that date
the rate has been 5%.

During the first period when the tax was at a 3% rate, the law
provided that one-third of the sum collected should be returned to the
county to be used one half for the county school fund and one half for
the county road and bridge fund. The April 1, 1935, amendment reduced

the county's share to two tenths of the proceeds, to be divided equally

between the county highway construction and maintenance fund and the
maintenance of schools fund.

11. rThe Secretary of the Interior paid to Osage County 1% of the

Osage Tribe's royalties until that provision of section 5 of the 1921

 

Act was removed by the joint resolution of April 25, l9hO (Eh Stat. 168).
_ Duringthatperiod the sum of $1,092,338.11 was paid to Osage County,
nhich sum is the item in controversy in this action. The entire amount
‘was used by Osage County for the building and maintenance of roads and
bridges therein, as specified by the Act.
l¢\ furing the period from 1906-1921 the oil and gas production of
Osage County was not subject to any state taxation because the minerals

had been held to be under the protection of the Federal Government and

hence not taxable by the State. Indian Territory Illuminating Oil Co.

 

 

5&9.

v. State of Oklahoma, 2L0 U. s. 522; Large 0:11 co. v. Howard, 21.8 U. s.

13. In 1920 the census figures indicate that the Indian population

of Osage County was l,208 out of a total population of 36,536 (Pet. Ex; 15}.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h - ' 875

However, the Csages owned a much greater proportion of the land in

Osage County. In a statement filed at the hearings conducted by the
House subcommittee, Mr. T. J. Leahy stated that two—thirds of the Osage
County lands were still held by the original Indian allottees (Def. Ex.
l8, p. h28). During the course of the Senate Committee hearings,

arthur Bonnecastle, principal chief of the Osage Tribe, told the Coma
mittee that about hoo,ooo acres of the allotted land had been sold (out
of the approximately l;h70,000 originally allotted). Of course this '
does not mean that all of the approximately hO0,000 acres sold passed to
non-Indians since other Indians were among the purchasers of the hO0,000.
“acres (Def. Ex. ll, p. 25). In its reply brief petitioner stated that
75% of the land.was owned by individuals who were of Osage ancestry (Pet.
heply'Brief, p. 31).” The Commission finds that the Osages were the

‘principal land owners in Osage County owning, at the time oi the enact's}ment of the 1921 Act, about 65 to 75 per cent of the 1ands.i The Osage

Tribe also, at that time, owned the mineral rights to all of the land

g in Osage County.

i""ih.“ The Commission finds that the sxpshoituto or $1,o9é.338.71

is over a nineteen year period for building and maintenance of roads and

bridges in Osage County was a distinct advantage to the residents and

P

sprbperty owners of Osage County and was beneficial to the continhing

development of the oil and gas produetion in Osage Countyx_,These benefits inured to the Osage Tribe and the members thereof. Q ii*.

13. The Commission finds that the payment of $1,092,338.71, reP?esenting 1% of the oil and gas royalties of the Osage Tribe. as provided

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h C 877

by section 5 of the Act of March 3, 1921, did not violate the standards
of fair and honorable dealings between defendant and the petitioner and,
therefore, petitioner is not entitled to recover said sum under the
provisions of Section 2, Clause (5) of the Indian Claims Commission

Act.

Edgar E.'Witt
Chief Commissioner

wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

 

