I 1 Ind. c1. Com. 408 _ 408

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE EASTERN (EMIGRANT)
CHEROKEE INDIANS, on the
relation of Jesse 3. Milan,

James Pickup, et al..

Plaintiffs.
vs} Docket N0. M2

THE UNITED STATES or innicn.

Defendant.

Appearances:
Wilfred Hearn, with when were
George E. Norvell, Earl Boyd Pierce,
Dennis Bushyhead and Houston B. Tehee,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Jules H. Sigal and Ralph An Barney,
with whom was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech,

Attorneys for Defendant.

am: 29 1950
rxmnrros or FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact in the aboveentitled cause:
1. The Cherokee Nation or Tribe of Indians were originally

located in parts of the States of Georgia, Alabama, Tennessee and The

Carolinas, and early in the nineteenth century a part of this tribe,
which.became known as the Testern or Old settler Cherokees, moved west

of the uississippi river and were finally located in an area in what

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 408 ' 499

-2is now the State of Oklahoma, Some time after the settlement of the
Western Cherokees in Ckiahoma, a large part of the Cherokees who remained east of the Mississippi river decided to move west of that

river and join the Sestern Cherokees. These Cherokees became known
as the Eastern or Emigrant Cherokees. .

2, The so~cal1ed.Eastern Cherokees, about the time of their
emigrations to the west, ceded all of their lands east of the Mississippi to the United States for a consideration of $5,600,000 (treaties
of December 29, 1835, 7 Stat. M78, and March 1, 1836, 7 stet. has),

In the treaty of 1835, the United States ceded to the Cherokee Nation
800,000 acres of land and the Eastern Cherokees located on this land
and in the territory of the Western Cherokees.

3. The consideration paid the Cherokee Nation for the cession

of the lands lying east of the Mississippi river, namely, the sum of

$5,600,000, was handled by the United States, and after those Indians,

that is that part of the Cherokee Nation known as the Eastern Cherokees,
located in the west, a dispute arose between the Eastern Cherokees, or
the Cherokee Nation, and the United States as to the administration of
the treaty funds by the United States. This dispute lasted for many
years, and finally by the Act of July 1, 1902. 32 stet. 726, the

Indians were-permitted to bring suit in the Court of Claims against

the United States, The pertinent part of this Act reads as follows:

“Jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon the Court
of Claims to examine, consider, and adjudicate, with

a right of appeal to the Supreme Court of the Uhited
States by any party in interest feeling aggrieved at the

 ...,.......ea....'...;..:-as---—'-'-’-1’-6'

410
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 408

.....3..

decision of the Court of Claims, any claim which

the Cherokee tribe, or any band thereof, arising
under treaty stipulations, may have against the
United States, upon which suit shall be instituted
within two years after the approval of this act;

and also to examine, consider, and adjudicate any
claim which the United States may have against said
tribe, or any band thereof. The institution, prose»
cution, or defense, as the case may be, on the part
of the tribe or any band, of any such suit, shall be
through attorneys employed and to be compensated in
the manner prescribed in sections tventy—one hundred
and three to twenty~one hundred and six, both inclusive, of the Revised Statutes of the United States,
the tribe acting through its principal chief in the
employment of such attorneys, and the band acting
through a committee recognized by the Secretary of
the Interior.“

seia Act was amended by the Act of March 3, 1903, 32 Stat. 996, the
amendment reading as follows:

"Section sixty—eight of the act of Congress

entitled ‘An act to provide for the allotment of the
lands of the Cherokee Nation, for the disposition of

town sites therein and for other purposes,‘ approved

July first, nineteen hundred and two, shall be so
construed as to give the Eastern Cherokees, so called,
including those in the Cherokee Nation and those who
remained east of the Mississippi River, acting together
or as two bodies, as they may_be advised, the status

of a band or bands, as the case may be, for all the purposes of said section: Provided, That the prosecution

of such suit on the part of the Eastern Cherokees shall
be through attorneys employed by their proper author~
ities, their compensation for expenses and services
rendered in relation to such claim to be fixed by the
Court of Claims upon the termination of such suit: and
said section shall be further so construed as to require
that both the Cherokee Nation and said Eastern Cherokees,
so called, shall be made parties to any suit which may

be instituted against the United States under said sec~
tion upon the claim mentioned in House of Representatives
Executive Document Eumbered Three hundred and nine of the
second session of the Fifty~seventh Congress: and if said
claim shall be sustained in whole or in part, the Court
of Claims, subject to the right of appeal named in said
section, shall be authorized to render a judgment in

1 Ind. c1. conn. 408

411

-Mfavor of the rightful claimant, and also to determine,
as between the different claimants, to when the judgment so rendered equitably belongs, either wholly or
in part, and shall be required to determine whether,

for the purpose of participating in said claim, the
Cherokee Indians who-remained east of the Mississippi
River constitute a part of the Cherokee Nation or of
the Eastern Cherokees, so called, as the case may he."

9. Pursuant to the jurisdictional acts set forth in the last
preceding finding, The Cherokee Nation, in Case No. 23,199, The Eastern
Cherokees, in Case No. 23.21% and The Eastern or Emigrant Cherokees, in’
Case No. 23,212, brought separate actions against the United States.
These cases were consolidated and tried, with the result that on May 18,
1905. the Court of Claims nade and entered its decree, which, among
other things, awarded the Cherokee Nation, for the benefit of the Eastern
Cherokees, the sun of $l,lll,28H,70, with interest thereon from June 12,
1838, amounting in all to the sum of $5,098,361.08 (ho Ct. Cls. 363-365).
This decree provided that from the amount awarded there should be deducted the attorneys’ fees fired by the court, of the attorneys representing the Indians, and the costs and expenses incident to ascertainn
ing and identifying the persons entitled to the judgment. It was also

decreed that said judgment be distributed directLy to the Eastern

Cherokees. By the Act of June 30, 1906, 3H Stat, 63M, 66%, and March U,
1909. 35 Stat. 907, 938, the Congress appropriated the money with which
to pay said award of the court, including the interest thereon to the
daté of payment of the sum.

5. The decree of May 18, 1905, was modified.by a decree of said

court, dated May 28, 1906 (Def. Ex. 1), by which the court fixed the

11 Ind. c1. Comm. 403 412

-5amount of attorneys‘ fees to be paid to counsel for the Eastern
Cherokees, and directed that the Secretary of the Interior prepare

.a list or roll of the Eastern Cherokees entitled to share in the

distribution of the judgment fund,

' 16. Pursuant to the decree of May 28, 1906, the court awarded the
attorneys for the Eastern Cherokees the sun of $7u0,555eM2 as conpenv
sation for their services, and this amount was deducted from the
judgment fund, and on November 3, 1906, the officers of the Treasury
Department of the United States paid to the attorneys for the Cherokee
Nation, out of the judgment fund, for their services in said cause,
the sum of $1us,2u5.15,

7. In a.proceeding in said cause Nee 23,21M, the Eastern Cherokees asked the Court of Claims to construe its decree respecting the
right and authority of the Secretary of the Interior, or of the
Treasury Department, to apply a.part of the award made by the decree
iof may 18, 1905, to the payment of fees for the attorneys of the

_ Cherokee Nation, and.that court, on January 17, 1910, held that said
payment to the attorneys for the Cherokee Nation was proper, and dismissed said proceedings; that at the hearing on the question so raised
by the Eastern Cherokees, there were represented the United States,
the Cherokee Nation, and the Eastern Cherokees.‘ (See The Eastern
Cherokees v. The United States, M5 Ct. C15. ion).

8. In the year 1907, a petition in behalf of certain named

members of the Eastern Cherokee group, and in behalf of all other

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 408

413

-6Cherokees who may desire to join with then, was filed in said cause
No. 23.21%, in which petition they asked the Court of Claims to
modify its decrees by directing that the judgment fund be distributed
by and under the supervision of the court rather than the Secretary C
of the Interior. This arrangement was approved by the Secretary of
the Interior and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and on April 29.
1907, the court entered its order vacating the part of the previous
orders requiring the Secretary of the Interior to make distribution
of the judgment fund, and retained jurisdiction of the distribution
of the fund, and appointed one Guion Miller, Special Commissioner to
prepare a roll of the persons entitled under conditions of the decrees
and orders of said court to share as_hastern Cherokees in said fund.
That said Special Commissioner, in the performance of his duties,
expended the sum of $103,7M9.7h, which sum was deducted from the judg—
ment fund, with the approval of the Court of Claims. That said sun
was expended for the costs and expenses of determining the persons
entitled to share in the per capita distribution of the judgment fund.
9. That after deducting the attorneys’ fees and the expenses of
distributing said fund, there was available for per capita distribution to the Eastern Cherokees the sum of $U,lO5,8lO.77, which sum was

distributed.in accordance with the orders of said Court of Claims. The

Court of Claims decided that the Eastern Cherokees were communal ownersof said fund, (See 1:0 Ct. 0155. 327). and by its order of April 29,

1907, directed the per capita distribution thereof.

Dated this 28th day of December, 1950.

