EPFOPE 'I'r3L‘ IFIJIAE-F CL!i_.T.?-SS C C?-it-EISSI 03%

’i’T:vE'.*:'3 Lf"‘='e.-'.";E,‘P..  D'OI-HZZLLE OP.
KALISPEL 'IPxl?E OP IIEJIANS,

1'
Petitioner,
V.

Decmt No. 9h

THE UNITED smsrrs or AMEIRICA,

~..._/-...-ix.../\....aP--.-"~...#'~...I'~—»4"--o-"-H’

Defendant .

Decided: June 9, 1958

Appearances:

John 1=~.T. Cragun, Ralph G. Wiggenhorzi,
Kenneth R. L. Simmons, Donald C. Gormley,
Leonard S. Strahan, Bruce L. Beatty,
Attorneys 2‘? or Petitioner.

7,1,,“ 1'3 -_._- 4.1.. _.1..-...- .'.-...—

-—'«...-........'. —¢ --n.4..§......a..'g L,g.La.., i'u..:..u;.L Iu.'nJ.i:.i. Vicib

MI‘. Assistant Attorney. General
Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys 1‘ or Defendant.

Q..''T '3 -2-- .--.o1=rN1oN 93 __}_=*_ commission

O‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this action was duly filed with the Commission by
the Lower Pend d‘Orei_'Lle or Kalispel Tribe of Indians. Petitioner euegea
therein that prior to, and on or about the year 1890, the United States
wrongfully and forcibly, seized and took from the petitioner certain
lands described in the petition, with full knot-zledge that the lands were
the promrty of, and exclusively held, owned. and possessed  petitioner.

Petitioner farther "lleged that no comideration was ever paid to, or

1

received by, said petitioner for the lands so taxen (Petition, page 2}.

The petition was amended to more fully describe the lands claimed by
petitioner and such description was again amended to eliminate two small
areas in the southeastern portion of the claimed tract following the
filing of a disclaimer to said small areas (see Finding IS).

Defendant concedes that petitioner is an organized group of Indians
presently residing upon the Kalispel Indian Reservation in the State of
‘Washington and its corporate charter under the name of Kalispel Indian
Community Reservation, dated.Hay 28, 1938, has been.recognized and approved by the Secretary of the Interior (Def. Req. Fdg. No. l). Defendant contends, however, that petitionr represents only the Lower Kalispel

Indians as distinguished from the Upper Kalispel Indians (the distinction

---—-—-. ‘. JV __ 0 ‘I _ with 0 no ___- V _ ' -'_ ‘ ". ' ‘J '‘
shown uy one evidence will be discussed nereinaiterj and tnat the

question for consideration is only the area of land, if any, exclusively
used and occupied by the Lower Kalispel. Defendant further contends that
the substantive evidence supports the conclusion that petitioner did.not
exclusively use and occupy any area to the exclusion of other tribes or
groups, and, in any event, the Ealispel Indians - including both the
upper and lower divisions - did not use and.occupy mere consistently
than other groups an area mere extensive than outlined by defendant‘s
ethnologist on a map, defendant‘s Exhibit 21 B.

Pursuant to a stipulation filed by the parties with the Commission,

it was agreed that the initial hearing of the case shculd be confined to

the question of title or ownership of the territory claimed by petitioner.

or owned or occupied by it, and the area thereof, all other issues of

law or fact to be postponed until the determination of said question.

6

Petitioner contends in its brief thzt ‘t has prcven Indian title

so the tract claimed in its second amendment to the petition xFdg. l5)
by two methods, (l) factual proof of exclusive use or occupancy of a
definable area and (2) recognition of title in petitioner by the United

States.

The tract of country claimed to have been immemorially in the exolusite use and possession of petitioner is located along the Pend
d‘0reil1e River in what are now the States of'Washington and Idaho,
around Lake Pend d'Oreille and.Priest Lake in the State of Idaho,eand

31033 the Clark Fork:Eiver in the western part of what is now the State

of Montana.

Beginning with the fur traders and.missionaries, two tribes of

__ __ 3 c 1 0 .9 1

_ ____ _ _ -n 3 ¢ _ _ . '9 _o______. '__-I-__ ___n
"11... cu'\:' .Ii.i'LJu.U..I.\.a‘1.t'c'L'\.i. 4.11 uuc ..l..UL:£.:CJ.':‘:> anu ,_[Uu.I.11d.1.b U..L

”hese men. The Upper Pend d'0reille, a tribe closely associated with

the Flathead Tribe in Montana, were considered a tribe separate and
distinct from.the Lower Pend d‘0reille or Kalispel Tribe. Fbr the pur;
pose of clarity, the Lower Pend dFOreille will hereinafter be referred.
to as The Kalispel Tribe. There is little dispute between the parties
that from the first recorded history of the Kalispel they have been

mentioned as inhabiting the country about Pend d‘Oreille Lake and along

the Pend d‘Oreille River in what are now the States of Idaho and'Washing~

ton. As to the lands claimed by petitioner in the States of Washington

and Idaho, the ethnologists for both petitioner and defendant are in

substantial agreement. as to these lands, defendant‘s ethnologist con-1 at -— 4'-n-.-934-.-In-up «-3 ‘W 1 0 1 so _ u - . 1.
slaclea them to be ianos "to which tne Loner naiispel bands had indisputable

ébori ._j_Tm1 Claimog: .5 Should be nQ'['_,e@_ 4,_-.h.=:.t  bcaundaries of the eth~—
nologrists vary’ slightly as to these indisputable lends but not su,ffieientl3’
to cause any material disagreement. So it is 01113:" 1'15-13h T€5P9Ct to the
lands in the southeastern part of the claimed tract 1-zhich are along: the
Clark Fork River in the State of Montana that the parties eeiuelli’ are in
disagreement as to exclusive use and occupancy of the Kalispel Tribe.

While documentary evidence of a historical nature is meager as to
the existence of a division of the Kalispel Tribe into two divi-'5i01’1S 01‘
units, that is , the Upper Kalispel who are said to have had headquarters
at or about -the eutle-t, of the Clark Fork River and the Lower Kalispel who
appear to have concentrated for the most part on the Pend d'Oreille River
west and north of Pend d‘Ore:i_lle Lake, all e‘bhn0108iStS agree to this
division. A third div‘ision is often mentioned, the Cnewelan, hilt ‘Shell’
lands are not included within the area claimed. Doctor Allan H» Smith:
a professor of anthropology, who conducted an intensive field study of ‘
the Kalispel Indians in 193.6, 1937 and 1938. testified as an e:-rer‘r» Witness for petitioner. Doctor Smith‘s manuscript of the €’0hn0§-TTaPh.'Y Of
these Indians was introduced as petitioner's Exhibit 65 and his map of
the boundaries of the Iialispel Tribe, as found by him, are delineated by
a red line on petitioner‘s- Exhibit 63, with an overlap map, petitioner‘s
Foehibit en, showing villages and hunting, fishing and gathering e~‘N“=ee 
these Indians.

With respect to the divisions or units of the Kalisgel Tribe, Dcei!::ta:;~f;?f*
Smith testiied that the two divisions were separately organized geu;ty::1

or political entities and each had its own chief and sumhiefsi that one

division did not claim a specific territory as its own as distinguished
from the other division.but rather that they had joint use and occupancy
of the same territory. This witness testified that in spite of the divisions of the Kalispel he believed they constituted a tribe.

Defendant*s ethnologist, Stuart A. Chalfant, also testified that the
Kalispel consisted of two divisions. These divisions, defendant‘s expert
stated, were not necessarily political groups but rather were “geographic
groups of political units, clusters of political units.” Chalfant testified that in terms of land use the divisions did make use of more or less

the same territory.

There is little doubt that the Kalispel, both upper and lower, conlAll agree that they made use of more
*'uory. The Kalispel were but one land—ho1ding
entity as we have found, and the documentary evidence demonstrates that
the agents and representatives of'the United States so considered them..
Since the land4holding and using entity was the Kalispel Tribe, petitioner
has the capacity and authority to maintain this claim since any award.will
be for the benefit of the Kalispel Tribe, including therein all the deé
scendants of upper and lower divisions‘

As previously'stated3 the only real controversy with respect to
Indian title in this case concerns the lands in the southeastern part of
the cession along the Clark:Fork'River in Montana. Both Doctor Smith and
Mr. Chalfant agree that the Kalispel Indians used the area in the vicinity

of Paradise and Plains in.Montana and that the Kalispel had several winter

villages in this extreme eastern portion of the claimed tract. These

C"=3-h?»01Oi?iSts also agree tmt the Pend d‘Oreille  also oeca.sicnally
used the disputed crea. Doctor Smith, petitioner‘s ethnologist, included
‘the 5393.":-ed area as Kalispel territomr for two reasons, first, because
the Kalispel also hunted in the area and made extensive use in that way
of the region and, secondly, because they had winter villages there.

The eastern portion of the claimed tract from the town of Noxon -on
the Clark Fork River eastward is excluded from Kalispel territory. The
excluded area was not exclusively used by petitioner. Exclusive use and
occupancy is the standard established by the Supreme Court oi‘ the United
States to establish Indian title to an area of land. United States ‘V.

Santa Fe Pacific Railroad, 311; U. S. 399. While the Kalispel  have

 

occasionally wintered in the area following their migrations to the bufu

5810 Country, they did. not exclusi*:el:,'* use the area. 711 addition, the
evidence shows. that much of the disputed area was rough and unsuited for
use and occupancy and little utilizedfor either purpose (see Finding 1:,

and 111; and Sr.-1ith‘s overlay map, Pet. Ex. 61;). It may be noted from

other cases containing studies of the Indians-of the plateau culture

that the greater the distance from pepulation centers the more fvague
the bolmda-T3’ lines for a tribe may become (cf. The Confederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation, et al., v. The United States, L; Ind. Cl.
30171mo 151, 19h). This observation applies equally as well in this
rase as to the southeastern portion of the claimed area. Another in-stance that may be mentioned is the Priest Lake area of the claimed
while both ethnologists for petitioner and defendant describe

Lract.

>319 Priest Lake. region as definitely ha’-‘.1 ispel territory, and for this

reason it was so found to be by the Commission, the testimony of a quali_ed ethnologist in Docket No. l5h, The Kootenai Tribe or Band of Indians

   

J."

V. United States, 5 Ind. Clo CO.no L§5, was to the

   

effect that he believed the lands of the Bonners Ferry Kootenai, petitioner in that case, extended to the eastern shore of Priest Lake. The
witness, Doctor Claude.E. Schaeffer, who had made a thorough study of
the Kootenai and was then employed by the Bnreau of Indian Affairs, had
been subpoenaed.tw'petitioner in the Kootenai case to testify therein.
The Kootenai claimed area, however, did.not include the lands along the
eastern shore of Priest Lake.

As is obvious from the above discussion, the studies of the ethnography of neighboring tribes by different ethnologists often show conflict

g'3'r!Qn¢:- rx-F"+¢'."Iv'u-r-=2-ssv-\ run
n U‘ ‘I \-u—-. '3-$2; ---an-v-11-!’-nun 03¢

of c:.'la"im:=§ to t".t=>.'r"}'.:2"in :>‘r's=>:_:.c: }_‘a9‘t'.1_._T£_39‘_l_"} +.ht__':: -i_-3-flags

I'\_‘P‘''
.. - - -.- -.- J u. .common use. This fact is also clear when one studies the report and testiNODY Of Carling Marlouf, anthropologist for petitioner in The Confederated

 

Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation v. United States,
Docket No. 61, before this Commission (see Fdg. 13; and Report and Affidavit Of P€titiOner‘s ethnologists Verne H. Ray and.Allan Smith,.and

Mr. Malouf‘s accompanying disclaimer filed_by petitioner on July 2, 1957).

Petitioner's counsel urges that there was a recognition of title by
defendant in the Kalispel Tribe to the lands claimed herein. Counsel
states “in this case, the officers and agents of defendant itself did the
pleadina and expressed.the recognition plainly and clearly.“ Counsel

relies on the decision of this Commission in Coeur d'Alene Tribe V. The

United State,’

h Ind. Cl. Comm. 1, with recogn‘tion as being

 

comparable to the situation in the instant case. The recognition in the

Q

Coour dialene case was based on congressionai recognition of Indian title

in the ratification of the agreement of cession. In the instant case there
was no treaty of cession nor any congressional action and therefore no

recognition of title in petitioner. In a more recent case The Miami Trike

 

of Oklahoma et

2 al., v. The United States

 

, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 198, this
Commission discussed at length the question of recognition, or recognized
title, and the need for congressional action to establish such.recognition.
The Commission concludes, based on the record as a.nhole and the
findings of fact herein made , that the Kalispel Tribe had aboriginal
Indian title to the lands described in Finding 16. The parties stipulated

that the initial hearing would be limited to only the issue of Indian

All other issues, such as when the defendant acquired the subject

property, are not in.issue. As to the time the defendant acquired the_

sutgect lands, it is not possible from the record now before the Commission to determine such time, although the evidence does show that the

Indians were deprived.of their lands long prior to August 13, 19b6, and
nithout compensation, The time the Indians lost their lands must necessarily be determined at a later hearing unless the parties agree on an

average date for purposes of valuation.

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner
We concur:

Edgar E.'Witt

Chief Commissioner

Wm. M

_ . Holt
Associate Commissioner

