Before The Indian Claims Commission

3. }_..’*.}{‘€ }t‘""’»"'T""°I""-. .";T.'D """"'""" '7""*°-Ii?

l"t.:.-‘L-L  ..I."'...-'.Petitioners,
V.
THE UKITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Defendant.

TURTLE MOUNTAIN BAND or CHIPPEMA
.'£3\*DI.’s.I<.‘S ,

Petitioners,

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

l"|'\TT"'I"'\ I-"!'l"!"u"'!'1'f1|"\ .o"'!T‘!""l"'!'l'

.Ln.r. J..*.u..n. .:>m:.1.L B.e3.l'~3D OF CE-IIPPE'U\

TWDIANS, et a1.,

Petitioners,
V.

THE ‘UNITED STATES or !aMERIC.b.,

Defendant.

_-Dec ided :

333 H. Hoeg, Attorney of Record for

Petitioners in Docket No, 18-A

Ernest L. Wilkinson, Attorne?/” of

Record for Petitioners in Docket
No. 113

Lat-rrence C. Mills, .~'Lttorne';.T of
Record for Petitioners in
Docket No. 191

Docket No. 18-3

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

3

)

)

3

% Docket No. 113
) I
)

)

)

)

3

3
 ‘Docket No. 191
) I

)

)

May 21 , 1958

Appearances:

Ralph E. Barney, Sim T, Carmen,
Meuriceii. Coopermen,'Wi11iam.D.

HcFar1ene, with whom was Mr.

Assistant Attorney Gener ,
Perry 1-I. Morton ,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPIKICD OF THE COMEISSION

 

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of'the Commission.

The petitioners in Docket No. l8_A, the Red Lake, Pembina and
White Earth Bands of Chippewa Indians, and the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe,
present the claim of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands for the value, less
proper credits and offsets, of 9.799,H4O acres of land located in north'western.Minnesota and northeastern North Dakota ceded to the United States
by the ‘Red Lake and Pembina Bands for an alleged unconscionable consideration under the Treaty of October 2, l863 (13 Stat. 667). For convenience
the cession will be referred to generally as Royce Area 414-5.

The petitioners now concede that neither the‘White Earth Band of
Chippewas nor the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe has any'interest in the claim

asserted in Docket 18-A, and the petition is therefore dismissed as to

these two petitioners.

The Turtle'Nountain Band and Little Shell

Band Claims, Docket Nos. ll} and 121

Due to partial overlapping claims in Docket Nos. ll3 and 191, these
two cases were consolidated for trial nith Docket l8-A to the extent the
area of land in North Dakota claimed in Dockets ll3 and l9l overlap Royce
Area 445 claimed in Docket l8.A,

The claim asserted by the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas in
Docket ll3 is for compensation for a large tract of land in North Dakota
which includes that portion of Royce Area #45 in Rorth Dakota lying
between the Goose River on the

south and the Canadian border on the north;

which tract is alleged to have been owned and occupied by said band from

O\
IV.)
C)

O‘\

ae immemorial. As we construe the petition, it is claimed that the
Turtle Mountain Band was an autonomous land—holding group separate and
distinct from the Penbina Band and was not a party to the October 3,
l863 treaty ceding Royce Area #45 in.North Dakota. However: P9titi°neT5
now agree by stipulation with petitioners in 18-A that the Turtle
Mountain Band was a constituent part of the Pembina Band who executed
the 1863 treaty, and that it was signed on behalf of the Pembina Band
by its duly authorized chiefs.

The first claim in the petition filed in Docket l9l is also for
compensation for a large tract of land in North Dakota which includes all
of Royce Area 445 in North Dakota. This claim is presented on behalf of
the Little Shell Band of Chippewa Indians by twelve individual petitioners
now living in Montana who allege they are “members of and rightdul de--endants and heirs of the Little Shell Band of Chippewa Indians, sometimes known as the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and the
Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians“; and that they represent all such '

members and descendants of said.Little Shell Band. According to the

petition they base their claim on.the alleged grounds that the claimed
area of land in North Dakota was owned by the Little Shell Band by
virtue of occupation and conquest until defendant unlawfully'acquired
said lands under a "purported agreement" dated October 22, 1892. There
is no mention made in the petition of the October 2, 1863 treaty cession
of Area 4&5 in North Dakota, however, these petitioners have now also

agreed by stipulation.with petitioners in Docket l8-A, filed herein on

April 2, 1954, that the so-called “Little Shell Band of Chippewas“ was

KO

(.3

a constituent part of the Pembina Band who executed the 1863 treaty,
and it was signed on behalf of the Pembina Band by its duly authorized

chiefs, Little Shell and Red Bear. lt is true, as counsel for defendant

' 6 308 

contends, the attorney of record for petitioners who signed the stipulation

on their behalf did not mve an approved attorney’s contract. However

a different attorney later employed by said petitioners under an approved

contract has on their behalf reaffirmed said stipulation in a subsequent
stipulation with petitioners in 18-15., filed herein on October 21, 1957.
Petitioners in Dockets 113 and 191 have not offered any evidence
in support of their respective claims to Royce Area 1445 in North Dakota
and apparently rely upon the stipulations and the evidence offered by
petitioners in Docket 18.9. to establish their right to share in any
award made the Pembina Band on the claim arising under the 1863 treaty.
This would seem to be proper in view of the stipulations. But aside
from the stipulation, there is proof that in 1863 the Pembina Band comprised two groups of Chippewa Indians, one group under Chief Red Bear
and a second group under Chief Little Shen. The 1863 treaty ceding
Area L1-1+5 was signed by the chief of each of these groups as a "gembina
Chief" so obviously both groups were parties to the treaty. It also

appears that Governor Ramsey, who negotiated the 1863 treaty, considered
that the Pembina Band consisted in 1863 of more than one group for in
his report on the treaty he refers to the “Pembina Bands“ as retaining
a tract of country to the west of the ceded area.

After the Treaty of 1863, the Famine Band of Chippewas continued
to live on the lands in North Dakota until in 1873 the United States

pumhased a township in the White Earth Reservation in Minnesota for use

as a home for the Pembina Indians. Thereafter, the government renzoved
some of the Perrioinas to the 3;. its Earth Reservation, and others to the
Red Lake Reservation in Minnesota, but many continued to live in Korth
Dakota principally in the Turtle Mountain area. Those Pembinas who re.mained in North Dakota became known and were recognized by the defendant
as the "Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas,“ and in 1882 an Executive Order
reservation of two townships was established at Turtle Mountain in North
Dakota for the use of the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas. ‘ 8
It  be seen from the above that both the Pembina Indians removed to the reservations in I-Einnesota and those remaining in North
Dakota, who became known and recognized as the Turtle Mountain Band,

were all part of the Pembina Band of Chippewas as it existed in 1863.

If there was  distinction between them it seems to have occurred after
.863. It is therefore our conclusion that the Turtle Mountain Band of 8
Chippewa lndians, petitioners in Docket No. H3, and such members of the
petitioner grouprepresented  Docket 191 who are descendants of tnembers
of the Pembina send as it eidsted in 1863, have an interest in Royce I-.rea

14-45 in North Dakota and are entitled to share in any award made herein in

Docket No. 18-15. on the claim of the Pembina Band of Chippewas arising

out of the 1863 treaty cession. This is in effect conceded by petitioners.

in Docket l8-A by the stipulations.
Indian Title to Royce Area 1+’-L5

We have next for determination the question of whether the Red Lake
and Pembina Bands of Chippewas at the time of the cession of the

9,799,420 acres of land by them to the defendant under the Treaty of

October 2, l853, had Indian title to said land or any part thereof .
The land in the cession as described in Finding 6 is located along both
sides of the Red River of the Eforth in 1-shat is 1'10‘:-.’ northwestern Minnesota
and northeastern North Dakota, extending south from the Canadian border.

I-Ihile petitioners concede that Royce area 1M5 was a part of the
territory the Chippewa acquired by conquest from the Sioux, they contend
that substantially all of the area became Chippewa territory prior to
the 1803 Louisiana Purchase, and that, at the time of the l863 cession,
the Red Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewa held Indian “title to said land,
not only by reason of exclusive use and occupancy but also that such title
was recognized by the defendant. S ’ ‘ I A

The defendant contends that the lands in issue became the exclusive
I-31‘0P€'I‘tY of the United States in 1803 by the Louisiana Purchase un-. I
encumbered by Indian title of any tribes or bands. While both the petitioners and the defendant have presented the _case upon an assumption
that Royce Area  was included in the territory acquired by the United
States by the Louisiana Purchase in_l803, the Commission does not agree
that the area in question was a part of the Louisiana Purchase. Based on
the record and other documents concerning the history of this area, the
Commission is satisfied that the Red River Valley was a part of the 
claimed by England until 15318 when the forty-ninth parallel was established
as the boundary between the United States and Canada by the Convention 
England making the med River ‘I alley .1‘;mericaniterritoI'y.

It appears from the defendant‘s proposed findings of fact that defendant is willing to concede that the evidence discloses that the Red

Lake Band occupied the territory around Red Lake just to the east of
Royce Area #45 from about 1?96 and that the Penbina Band occupied an
area along the Pembina River in the northern part of the ceded area
from about 1803, and that each of these two bands hunted and roamed
over most of Royce Area #45. Defendant contends, however, that as of
October 3, 1863, neither the Red Lake and Penbina Bands nor any other
band or bands of Chippewa or Sioux.Indians exclusively used, occupied
or controlled any part of Royce Area 445. Defendant also denies that
prior to 1863 Congress had ever in any manner recognized the Indian title
of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands to Royce Area 445.
At the rehearing the petitioners in Docket N . 18.}; and the
defendant both submitted much additional evidence bearing on the ques4 of the Indian title of the Red.Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewas

to Royce Area 4&5. according to the evidence the Chippewas constituted
one of the larger Indian tribes in the northerly part of the United
States, and during the 17th century they were located in the area
around Lakes Superior and Huron. Beginning in the earhyjpart of the
18th century; the Chippewas started pushing their'way'westward from

the Great Lakes Region, gradually displacing the Sioux and continued

their westward expansion until by the end of the l8th century they had
extended their occupation through the northern half of I-Einnesota and
across the Red River into northeastern iéorth Dakota. They had a large
number of villages, bands and local divisions scattered over a region
extending a thousand rrdles fromeast to west, and many oi‘ these bands
came to be known by the name of village, lake, or river near which

they resided. Among these bands were the Pembina Band located in northeastern North Dakota and the Red Lake Band located in the area around
Red Lae and Red Lake River in the northwestern section of Iviinnesota.

In the course of their westward expansion, The Chippewas had
forced the Sioux across the Mississippi and south to the Minnesota
River. , The record does not disclose just when the Chippewas mov..d into
the Red River Valley but the reports of early explorers and traders show
the Chippewas were occupying and using a major portion of it for hunting
and trapping in the l790‘s. Dr. Omar Stewart, an ethnological witness
for petitioners, testified during the trial that he was convinced from
hi5 Stuck’ of the history of the Chippewas and their westward expansion
that by 1800 the Chippewas had displaced the Sioux in Royce Area 4145,
except for some contention with the Sioux over the Cheyenne—Goose River
area on the Dakota side.

In 1805 Lewis and Clark, who had been commissioned to explore the
Louisiana Territory and, among other things, to report on Indian in-.
habitants in the newly acquired territory and adjacent areas, reported
that the Red Lake lndians were located around Red Lwe and Red Lake

River and as far west as the Red River and that beyond the Red River

6 313

iey contended with the Sioux.for territory. This report placed the
Red Lake Band in Royce’s Area 435. Lewis and Clark also reported that
the Pembina Indians were located on the Red River and about the mouth

of the Pembina River in northeastern North Dakota, which is in Royce

Area 445.

After the fortyaninth parallel had been fixed by'the Convention of
1818 with England as the boundary'betwen the United States and Canada,
Major Stephen Long, in l823, made an expedition down the Red River from
Lake Traverse, passing through the entire length of Royce Area #45 to
Pembina, where he marked the forty-ninth parallel.

In his report on the

L0ng expedition, Mr. wm. H. Keating defined the limits of Chippewa territony. The line which he fired as the southern boundary of Chippewa terrim

tony in Minnesota extended from Mille Lac northwest to a point on the
“ed River where Grand Forks, North Dakota is now located. This line was
approximately parallel and to the north of the dividing line between
Chippewa and Sioux territory which was later established by the-1825
Prairie du Chien Treaty; Keating's line continued northwest through
North Dakota slightly to the north of the Goose River. By this description Keating included in Chippewa territory substantially all of Royce
Area #45 in Minnesota and.most of the Dakota section thereof north of
the GOOSE River. It is true that Keating was inconsistent in also

assigning all of that portion of Royce.Area h#5 south and west of Pembina

in North Dakota as Sioux territory. However, he further stated that the

O

‘\ r!-H-‘$14-‘vs
£ .LS gJ\J£.J.|..a£.I.

Bois des Sioux, whic

6 311+ .:'

limit of the undisputed property of the Sioux on the Red Pdver, and

the only lands in Royce Area 1445 which were within the area he described
as being in dispute between the Sioux and Chippewa were those in the
vicinity of the Goose-Sheyenne River area in I~Eorth Dakota.

It was due mainly to the territorial boundary disputes between the
Sioux and Chippewa that the United States concluded the Treaty of August l9,
1825 (7 Stat. 272) at Prairie due Chien with the Sioux and Chippewa Tribes
and other Indian tribes of that northwest country for the stated purpose
of promoting peace among the tribes by establishing their recognized
territorial boundaries. That portion of the I825 Prairie du Chien

line in Minnesota separated the Chippewa" territory on the north from the

S Sioux territory on the south, both tribes and the United States agreed ng

to recognize that line as the limits of the respective tribes. The line
extended westward across southern Minnesota to a point where the Buffalo
River in ‘Minnesota enters the Red River and then north down the Red River L I
to the mouth of the Goose River which enters the Red River from the west.
It is significant that, following this treaty, the United States in all
its dealings with the Indians in Minnesota recognize the Prairie du

Chien line as the dividing boundary between Chippewa territory on the
north and Sioux territoryion the south. The prairie du Chien becare

a well-known and well-established boundary. In subsequent cessions
involving the Indians in that area, it is plain that the Indian ‘b1"i":;;..~;=.

as well as the United States did recognize and honor the boundaries

as defining the true limits of the territory owned by the respective

tribes. Commencing in 1837, six treaties were concluded by the United

‘H

‘ates with Chiouewa sands for cessions of their lands in Einnesota
north of the Prairie du Chien line. Those treaties which are set forth
in Finding 17 were:

1. The Treaty of July 29, 1837, with the I~1ississippi
and Lake Superior Chippewas.

2. The Treaty of august 2, 18b7, with the Chippewa
Indians of the Kississippi and Lake Superior.

3. The Treaty of August 21, 1847, with the Fillager
Band.

4. The Trea y of September 30, 185k, with the Chippewa
Indians of Lake Superior and the Eississippi.

5. The'Treaty of February 22, 1855, with the HissiS3iPPi._
Pillager and Lak ‘hinnebagoshish Bands of Chippewa Indians.

6. The Treaty of October 2, 1863, with the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands.

In five of the six treaties enumerated above the Prairie due Chien
e constituted a portion of the boundary of the described cession.
Likewise the United States dealt with the Sioux for cessions of lands,
lying to the south of the Prairie du Chien line. Those treaties Of
cession of lands in Hinnesota south of the line were:

1. The Treaty of September 29, 1837, with.Medawakanton
Sioux.

2. The Treaty'of July 23 and the Treaty of August 5,
1851, with the Hississippi Sioux.

Having determined that since most of Royce area u&5 lay to the north

f the 1825 Prairie du Chien line in well established Chippewa territory,
we now turn to the question of which Chippewa bands were actual 3 in the
ceded area and the extent of their occupation within the area. Again We

find that this determination is aided by a strong and consistent pattern

of governmental dealings involving the lands in question. ‘.-'.’1.en the
United States became interested in acquiring Indian title to the lands
in the Red River Valley, there were only two bands of Indians involved
in the negotiations, the Red Lake and Pembina Bmds. The first effort
by the government was made through Governor Ramsey who, on September 20,
l85l, concluded a treaty with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands for a
cession of sone 5,000,000 acres of their territory largely within Royce
Area 1445) located on both sides of the Red River. However, the treaty
was never ratified. In 1860 treaty commissioners met with representatives

of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands in an effort to negotiate a cession of

the Indians‘ lands on both sides of the Red River. The efforts were unsuccessful._. F.‘3'T1.::]_'}-tr‘ an ‘IRA; the 4;

—--no -n-- 1-‘ ' Cal «eafv SA. cession herein involved was
negotiated with these same two bands. In addition to these three instances of treaty negotiations with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands, there
were two unsuccessful attempts is 1857 and 1862 to hold negotiations

with these same two bands for a cession of their lands in the Red River
Valle‘ .
if—-.l_l of this evidence causes the Conzmission to conclude that all

government officials during a period of at least some. twelve years‘ prior
to the 1863 cession repeatedly recognized petitioner bands as the

owners of Indian title to the lands in the Red River Valley area. We
find a consistent pattern of treaty negotiations with the Red Lake and
Pembina Rands exclusively, with no evidence of consideration ever being
Eiven to th . possibility of any other Indians being within the area to
be 1'-1‘.--.'.?_"-.1‘-Qe«’11 to the petitioners. Of particular importance in considering,

the evidence of g_?overn*r;="1tal dealings with the petitioners was the care

taken by the officials during this period to deal only with the Indians
actually in possession of the lands involved, The Court of Claims stated
in Hole Lake Band et al 3 V, Ine United States, 126 C. C15. 596, at pages
611 and 612, "After the advent of Lewis Cass in 1817 and Henry R. Schoolcraft in 1822, all responsible officials of the United States were careful,
in their dealings with the Chippewa Indians, to summon to council the
headmen of all bands known or believed to be in occupancy of the lands

in question or otherwise interested in matters to be discussed, and not

to summon other Indians."

Of further importance in considering the question of petitioners‘
occupancy within the ceded area is the evidence of the occupancy by
the Red Lake and Pembina Bands of lands adjoining three of the four
boundaries of Royce Area #a5.

In his report to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in October, 1863,
Governor Ramsey made some significant statements concerning the recently
concluded treaty, He recognized that the Indians had not ceded all their
lands in Minnesota and North Dakota. There remained, he reported, a
strip of land on the east of the ceded area around the Red Lake basin

‘which was reserved by the Red Lakes. Likewise, he reported that the

Penbinas retained for themselves a tract of land on the north and northwest

of Devil‘s Lake, to the west of the ceded area. By this recognition on

the part of Governor Ramsey of Indian occupancy on both the immediat

(D

eastern and western limits of the ceded area, it a pears that he enter4

tained no doubts concerning the Indian title of the Red Lake and Pembina

Bands to the area within the eastern and western boundaries of Royce Area

#45.

With respect to the eastern boundary of Royce area 445, the United
tates Suprenze Court has held that the Red Lake Indians held Indian right
of occupancy or title to the lands retained on the east of the 1863
cession (see Finding of Fact No. 31). The Court of Claims decided in
the case of the Chippewa. Indians of Minnesota V. The United States, The

Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians of Minnesota Intervenors, 80 C. Cls.

   

410, that, in l889 and prior thereto, the Red Lake Indians had full
Indian title to the land in the Red Lake Reservation to the exclusion‘
of all other Chippewas in Minnesota.

with respect to the western boundary of Royce Area -’+l4-5, the Court
of Claims found in The Sisseton and Wahpeton Bands of Sioux Indians V.

The United States, 58 C. Cls. 302, that the plaintiff bands of Sioux

 

Indians had no valid claim or title to the lands north of Goose River
and Devil‘s Lake in North Dakota. As detailed in our Finding of Fact
No. 33, the Commissioner of Indian .~’-zff airs in 1881 reported that the
land north and northwest of Devil's Lake in North Dakota was claimed

by the "Turtle Iiountain Band of Chippewas” and their claim of ownership

was based on "continuous possession and occupation by them and their

ancestors for many generations." Such claim, the Comznissioner reported,

seemed just to him since it was supported by the files and records thf“.
government officials had long recognized the claim. Further, in l892,
£1 C0-321*" ssion appointed under authorization of the Congress reported that

the Turtle 1-Eountain Band of Chippewas had valid original Indian title to

an area north of Devil's Lake.

K0
3 C‘)

in view of Governgr Ramsey’s recognition that the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands occupied lands on both the eastern and western boundariesl
of Royce Area QQE and in View of the decisions of the courts and of ad»
ministrative officials concerning the areas to the immediate east and
west of Royce.Area #35, the Commission is satisfied that the Indian use
and occupancy of the petitioners extended to the eastern line of Royce
Area #35 and extended to that portion of the western line of R0309 érea
h&5'which runs from the International Boundary south to the headwaters
of the Goose River near Devil's Lake.

The proof in this case clearly shows that petitioners‘ territory
extended for some distance into Canada. $CC0TdiD51Ys the n0TtheTn
boundary was the International Boundary between the United States and
Canada. The evidence supports our finding that the petitioners exp

lusively used and occupied the area as far south as that portion of the
Royce Area #45 boundary which runs from a point near Bagley, Minnesota,
to the mouth of the wild Rice River. It should be noted that this line
is north of the recognized boundary between the Chippewas and the Sioux;
established by the 1825 Treaty of Prairie dn Chien.

Having thus determined.the extent of petitioners‘ use and occupancy
of Royce area Mk5 on the east, west, north and a portion of the south
boundaries, we now turn to that portion of the line from the headwaters
of the Wild Rice River west into Dakota. The CO~3iSSi0n C3nn0t 3CC€Pt
the Royce irea h%5 line which runs along the Cheyenne River for the

evidence does not support petitioners‘ claim to that portion of Royce

area #45 which lies between the Goose and Cheyenne Divers in North

‘I-5:-— V-In-I-uh"

Dakota. while it is true that the Red Lake and.Fembina seeds hunted
in that area and it was included in the l863 cession, the record shows
that the hostile bands of Sioux Indians on the south also hunted in
and claimed the area as theirs. Governor Ramsey'during the 1863 treaty
negotiations, commenting on the Red Lake and Pembina claim to that area
said, “dhat do they mean by proposing to sell me a country which does
not belong to them? To«nw'certain knowledge the Sioux are on the
Cheyenne more than they are." The Sioux bands also considered the area
had been assigned as Sioux hunting grounds by'the 1825 treaty, and the
Sioux-Chippewa conflict over hunting rights in the Cheyenne-Goose River
area continued down to the time of the 1863 treaty cession. ‘Further,
‘when the United States and the Sioux Indians entered into the Treaty
of February 19, 1867 (15 Stat. 505), the Cheyenne.Goose River area

‘was included.within the boundaries of the lands in which the Sioux.

granted the United States the right to construct roads, railroads and
utilities.

.As to the remainder of Royce Area 345, there is evidence of
skirmishes between the Sioux:and the Chippewa, particularly in North
Dakota north of the Goose River; These Sioux invasions consisted mainly
of invading war parties, just as there were Chippewa invasions into
Sioux territory to the south, These invasions, often in retaliation for
previous raids, were infrequent and'widely scattered, and there is no
evidence that the Sioux attempted to establish.residence in, or mere"

Permanent use of, any part of Royce area 43»; except for the CheyenneGoose River area.

Having considered the entire record and particularly the earl;
historical accounts of the Chippewa conquest of the area in issue, the
Pattern of treaty negotiations by Che United States with the Red Lake
and Penbina Bands, the court decisions respecting Indian use and occua
P330? Of adjoining landss the administrative actions taken by the United
States with respect to the Indians in and about the areag and the opinions
of the ethnologists, it is our conclusion that the Red Lake and Pembina
Bands of Chippewas have satisfactorily established that from a t'ee
prior to 1800 and until the October 2, l863 treaty cession, they held
Indian title through exclusive occupancy and use to all the lands within
the boundaries described in said treaty as set forth in Finding 6, exe
cept that portion thereof lying between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers
in North Dakota.

‘With respect to the excluded.Goose-Cheyenne River area there is no
persuasive evidence that the defendant recognized petitioners? Indian_
title to that area. In fact there is evidence that the defendant con»
sidered this excluded area to be disputed land. The Commission is like»
wise not persuaded by'petitioners‘ argument that the question of title
t0 ROYCE Area MQ5 is res judicata'by'virtue of the Court of Claims dew

cision in Chippewa Indians of?Minnesota'v. The United States, the Red

 

Lake Band of Chippewa Indians of Kinnesota. Intervenors, 80 C. Cls, #10,

 

That case involved some 666,433.64 acres located within the unceded area
to the east of Royce area Maj. ho part of Rovce Area Maj was included
in that litigation. t is true that the Court of Claims did find in

4vhat Caaethat the 6669b $.64 acre tract was a part of the large original

country‘ held by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands, part of which territow
those bands had ceded to the United States in 1863.. The Commission, as
previously stated, has considered this case and the Court‘s findings,
particularly in reaching our conclusions concerning the eastern boundary
of the tract. Z”.-owever, the findings of the Court of Claims in that

case cannot be given the importance which petitioners urge in this case
since the Court did not have to delimit the boundaries of the Red Lake
and Pembina Bands’ Territory, The Court based its ultimate decision,
in part, on a finding that the area in question was a art of the larger
Red Lake and Pembina Bands‘ territory. But that does not mean that the
Red Lake and Pembina Bands held aboriginal title to all the land within
the 1863 cession as there was nothing in the case to indicate that the

Court was concerned with a determination of the extent of the petitioners‘

actual use and occupancy within the entire area.
It having been established that the Red Lake and Pembina Bands held

Indian title to all the lands in Royce .‘-‘area 1:45, except the CheyenneC-oose River area, we have next the question of whether or not the consideration paid said bands for the cession of their lands was unconscionable.

The area ceded contained appronrinately 9,799,940 acres of land, 2,311,600
acres of which are in the excluded Cheyenne-Goose River area l.e<':3J.TfLi‘T..3_-".;
7,488,280 acres in the remainder of the cession.
the parties disagree on the amount actually paid the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands for the 1863 treaty cession. The pertinent provisions
of the 1853 treaty are set forth in Finding 27, and the modifications

are shot-m in Find"_ra..-z: 28.

3-’ \_IT1-'=”‘~<i€* in the 1861:» supplemental treat

As to the considerat

'\_s)
(0

The petitioners maintain that the total recited consideration for

the 1863 treaty

-tr}cession, as modified by the 1864 treaty, was :6l2,000.

The defendant insists the consideration paid by the United States for

the cession amounted to the total sum of $677,591.25. In reaching this
conclusion, the defendant has taken the figure of $677,591.25 shown at
page 21 of the General Accounting Report (Def. Ex. 81) as the total
amount of the disbursements made by the United States for the benefit
of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands. However, the report further shows

at pages 17, 18 and 19 that of this total sum, the United States disbursed under the 1863 treaty the sum of $123,010.40, of which $112,290.40
was "pursuant to treaty stipulations" and $10,030 was for "Miscellaneous
purposes in connection.with said treaty," namely, for expense of a delegation of Chippewa to Washington; and that inder the 1864 treaty, a

ntal sum of $554,580.85, of uhich $h96,499.96 was "pursuant to treaty
Siipulations," and $58,080.89 for “Miscellaneous purposes in connection
with said treaty," consisting of $8500.55 for expenses paying annuities,
31200 for twine. $2550.32 for agency expense, $2380.30 for provisions,
and $83,960.32 for transportation of annuity supplies.
we think it is obvious that $609,160.36 was the total sum disbursed

pursuant to treaty stipulations, and that the items of disbursement,made for miscellaneous purposes have no relation

to the consideration for the cession and, in our opinion, should not be
considered as a part of the consideration. While it is true that some

of these items may constitute proper offsets, we believe that it is a

matter to be determined after any'award is made and offsets are presented

6 323,

by defendant‘ It is,our conclusion that the consideration Paid ihe

Red Lake and Fembina Bands for the 1863 cession Of their leeee “es
$6o9,u80.36.

The Treaty of 1863 also provided in article 8 that each male adult
mixed-blood of both petitioner bands was to be granted e heeeeeeed 05
160 acres to be selected at his option within the ceded area,'Whi°h
article was modified by krticle 7 Of the 186” treaty to provide that
in lieu of the lands, scrip was to be issued to such mixed4bloods whoi
so elected. élso 1280 acres of land was to be set aside to the two

chiefs under Article 9 of the 1863 treaty» H0WeVeTs he Proof was
offered in this case by either Dart? 35 to the acreage of such grants’

. C ,, 
if any, nor ls there any proof that the 1280 acres of land was set He? 9

to the two chiefs. In the absence of any proof 810mg these lines. the

Commission will determine petitioners‘ claim on the basis of the entire
7,h88,28O acres of land ceded by Red Lake and Penbina Bands. In the
event evidence is subsequently submitted concerning grants Of land 0?
the issuance of scrip under the provisions of the above-mentioned
articles of the treaties, the Commission will consider it and, if
necessary; any award ma e on the claim.may be amended as is justified
by the proof.

Value of Lands Involved

‘We now have the problem of determining the fair‘ValUe Of

the 7,488,280 acres of land as of October 2, 1553: Censistine of 3=323?3§§

acres in the State of Korth Dakota between the Goose River "Ed the

6 324

1.

‘.3 In

and 4,16-,l2O acres in the State of hinnesota

.L.:.}

cast of the Red River of the North. The petitioners contend that toe

l:nds had value as of that date of at least $1.75 per acre. The defendant contends that a price of five cents per acre was a fair and
adequate market price for the lands as of the date of the 1863 cession;
thai the United States has heretofore paid to the Red Lake and Pembina
Indians an adequate price for their claims to the lands. The extreme
difference in the valuations of the petitioners and the defendant readily
shows the difficult task we have of evaluating more than seven million
acres 05 Petitioners’ land as of a date almost a hundred years ago.

The parties have introduced the testimony of expert witness and
much documentary evidence bearing upon the value of the lands in issue
in 853. The Commission has carefully.reviewed all of this evidence and

ze various elements affecting the value of the tract are described in

detail in our findings of fact,

The area to be valued, which will be hereinafter referred to as the
Red Lake-Pembina tract is located in the extreme northern section of the
present States of Minnesota and North Dakota, its northerly boundary
being the United States-Canada border. The area lies in the Red River
Va1l€Y.'which river approximately bisects the tract flowing from south
to north.

The Red Lake-Pembina tract was largely prairie land.which could
be broken and prepared for cultivation without the necessity_of first
clearing it of timber.

The soil was generally good with the best soil

1 - a - H .
c_asses'bein6 the Fargo, Bearden, Ulen, Pelan, Barnes and alluvial.

K»)
Fa)

‘'-''‘-I—-:which ranged in qualitgt from a deep black gumbo type near the river to

a sandy loam further out, The undesirable soil groups, classified as
"”"'3u1<031s Dunesand and Peat, coznprised about one million acres of the
3PPI‘03'i1''33te1y 7%" million acre tract, The Red Lake Pembina tract was
51‘ ained by the Red River and its tributaries which included the Roseau,
Snake, Middle, Grand, Morais, Red Lake, Sandhill and Marsh, on the east
watershed and Pembina, Tongue, Park, Forest (Salt), Turtle, Goose, Elm,
Rush. Maple and Sheyenne on the west watershed. Since the descent of the
Red River was very gradual and because the land adjoining the river was
flat, the natural drainage was very slow and in many places inadequate.
The area of poorest drainage was located in the northeastern section of
the tract, where there were many peat bogs and sloughs,

The climate of the Red River Valley was characterized by long,

cold winters and relatively wann summers, with a growing seasion of 90
to 100 days. The average annual rainfall was about 2l inches-, with
approximately 16 inches falling during the period from April to September,
thereby providing adequate rainfall during the growing season. While
conditions of flooding or drought might occasionally occur, such extremes were not common,

At the time of the 1863 cession it was generally known that grain
could be grown in the Red River Valley’. The highest and best potent.i,.,rif‘..
use of the tract was general farming and the growing of crops. here
were no known minerals on the tract and the timber, which grea along

the Red River and its tributaries, while desirable for use by the e:;—:r_..:,«*

settlers, had no comzeerciel value. By l863 the ceded area had ceased

10 be F m?jor buffalo huntinr

on

1 \ -I1 I‘
"" -‘:c:.l--.‘*- 3.7;: ~'-.'_: :~ I‘'\ *—‘-r_. rut--.'.v'9“ _
\d¢J\- \. \I\.-¢'_ ‘.-' $.21!-. o'.,a \..r|.\.—r ..-—

- ‘N :_
region, cat

0 "~

antelope in and near the existing some for bearing animals
along the watercourses.
Transportation within the area was by boat on the Red River and
its principal tributaries and by or art across the over and trails.
For many years nrior to 1963 there were three main overland trails from
Pemoina, in northeastern Eorth Dakota, across the Red Lake-Penbina tract
to St. Paul, hinnesota. The X cart, with the capacity of about one—half
ton, was in use in 1863. The carts carried furs, buffalo robes, tongues
and oennican across the overland trails to St. Paul, returning aith
provisions and supplies. The distance from Pembina to St. Paul, whcih

‘would have been the closest outside market for products from the area,

911‘

was about héo miles and the one—way trip took from 30 to 66 days. ine

cost of transporting goods or products from Penb'.a to St. Paul was quite
high being estimated at $90 to $180 a ton by the overland route and from
.:h[ 0 t I‘ . ‘ .
94 0 e50 a ton by a combined river and land route.

There were no railroads in the area in l863.

Eoeever, there was

some railroad pwannine

1-o--u-a. - 

and while, there was no immediate prospect for

rail transportation in the area, it could be reasonablt expected that

railroads wo‘ld be built in the area at some fnture time. In lE5?,

IonCongress had rranted to the Territorv of ninnesota aooroxjmatelv 2%

million acres of land to rid in the construction of various railroads

xailrosd plonninr

H;= mi territorial legislature.

"-_v--Q r "\
cl-1.... C._>I;delayed by the financial osnic of l€57 and rail

‘.3

3 \ \ ' 1 0 v
reach the led LaKe-Penoina tract until

Vallev'was soarselv populated, the only

\

at Pemo

:_-1 -1.1’?

?'1
. Ads

9 4

zero a post office had been established,

and at St. Joseph, a short distance to the west. as late as l870,

-F!

.a
gun

4/5ths of the popul tion of ‘-iinnesota was in the southeast part of the
state and 6/7ths of Dakota‘s population was in the southeastern part of
the territory, in the Missouri ualley. In l860, the population of the
entire State of Minnesota has l72,023 and the population was only'h,837

in the Territory of Dakota. The largest population center near the

subject area was to the southeast around the present cities of Minneapolis

and St. Paul.

In 1854 Congress had extended the provisions of the preemption laws
to the Territory'of Minnesota, which then included Dakota Territory; on
all unreserved public lands, except mineral lands. ‘The Homestead Act
‘was enacted on May 20, 1862 (12 Stat. hl3)'which permitted qualified
citizens to enter 160 acres or less of unappropriated lands subject to

Preemption at $1.25 per acre, or 80 acres or less at $2.50 per acre,

after the land had been surveyed. After residing upon or cultivating

the land for a period of five years and upon proof of compliance with

the law, the homesteader was entitled to a patent free of cost except

for a nominal filing fee.

No land surveys had been made within the tract at the time of the

1553 treaty cession.

The land records of sales of public land i:1

Kinnesota Territory show l,l82

%

7-}

he l0 years from l848 to 1859

53,339,840 acres had been sold.

acres sold between 1847 and l850, and dur‘v*

'

\‘_ q . . --5 I r, ‘ F‘ 1-1»
homestead entries coverina l.2;?.722 acres of land in hgnnesocac lne
V \—.i up 9

airst filing on ,uolic land within the Vermillion Land District in

s kota, within which tract the Red Lake_Pembina tract was located, was

(13

in lS68.' Filinas in North Dakota were few until l873 and there was no
rapid settlement of the area until after the arrival of the railroads

in the l870‘s. The greatest population increase_in the area occurred in
1533; Euch of the early settlement of tle area resulted from the promotional schenes used by the railroads to induce settlement of the area.

The petitioners offered in evidence a study of 1,933 recorded

warranty deeds conveying land within the ceded area during the period
from l87l to l8?9,'which are divided into three groups: l,2l8 sales
totaling 299,760.27 acres of unimproved non—railroad land sold at an
average price of $3.00 per acre; 531 sales of unimproved railroad land
sold at an average of $#c23 per acre; and 27 sales totaling

’ *7 acres of improved non§railroad.land sold at an average of $4.85
per acre;L No evidence was introduced of sales of large tracts near

the ceded area_wnich were comparable to the area to be valued.

The test for valuation of land is the fair “market value" of land.

 

is the Supreme Court in K.Y. v. Sage, 2397U.S. 57, 60 L. Ed. 1&3, said:

’. . .‘What the owner is entitled.to is the value of the property

;aken, and that means what it fairlyxmnrbe believed that a purchaser
n fair market conditions would have given for its. . ." Both petioners and defendant agree that there was no "actual market“ for the

ad Lake-Pembina tract in 186°. The evidence indicates that there were

3 sales of large tracts of land in the general area involved at a date

on or prior to the valuation date herein involved. In the absence of
evidence of actual market value, in the sense of willing buyers and
willing sellers, resort must be had to other data ehich'would have
been considered by a hypothetical buyer and seller in dealing with the
land in question in 1865, The principles and factors which are to be
taken into consideration in such cases were summarized by the Court of

Claims in Otoe and'Missouria Tribe of Indians V. The United States Of

   

America, ljl C, C_5, 593, The Court stated at page 633 that the factors

 

to be considered in the absence of evidence of "market value" included the‘

natural resources of the land ceded, including its climate, vegetation,

including timber, game and wildlife, mineral resources and whether they’

are of economic value at the time of cession or merely of potential

V31ues'W3ter power, its then or potential use, markets and transportation-considering the ready markets at that time and the potential market.“
'ith this brief statement concerning the methods of evaluating
land, we now turn to the appraisals of the expert witnesses of the

parties. One of the petitioners"witnesses,iHrt John Lee Coulter,

—placed a "use valuation“ of $5 per acre on the tract on the basis of

its best and greatest potential use in the production of wheat. Eowa

ever, this valuation, relying on many arbitrary'determinations and

assumptions, cannot be related to any corresponding market value, and,

therefore, the Commission cannot give any weight to it. As the wit»
nesses conceded, his $5 per acre valuation was substantially higher

than the fair ma ket price. 3

‘if

The petitioners‘ other witness, hr.'3. 3. Davis, prepared 8 de0

Q
9 In a 1 ‘‘__‘‘‘= 1‘_ _ _ _ o P c a u -5 "'3 _______‘ ’__‘_l__'l _ 
tmlleh re;mnd;11nioh contained consioerahle inlornation tne ooma.,,

.1as found verzv helpful in evaluating the tract. I~Ir.. Davis used three

approaches in determining the fair market value of the ceded area. His
first method, the "summation approach" involved a computation of the
value of each of the various soil groups found in the area. It should
be noted that the 872,886 acres of peat and sandunes which I-‘Er. Davis
assigned a nominal value of 10¢ an acre were all in Minnesota and that
none of the 2ll,LL6O acres of the I-Iaukon group, valued at 50¢ an acre,
were in the excluded Goose..Sheyenne River area. So when this GooseSheyenne River area, with its more desirable soil groups, is excluded,
1'11‘. Davis‘ summation appraisal would be lower than his $1.89 figures for

the entire ceded area. Further, since the statistical study of the sales

of the various soil groups was based on the warranty deeds of sales
during the 18718 to l879 period and since the result depended on 1‘? .
Davis’ own arbitrary computation of 1863 values of the soil groups,
little weight can be given to a valuation by this method. Mr. Davis

himself conceded that the summation of his assigned values resulted in

a greater value for the entire tract than could be justified by the facts.

MI‘. Davis‘ second method was by the “capitalization approach.“
This method involved an assumed percentage of the entire tract which
might have been under cultivation (actually none of it was being
farmed in 1863); assumed figures as to yield per acre of wheat, oats,
corn, and potatoes; and assumed prices for each commodity, with the
“probable“ net return to land capitalized at  to arrive at a
figure of $3.57 per acre,

any valuation involving such a variety of

assumptions based on the witness‘ own conjecture and speculation can

have little value in reaching; an estimate of true market value. Mr.

Davifi stated that he did not select his "capitalization approach“ as

the most .f.‘avorable approach in the determination of fair market value.
3*‘ . Davis selected his "comparative sales" approach as the best

method of evaluating this tract. This method was based on his study’

of deeds for sales in l8=7l to l879 adjusted to the economic conditions

of the 1860 to l87O period. In his favored "comparative sales" approach,

Mr. Davis gave major consideration. to the l,2l8 sales of so-called

"unimproved non-railroad iland, " between 1871 and 1879. which brought

an average price of $3.00 an acre. Mr. Davis arbitrarily reduced this

$3.00 figure to $1.75. The Commission has considered the evidence of
the sales but it must be remembered that any weight to be given such
sales must be tempered by the realization that the so-called "comparative
sales" involved small tracts averaging l87 acres, which tracts obviously
brought higher prices than would’ immense tracts such as the 7 million

acre Red Lake-Pembina tract herein involved. Also, the sales were

largely choice sites purchased by the settlers dong rivers and the

railroads and on the best soil. Obviously, the poorer areas would not

be fairly represented in a study of these early land sales. Since the

sales were during the period some 8 to l6 years later than the evaltr.;at.Z:..<%;>;:::

date in this case, it is likewise apparent that the values were sub“

stantially greater because of rapid progress in the 1870's includ_n'3 g

-~-.

the building of railroads in the area. The method used to adjust 

later sales back to an earlier period did not compensate for the above"3’_'*'Y"'3¢-3
av pi

mentioned factors, and the Cor:'missi-on cannot réth Mr. Davis‘ 

clusion that the fair m:=.r1<et value of the subject tract was $3475 

533

IN

1

The defendant's two expert witnesses valued the tract on the basis
of the purchase price which “in all probability, as near as presentxv
can reasonably be ascertained, would have resulted from fair negotiations
between an owner willing and able to sell and a purchaser desiring and
able to buy." (Def; Br., p, 199), after considering the various factors
outlined in our Finding of Fact Ho. 51, the defendant‘s expert concluded
that the said lands had very little monetary'value and the fair market
value was placed at 5 cents an acre. ‘while the Commission agrees that
“market value" is the proper standard for evaluating the lands, we cannot accept all of the witnesses‘ conclusions as to the effect of the

existing conditions in 1863 upon the market value of the area and we do

not agree with the ultimate conclusion that there was very little monetary

‘value in the lands.

In 1863 any well-informed'buyer would have taken into consideration
the size of the tract and the expense of surveying and reselling the
land in small parcels, its remote location, the absence of any sabstantial white population, the absence of any railroads in or near the
area, the fact that transportation to outside markets could only be
accomplished at great.expnse whether by crude carts over the long
overland route to Minneapolis and St. Paul or by boat and cart, the
severe winters, the lack of any actual market for the lands. But at
the same time a propspective buyer would have been aware in l863 that
railroad routes'uere being planned for the general area; of the fertility

of the soil in the Red River Valley and he would have considered the

adaptability of the land for raising grains; the fact that the land

could be broken for farming without the necessity of first clearing
it 05 ti§b€T; the existing water and overland transportation and the
growing population to the south of the area which would furnish expanding markets.

After considering the above and all the evidence of record, it is
the conclusion of the Commission that the 7,¢88,28O acres of Chippewa
land ceded to the United States by the Red Lake and.Penbina Bands under
the treaty of October 2, l863, had an average fair:market value of fortyfive cents per acre on October 2, l863. or a total sum of $3,369,726.00.

‘we have hereinbefore discussed the consideration the United States

paid the Red Lake and Penbina Bands for the cession of 7,488,280 acres

kia. &u'.&\.r.a.a.

-K/a-as l.f"~-n A

I 9 I C ‘Q Q
@OU7,w0Uo)O, which lands'we

__ _-.._..‘[ ‘...._,. ..."t.__\.,1 _g'I_,__.t -3.1. _ 
-‘-‘—'-*-=-U- C--I-I-u. M/\J¢.i.‘\.2.:.i.i'LJLt:'\.L uxlcib .I.L.» was

have now valued at an average price per acre of fortyafive cents, or
$3  97260000

The consideration the Red Lake and.Penbina Bands received for their lands was so grossly inadequate as to constitute an
unconscionable consideration.

It is therefore our conclusion that the Red.Lake Band of Chippewasand the descendants of members of the Penbina Band of Chippewas as it
existed at the time of the Treaty of October 2, 1863, are entitled to
an award in the sum of $3,369,726.00, less $609,480.36 paid on the
claim, leaving a net recovery of $2,760,2h5.6h; provided, however, that

the amount of the award may be amended as is justified by any proof

the defendant may offer showing the acreage of lands granted within

the ceded area, or in lieu thereof scrip issued, to male adult

mixed-bloods of both bands as providea under Article 8 of the 1853
treatv, as modifieé by'Article 7 of the 186% treaty, and that the
1280 acres of land was set aside to the two chiefs as P3'0Vj-5-e‘3~ ‘mder

Article 9 of the 1863 treaty;

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:

Edgar E . Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. 0'}-iarr
Associate Commissioner

 

