BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE
COLVI LIE RESERVATION, ET AL, ,

Petitioners,

v. Docket No. 181

THE UNITED smrss or names,

Defendant.

Decided: February 29, 1956
FINDINGS 9§_§§gT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. The petition in this case was filed before the Indian Claims
Commission on July 3, 1951, by the Confederated Tribes of the Colville'
Reservation as representative and successor of the Colville, Lakes,
Sanpoil, Nespelem, Okanogan and Methow Tribes and by certain individual Indians identified in Finding No. 3 below as the representatives
of these tribes. An amended petition was filed on January 3, 1956,
in this case for the sole purpose of severing claims not involved in
the issues herein.

2. The Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation (hereinafter sometimes called the Confederated Tribes) is an organization
recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having authority to
represent the Indians enrolled on the Colville Reservation. At the
Present time the enrolled membership of the Confederated Tribes numbers
Bpproximately 3,650 Indians. Of this number, approximately 2,790 are
members of the Methow, Okanogan, Sanpoil, Nespelem, Lakes and Colville

tribes. Since 1938, the membership rolls of the Confederated Tribes

has not designated the tribal membership of each enrollee. Accordingly,
in preparation for the presentation of this case, the Business Council
of the Confederated Tribes established a committee to designate the
tribe to which each enrolled member of the Confederated Tribes belongs
and to prepare a tribal role showing this designation. The report of this
committee, approved by a resolution of the Business Council of the Confederated Tribes. shows on the present membership role of the Confederated
Tribes l,382 members of the Colville Tribe, 220 members of the Lakes
Tribe, 117 members of the Nespelem Tribe, 352 members of the Sanpoil
Tribe, 578 members of the Okanogan Tribe, and 138 members of the Methow
Tribe.
3. Each of the individual petitioners named in this paragraph was.

at the time of filing the petition in this case, a member of the tribe
indicated.herein, and each, with the exception of Peter J. Gunn and

Eddie Yeracostchin who are deceased, is at the present time a member

of the tribe indicated herein:

Louie Camille Colville
Peter J. Gunn Colville
Peter Lemerie Lakes
Florence Quill Lakes
Alex L. Covington Sanpoil
Lewis H. Runnels Sanpoil
Eddie Yeracostchin Nespelem
Ed Hilakahn Nespelem
Alex Nicholson Okanogan
Narcille Brooks. Okanogan
Sam Miller Methow
Michel Charley Methos

N. Each of the tribes on whose behalf this action is brought,'viz.:
The Methow, Okanogan, Sanpoil, Nespelem, Colville, and Lakes (herein—

after sometimes called the petitioner tribes) is a tribe, band, or

identifiable group of American Indians residing in the United States;
and, from the time of earliest contacts with white men down to the
present day, each has been recognized as a tribe, band, or identifiable
group of Indians by the officers and agents of the United States dealing
with these Indians, by the ethnographers who have studied these Indians,

and by the historians who have recounted the history of the country in

which these Indians lived.

5. The land originally claimed by the petitioner tribes lies along

the upper reaches of the Columbia River and its tributaries in what are

now Okanogan, Douglas, Ferry, Lincoln, and Stevens counties in northeast

Washington. The United States acquired undisputed sovereignty over this

land by Treaty of June 15, 18b6, with Great Britain. By Act of August lh,

18h8, 9 Stat. 323, the United States included this land within Oregon
Territory and by Act of March 2, 1853, 10 Stat. 172, carved this land out

of Oregon Territory and included it in Washington Territory. Both these

acts provided against impairing the rights of Indians to land in the Territory so long as such rights remained unextinguished by treaty between

the United States and such Indians. For a number of years the United States

Proposed and planned to make a treaty of cession with the petitioner tribes

and other neighboring Indians. The United States never concluded any

treaty with any of the petitioner tribes for the cession of any part of the

land originally occupied by them. Nevertheless, by an executive order

dated April 9, lS72 (I Kappler 915-16) a tract of land lying east of the

Columbia River was set apart as a reservation for certain named bands of

Indians, including the petitioners herein, but by an executive order

14 15::

dated July 2, 1872 (1 Kapp. 916), the executive order of April 9, 1872,
was revoked, the tract of country described therein restored to the public
domain, and the following described tract was set apart as a reservation

for said Indians:

The country bounded on the east and south by the Columbia
river, on the west by the Okanagon river, and on the north by
the British possessions. C

All Indians except members of the petitioner tribes were established on
other reservations provided for them after 1872.
The lands within the boundaries of the Executive order reservation

of July 2, 1872, aforesaid, are not included in this petition.

6. At the beginning of the 19th Century, when the white man first

came into the area within which this case is concerned, politically
autonomous villages constituted the dominant unit of Indian habitation

throughout these lands, The inhabitants of each of these villages called

themselves by the name of the village that they inhabited. They were

governed by the Chief and Assembly of that village. None of the petitioner

tribes, except the Lakes, had developed by that time any political chief

or governing body larger than these autonomous village units. The Lake

Tribe, however, unlike the other petitioner tribes, had developed some

central tribal political organization and is reported to have had a tribal

chief. For the other petitioner tribes, the political organizations that

existed rested specifically and wholly within the villages.

7.

Since the advent of

Indians, most of these groups have been considered and referred to by

the white man, with only rare exceptions, as separate and distinct Indian

tribes.

The early reports of explorers, fur hunters, and missionaries,

the white man into the lands occupied by these '

1: 13

and of the agents of the Hudson Bay Company and the Pacific Fur Company
speak of these tribes and locate in a general way the lands of these
tribes. The earliest dealings of officers and agents of the United States
with the Indians in these lands were conducted with the Colville, Okanogan,
and Lakes Tribes. Commencing;about the year 1859, the agents of the

United States charged with administering the Federal Government's relations
with the Indians in this area began to report annually on the Okanogan,
Methow, Sanpoil, Nespelem, Colville, and Lakes Tribes, reporting for each
the general location of the lands occupied, the estimated population, and
in some instances the names of the chiefs. In the course of this continued
and increasing intercourse with the white man, each of the petitioner tribes
developed a centralized political organization fitted to the demands of this
intercourse with the possible exception of the Nespelem who were considered
part of the Sanpoil. ‘muevmite man sought chiefs who could speak for

the entire tribe and each of the petitioner tribes produced its chiefs.

In the negotiations that occurred from time to time between each of the
petitioner tribes on the one hand and the officers and agents of the

United States on the other over the years that preceded the establishment of the Colville Reservation in 1872, each of the petitioner tribes

was represented by its respective chief or chiefs, and the authority of
these chiefs to represent and speak for their respective tribes, and

the capacity of each tribe to be so represented by a,chief, was not
questioned by the United States or the Indians. For years after the
Colville Reservation was established and until after the Confederated

Tribes of the Colville Reservation was organized in the 1930's, the

S 1nvasion_of the country.

agents and officers of the United States continued to deal with and
report on each of the petitioner tribes as a distinct and separate tribe
having a political entity and assigned as such to the Colville Reservation.

8. Each of the separate tribes belonged to what is classified as

the Interior Salish dialectic group of the Salish speaking people. With

the exception of the Methow tribe, the speech of each, though differing,

was and is intelligible to members of the other separate tribes, The

Methow spoke a classification of Interior Salish spoken by the Chelan

and Columbia Tribes.

9. Commencing in 1782 and during the one hundred years that

followed, the separate tribes suffered from a series of adversities that

depleted their population. Chief among these were the smallpox epidemics

of 1782-83, 1830, 18146, and 1852-53, the measles epidemic of 18147, and
the disruption of the aboriginal Indian life by the white man's gradual
Dr. Verne Bay has estimated that as of 1780

the Okanogan and Southern Okanogan in the lands that later became the

United States, numbered 2,000 or more, the Lakes in the area that later
became the United States numbered 800 or more, the Colville, 2,000 or

more, the Sanpoil and Nespelem together, 2,500 or more, and the Methow
800 or more. Dr. Ray's estimate of the population as of 1860 puts the
Okanogan at 600, the Methow at H00, the Nespelem at 500, the Sanpoil
at 800, the Colville at 600, and the Lakes at 200. Since that time,
the population of the petitioner bands has remained nearly constant to
the Present day. Today there are approximately 2.900 enrolled members

Of the Confederated Tribes who are desceniants of members of the separate

tribes.

10. As already stated, the dominant unit of habitation for each

of the petitioner tribes was a village. These villages were the winter
homes of the Indians. They were located at sites which continued to

be used with permanence year after year, and generation after generation.
They consisted of winter semi—subterranean lodges and mat houses. These
houses were rebuilt and moved from time to time, and in this process

the precise location of each village would change within the same general
area.

The village sites were all located along the rivers. They ranged

in area occupied from the smallest villages consisting of_only two or

three lodges to large villages extending for more than a mile along the
bench that bordered the river. In population they ranged froh as few
as twenty-five to thirty persons to as large as four hundred and more

persons. the record contains evidence

In the case of the Lakes,
locating 10 such permanent villages; for the Colville, 7; for the Sanpoil, 13; for the Nespelem, 8; for the Okanogan, almost M0; for the
Methow, more than 15.

11. The permanent villages were fully occupied only during the
late fall and winter months. During this time, most inhabitants remained indoors to avoid the severity of the weather. Food, collected
and dried during the summer months, had been stored in the village.
Fuel likewise had been gathered and was stored at the village sites.
Except for hunting trips and the customary midwinter festivities, most
of the Indians stayed in the villages. Winter was the best season for

hunting (mostly deer), and it was at this time that the need for meat

to supplement the storage of dried fish from the summer‘s catch was

M15

f

1+ 158

most pressing. In the spring the Indians were occupied in root digging
which was the task of the women and small game hunting was undertaken
by the men. The summer was devoted to fishing and the Indians spent
this season at the great salmon fishing grounds along the rivers. In
the fall the Indians would move on to fall fishing grounds and some into
the mountains to gather fall roots or to hunt.

Sagnoil and Nespelem

12. The fur companies representatives were the first known white
men to contact the Sanpoil and Hespelen Indians in their habitats along
the Columbia River. David Thompson, who represented the Hudson Bay
Company and left a journal of his experiences, wrote of spending a
night in 1811 in a "Simpoil” village just below the juncture of the
Columbia and Sanpoil Rivers. A few days later he visited a village
of “Inspae1is" Indians just below the juncture of the Columbia and
Nespelim Rivers and the next day he spent a few hours with a village
of Methow Indians at the mouth of the Eethon River. (Pet. Ex. 502).
Ross Cox, another representative of the Hudson Bay Company in about
1813-1813, wrote that "The Sinpoils * * * occupy a district on the
northern bands of the Columbia, between the Spokan and Oakinagan Rivers.
They subsist principally on salmon and canas, nd sometimes a.smal1
deer. * * * We could never rightly ascertain whether they had a chief.
* ” *" (Pet. Ex. h5H). In 1829-1830 John Work of the same company
located the Sanpoil Indians along the Columbia River from about the
mouth of the Spokane River downstream to below "a little River falling

in from the North which bears their name.” (Pet, Ex, 7)

13. In l8h9, Governor Lane of Oregon Territory who was also exofficio superintendent of Indian Affairs, reported that "The Senpoils

on the Columbia river near the Kettle Falls are well disposed but very
poor. They number about five hundred, have some horses and a few guns.
They subsist on fish, roots, etc." (Pet. Ex. 11). In 185M in his report
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Governor Isaac Stevens of Oregon
Territory, linked the "N‘pockle or Sans Puelles, on the Columbia River,"
with the Okanagons, but also reported they “are also claimed by the
Spokanes," (Pet. Ex. 66). In 1859 Acting Indian Agent Major Lmgenbeel
who had recently arrived at Colville, Washington Territory, reported that
the San Poils resided during the summer at the mouth of Spokane River
where they had a fishery and that "During the winter, the whole tribe
collects at the mouth of Sans Poils Creek, on the Columbia River. * * *"
Indian Agent George A. Paige in his second annual report to the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Washington Territory in 1866 reported

(Pet. Ex. 226) the "San Poeils and other bands" to be residing along the
Columbia River from the 118th Meridian to the 120th Meridian and "on the
San Poeil” a tributary of the Columbia. In 1867 Paige in reporting on
the “San Poeils, Talouse, and other bands" stated: "These reside along
the Columbia river. From the ll8th to the 120th meridian are several
small, detached bands, remnants of once large tribes." (Pet. Ex. 225 and
230). In 1870, Samuel Ross, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, Washin5t°n
Territory, in his report to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs rep0Ft9d
the “Sanpoil and Nespeelum" to number 532 and that their head chief was

“Qua-tal-v-kin.“ (Pet. Ex. 266). Included in Ross's report are extracts

1% 155

from the report made to Ross by William P. Winans who had been appointed
by the Superintendent to investigate the names, locations and numbers of
Indians in northeastern Washington Territory. Winans reported "The
Sanpoils, which includes the Nes-pee—lum Indians, are located on the
Columbia, from the mouth of the Spokane down to Grand Coulee, (on south
of the Columbia,) and from a point opposite the mouth of the Spokane
down to the mouth of the Okanogan on the north side of the Columbia.
including the country drained by the Sanpoil and Nes-pee—lum Creeks."
(Pet. BX. 266). In his second annual report to the Superintendent in
1371. Winans reported (Pet. Ex. 285) "The San poels and Nespelums
number five humdred and thirty—eight, and reside on streams of the
same name, and on the Columbia River; * * *;" that they had never received any presents from the Government and stated they would accept
none since they believed by doing so they would give the Government

a claim to their lands. Accompanying this report Winans forwarded a
map (Pet. Ex. 516 is a copy thereof) showing, according to Winans,

"what part of this district is occupied by each tribe under my control."
The map has an area designated "San Poels“ marked off to include lands
both north and south of the Columbia River and on the north appears to
include much of the watersheds of the Nespelem and San Poil rivers. The
report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for 1875 stated that the
"Nespeelums and San P0915" were confederated tribes numbering 500.

(Pet. BX. 372).

lh, Anthropological sources contain many references to the

Sanpoil Indians.

Swanton (Def. Ex. 7) states their location was on the

Sanpoil River and Nespelem Creek and on the Columbia below Big Bend.

M 1E

Swanton cites the Nespelem as a subdivision of the Sanpoil. Curtis

(1917) (Def. Ex. 15) wrote that "The Sanpoel occupied the valley of
the stream that bears their name, and the shores of the Columbia between

the Spokane and the Sanpoel, its tributaries, * * *. Each spring the

Sanpoel crossed the Columbia to camp in the neighborhood of the present
Coulee City, Washington, and dig roots; about the first of July they
returned to the river to build their fish-weir at the mouth of the
Sanpoel." Curtis said that "The Hespilim occupied the valley of that
name, which flows into the Columbia about thirty miles west of the
Sanpoel, and the adjacent portion of the lands bordering on the
Columbia." Mooney (1896) stated the Sanpoil occupied the country on
San9oil river and the Nespelem on the north bank of the Columbia,
"along Nespelem river and down to the junction of the Okinagan, and on
the opposite side of the Columbia down to about Grand Coulee." (Def,
Ex. 9, p. 21). Mooney‘s map of the "Distribution of Tribes of the

Upper Columbia Region * * *“ depicts the territory he assigned to these

Indians (Pet. Ex. M69). Mooney limited the Sanpoil to lands north of

the Columbia.
15. In 1933 a book entitled "The Sanpoil and Nespelem, Salishan
Peoples of Northeastern Washington," by Verne F, Bay was published which
contains a thorough study of the ethnography of these Indians. Dr.
Ray, who appeared as an expert witness for petitioners in this case,
is a recognized authority on the plateau Indians, In this study of

the Sanpoil and Nespelem Indians the ethnologist found the exact territory Occupied by these Indians to be (Pet. Ex. M78, page 13) as follows:

1: 161

In northeastern Washington, about 85 miles south of the
Canadian boundary, the Columbia river abruptly changes its
course from south to westward. This has come to be known
as the Big Bend of the Columbia, and the adjacent territory
to the south of the river is called locally the Big Bend
country. This general area, together with that included
within the bend, was originally occupied by the Sanpoil.

The confluence of the Sanpoil and the Columbia rivers

marked the center of population but the geographical center
was somewhat north of this point, near Lake.Annun (Buffalo g
Lake). The southern boundary of the area was approximately a
straight line running east and west at about h7° HO‘ latitude.
The eastern boundary intersected this line about 15 miles
west of the town of Davenport. From that point it continued
in a northeasterly direction to the bend of the river, or

Just west of the village called Peach. The boundary line

then followed the river northward to Hunters, where it veered
westward and connected with the Kettle river range of mountains;
this range formed the remaining portion of the eastern territorial limit. A line drawn directly eastward from Republic

to the Kettle river mountains would represent the northern
boundary with fair accuracy. On the west the boundary line
proceeded from Republic to Kartaro, then southward across

the river toward Coulee City.

All villages were located along the Columbia river; therefore the boundary points on the river were much more clearly
defined than in other parts of the territory. The former were
determined by the actual extent of the villages, the latter
merely by the greatest extent of territory covered during

hunting and root gathering expeditions. The area thus recognized as belonging to the Sanpoil comprised about 1600
square miles. Approximately 85 miles of the course of the
Columbia were included and both sides of the river were
occupied except for the short distance between Miles and

Hunters.

The lands bounded as described above were “the—exact territory occupied
by the Sanpoil," according to Ray's findings and included the Nespelem

Indians since the author treated the two groups as a unit. The area is

mapped in Ray's book at page 1M.
16.

Bay in his publication in a footnote to his description of
Sanpoil and Nespelem territory stated that "It is somewhat misleading

however, to speak of territory belonging to the Sanpoil and to designate

1; 162

boundaries as definite lines. The nature of boundaries and concepts

concerning the territorial ownership are discussed at length in the

section on political organization, pages 109." Bay in the section

referred to found that "the Sanpoil political unit was the village"
and "tribal organization in the ordinary sense was entirely lacking."
The author, however, found "a strong feeling of unity among these otherwise independent villages." He stated: (Pet. Ex. M78, page 110)

* * * The Sanpoil, it becomes clear, were much more truly
“one people" than might appear from only a cursory examination
of their system of political divisions and allegiances.

Moreover, the various villages made use of the same hunting
and berrying grounds. These grounds were not considered either
village or group property. No concept of real property existed.
The use of common territory was a matter of expediency made
possible by the friendly relations existing between the villages.
The area, fairly definitely bounded, was considered by the Sanpoil as their proper range for food gathering but no effort
was made to keep outsiders from making use of it also. Neighboring groups, however, were reasonably considerate and en~

croachnent was slight.

1?. The Commission finds based on all the evidence of record,
oral and documentary, that although the Sanpoil and Nespelem Indians
were aboriginally only a collection of independent villages with no
tribal organization they did nevertheless over the years develop
because of increasing contact with white men and government officials
a tribal organization composing both groups with a head chief
authorized to represent them, respecting their lands. (Pet. Exhibits
253, 260, 266, 319). The Commission further finds that the Sanpoil

Tribe, which includes the Nespelen, exclusively used and occupied the

area of land described in Finding 15 as delineated on Petitioners’

Map. Exhibit 532.

 

THE COLVILLE
18. The first recorded mention of the Colville Indians is contained in the journals of the Lewis and C1a.r‘<: Expedition (18011-1806).
Although these famed explorers did not contact these Indians they
learned of them from others they did meet who located the Colvilles whom
they called ?heel—poo at the "Great Falls," now known as Kettle Falls.
Ross Cox of the Hwison Bay Company wrote that a small tribe called

"Les Chandieres" resided at Kettle Falls and that he visited their
village in 1813. Later John Work of the same company in 1829 mentions
the Kettle Falls (whyelpie) Indians as being in the Colville district
and gives their number as being jhl. Work in 1830 wrote that the
Kettle Falls Indians consisted of two tribes which he named the
Whyelpie and Sneelameen and stated they occupied the Columbia from the
Little Dallas above Kettle Falls to near the junction of the Spokane
River (Pet. Ex. 7). Father de Smet, the famed missionary among the
Indians of the Northwest, in l8Uh arrived at Fort Colville on the
Colville river and tells of baptizing some of the Shuyelpi or Chaudiere
tribe (Colville) who resided near the Fort including "the great chief"
of the tribe. (Pet. Ex. 1:56).

19. Officers and agents of the United States also found the
Colville Indians in the same general locality mentioned by the fur
traders and missionaries. Governor Lane of Oregon Territory in l8h9
wrote that "The Kettle Falls or Colville Indians live between the
Calispelm tribe and Fort Colville above the swall Lakes; are divided
into two bands, their total number amounting to eigh hundred-~one

hundred of whom are warriors." (Pet. Exhibits 11 and 12). In 185M

)4 1614

Governor Isaac Stevens reported that "Fort Colville is the principal
ground of the Schno-yel~pi or Kettle Fells tribe, one of the largest of
the Selish. * * * They number from five to six hundred. They do not
obtain many furs, the greater part of those taken at this post coming
from the Upper Columbia. * * * They have no head chief of note, and there
were present on the occasion only Kle—kah—ka~hi, the chief at the falls,
Kwilt-Kwilt-louis, a sub-chief, and Eli-mihl—ka, the son of a former
chief at this placer * * * They learned that but few of the original
Schwo-yel-pi stock remained. They had gradually become extinct, and
their places were filled by people from the adjoining bands.” (Pet. EX.
66). In July 1859 Major Lugenbeel of the United States Army who had
but recently arrived in Colville Valley wrote that the Colville Tribe
occupied the country "watered by n:11 Creek, on the east side of
Columbia river, and by the Colville River, coming in from the west."
(Pet. Ex. l6l). In 1865 Indian Agent George A. Paige in charge of

the Colville and Spokane Indians reported the Colville Indians

“inhabit the Colville valley and that of the Columbia river, from
Kettle Falls to a point thirty miles below, and number about 500."

In 1866 he reported they "inhabit the country bordering on the

Columbia River from the M8 to H9 parallel North Latitude and number
about 380 souls."

20. In 1870, Samuel Ross, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for
Washington Territory, reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
with respect to the investigation made by William P. Winans of the
names and locations of Indians living in the northeastern part of

Washington Territory. Ross stated that Winans reported the Colvilles

as being located in the Colville valley, on the Kettle River, and on
both sides of the Columbia River from_Kettle Falls down to the mouth
of the Spokane. (Pet. Ex. 266). In his 1871 report Winans stated
that the "Colvilles, numbering six hundred and thirty-one and residing
on the Columbia, Kettle, and Columbia [E19] Rivers, have thirty-five
farms; * * *." (Pet. Ex. 285). Winans prepared a map (Pet. Ex. 516

is a copy) to show what part of his district was occupied by each
tribe under his control and forwarded the map with his report. This
map includes much more land as Colville Territory than now claimed

by the petitioner tribe. It extends Colville Territory on the north
to the Canadian border to include much of the lands now claimed by

the Lakes, and on the east the area designated as Colville is larger
than now claimed and includes land now claimed by the Lakes. On the
south Winans‘ map also shows the Colville‘s lands as including a

small part now claimed by the Sanpoil.

21. Ethnological sources of record with respect to the Colville
Indians are not as complete as they were for the Sanpoil. Ray in his
"Native Villages and G-roupings" (1936) (Pet. Ex, hag, pp. 103, 118)
locates the Colville villages and maps the territorial boundaries
of the Colville. These boundary lines are also shown on Petitioners’
Exhibit 532. Curtis (1911) wrote that the "Colvilles lived in the
valley of Colville river and along both sides of the Columbia from
Kettle Falls to the mouth of the Spokane." Spier in his "Tribal
Distribution in Washington" (1936) reviews former ethnological and

historical matter pertaining to the Colville territory as follows:

1; 16£

« Adequate information on Colville territory is not at
hand. Ehe best statement appears to that of Paige in
1865: [See Finding 127} This agrees with Ray's map and
list of villages. Teit's brief notes are in accord:

"A leading band [§a§7 located at Kettle Falls or near the
mouth of Kettle River. ...The Colville are said to have
had several very large camps along the Columbia and on

the lower Colville River."

Other writers (Curtis and Winans) assign additional
territory on the Kettle River and particularly on the
Columbia quite to the mouth of the Spokane River. But
the latter was without much doubt within the territory
of the Lower Spokan. * * * Mooney is much too generous.
"They originally occupied the country on Colville and
Kettle rivers and on both sides of the Columbia from
Kettle falls down to Spokane river, in Washington, and
extending north into British territory to about the
lower Arrow lake." His map belies this, assigning
Kettle River and the Columbia above the mouth of that

tributary to the Lake tribe.
Chalfant, defendant's ethnologist, states (Def. Ex. 9, page 17) that
"in reviewing the historical and anthropological sources * * * it
becomes clear that the Colville did actually occupy the lower Colville
River valley, particularly in the vicinity of old Fort Colville, and
the Columbia River valley from Kettle Falls at least as far down as
Inchelium, Washington. * * *"

22. Although village autonomy undoubtedly prevailed among the
Colville aboriginally (see Ray, Pet. Ex. H73) constant Contact udth
the whites tended to bring about a loose tribal organization with whom
agents and officers of the United States dealt with over a number of years.
(Pet. Ex. 33?. p. 9; Pet.  383, p. 3; Pet. ‘Ex. 318, p. 3; Pet. Ex. 266).

23.

the Colville Tribe of Indians has established Indian title to that

The Commission finds based on all the evidence of record that

area of land which is dephzted on Petitioner's Exhibit 532 and which

is generally located on both sides of the Columbia River from just above
Kettle Falls on the north to near Hunters, Washington, on the south

with the northeastern boundary line of the Sanpoil, as previously

‘found in Finding 15, being the western boundary line of the Colville.

THE LAKE s

 

2h. Historical data of record with respect to the Lakes is not
as complete as it has been shown to be for the Sanpoil, Nespelem and
Colville. In 1827 J. W. Dease of the Hudson Bay Company wrote (Pet. Ex.
3) "Number of Indians distinguishing Tribes,

31¢. Kettle Fall Indians 5h, Grand Rapids Indians 62.

San Poils 91.
These N Tribes inhabit the Country from above Cola Lakes to St. Poil
River below what is called Spoken Forks." In 1830, J. W. Work of the
same company reported “The Lake Indians inhabit the Columbia from or

above the Athabasca portage to the White goat river or little Dalls not

far above Kettle Falls, and the small streams that fall into it.“ (Pet.
Ex. 7). Father de Smet reported a visit to the Lake Tribe in 18b6,

mentions Gregory as their chief and stated that these Indians were a

Part of the Kettle Falls nation. (Pet. Exo Q55). The reports of the

officers and agents of the United States are strangely silent with

respect to the Lakes Indians daring the early years of contact with the
tribes on the Upper Columbia. Major Lugenbeel in 1859 shortly after
arriving in Colville Valley, however, reported "This tribe (lakes) reside on Columbia River, about the parallel M99 N. They number some 59
warriors-—* * *. When the boundary between the United States & British
Columbia shall be ascertained, I think those Indians will be found to be

north of the line. They however come to Colville during the fishing

The Columbia Lake Indians 1: 16:

season & claim to be an offshoot of the Colvilles, with whom they have a
constant intercourse." (Pet. Ex. l6l). Agent Paige in his reports for
1865-1867 does not mention the Lakes. In 1866 and 1867 Paige reported
the Colville Indians as inhabiting the country bordering on the Columbia
River from the U8th to the M9th parallel of North Latitude. (Pet. Exhibits
226-227). Winans in 1870 visited the Lakes and reported they had never
before been visited by an.Agent. (Pet. Rx. 263). He reported the Lake
Tribe to number 229 individuals; that Kis—a~wee-likh was their head chief;
that their tribal name was Sen—i-jex-tee; and that they were located on
both sides of the Columbia River from Kettle Falls north to British
Columbia. (Pet. Exhibits 266, 285). Winans’ map (Pet. Ex. 516), prepared in 1871. on which he outlined the country occupied by the petitioner
tribes depicts but a small area of land east of Kettle River from Kettle
Falls north along the Columbia River to the international bouniary as
being occupied by the Lake Indians. The remaining portion of the area
now claimed by the Lake Tribe Winans indicates to be Colville Territory
for the most part.
25. Anthropological sources locate the Lake Tribe in the same

general area mentioned by historical documents. Curtis found that

the Lake Indians formerly held the Kettle river valley and that of

the Columbia from Kettle Falls to Lower Arrow lake, in Washington

and British Columbia. (Def. Ex. 15). Spier (1936) wrote that the
territory of the “Lake Salish or Sinojextee lay principally in

Canada along the Columbia River and Arrow Lakes from the vicinity of

Revelstoke southward to the border." Spier then quotes the following

from Teit: "There appear to have been about eight villages on the

Columbia_[in Washingto§7, all very populous" which Spier states extended as far south as Marcus, opposite the mouth of Kettle River.

(Pet. Ex. U92). Mooney stated that the Lakes "owned the country on

both sides of the Columbia in Washington, from about Kettle Falls

northward into British Columbia. * * *" (Pet. Ex. H69). Spier also

states that Mooney’s map (Pet. Ex. M69) "carries their southern
boundary westward from a point north of Kettle Falls, thence northwest

of the Kettle River (much as on Ray's map)." Dr. Ray in his “Native

Villages and Groupings" (Pet. Ex. H82, pages 11h, 12k, 125. 128,
published 1936) locates ll Lake Indian villages in northeastern

Eashington. Of their territory he wrote:
* * * The somewhat unusual shape of Lakes territory grows

out of geographical conditions. with but a single short
portage it was possible to make circuits of hundreds of miles
by canoe. The shape of the territory conformed to these
routes of travel. The southern lobe of Lakes territory is
the least definitely established. Its projection is based
upon the recording by Mr. William Elmendorf of a single
Lakes village site at Addy, Washington. [§ay's village number
M3, page 11E]. The information was furnished by Mrs. Nancy
Wyncoop, a Lakes informant now living on the Spokane
reservation.

Ray's map in.this publication of Lakes territory and villages is almost

identical with the Lakes area on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit 532, out«
lining the Claims of the petitioner tribes, except that the village
numbered 33 at Addy, dashington, does not appear on the map in evidence. Ray denotes indefiniteness of the boundary line at this point
on his map in Exhibit use at page 111:. Chalfant, de:f‘endant‘s ethnologist, in his report (Def. Ex. 9, page 7) writes “it may be noted

1: 17r.

that the Lake Indians are shown to_have occupied the region in
Washington on both sides of the Columbia from at least Marcus north
into Canada, and also the lower part of Kettle River. * * * The
mountainous hunting grounds in the upper Kettle River region west

of Marcus, Washington,although within the area mapped for Lake

Indians by Spier, are said to have been used by other Colville groups."

26. The Commission finds that the Lake Tribe has by substantial

evidence established Indian title to the area of land as delineated

on petitioners‘ map (Exhibit 532) for the "Lakes" except for the lands
within the area called the "southern lobe" by Bay. This excluded
area was found by Bay to be the "least definitely established" portion
Of Lake Territory and admittedly was based on the recording of a
single Lakes village site (which does not appear on petitioners‘ map,
exhibit 532) at Addy, Washington. Findings 18-21 inclusive, previously
made herein, show use of part of this “southern lobe” by the Colville
Indians. Mooney‘s (Pet. Ex. M69) mapping of Lake territory exclude
the Lakes from this "southern lobe;" SDier's map (Pet. Ex. H92, page
H3) Shows this "southern lobe" as Colville territory; and Winans
designates this southern area together with a great part of other
territory claimed by the Lakes to the Colville. The Lake Tribe's
southern boundary as delineated on Petitioners’ Exhibit 532 as it
runs from just north of Republic to the Columbia should be extended
directly east to intersect the eastern boundary line, thus excluding

from the area claimed by Lakes and shown on said Exhibit 532, all

lands thereof lying south of such line.

THE OKANOGAN

 

27._ One of the first recorded contacts with the Okanogan Indians
is contained in the report made by John MacLeod of the Hudson Bay
"This nation is very numerous say 250 to 300

Company. He wrote that;

men * 5 ”. They inhabit the whole of the Banks of the Okanogan River
from the Columbia river to the Great Ok Lake, and thence to Thompsons
River, a distance computed to be about M00 miles, * *." (Pet. Ex. 2).
Earlier, Ross Cox of the company visited Fort Okanogan and wrote that
“The natives of Oakinogan are an honest, quiet tribe. They do not
muster more than two hundred warriors; * * Their principal occupation
is catching and curing salmon and occasionally hunting for deer and
The chief is an old

beaver, neither of which abounds in their lands.

man. who apparently possesses but little power." (Pet. Ex. h5h). During
the same period of time, Ross Cox, a fur trader, also came in contact
with the Okanogans. He wrote that Red Fox "was head chief of the
Okanagan nation" in earlier times and mentioned meeting "Ye-whell—cometeta, the principal Okanogan chief.“ In lshu Father de Smet left Fbrt
Colville and after a journey of three days arrived at a "Okinakane
encampment," which was probably near east is now called Bonaparte Lake.
(Pet. Ex. M56),

28. Governor Isaac Stevens in 185M in a letter to the Commissioner
of Indian.Affairs quotes George Gibbs‘ report on the Oxanogans. Gibbs
had reported the ”Okin-akanes“ comprised the bands lying on the Okanogan
River “as far north as the foot of the great lake,” and that there were

911 bands, the Te-kunr-a-tum, at the mouth of the river; Kone—konep,

on the creek of the same name; the Kluck—hait—kwee, at the falls; the

h 17

Kin-a-kanes, near the forks; and Mil—a~ket—kun on the west fork. Gibbs

wrote that "the two bands on the forks are more nearly connected with
the Schwoyelpi;_[Colville7 than with.the ones first named." With the
Okanogan, Gibbs also connected the Sanpoil “though these are also
claimed by the Spokanes.“ Ethnologists have listed the last three
Okanogan bands listed by Gibbs as properly belonging to the Northern
Okanogan Tribe. ‘[§ee Finding 33]: (Pet, Ex. 66). Steven's 185M map
(Pet. Ex. 510) based upon Indian names and boundaries reported by Gibbs
locates the Okanqgan in a general manner in the country north of the
Columbia between the Methow River on the west and the Colville Indians
on the east. A map prepared by Stevens in 1856 (Pet. Ex. 511) located
the_0kanogan in the same general area including the Methow, Okanogan,
Nespelem and Sanpoil River drainage areas, except that the lands at the
mouth of the Sanpoil River and along the Columbia River from approximately
the present town of Hunters to near the mouth of the Hespelem were in»
cluded by Stevens with the lands of the Spoken Indians. This mapping
is apparently also based upon Gibbs‘ information which is set forth
above. Major Lugenbeel in 1859 reported to the Superintendent of Indian
Affairs that the Okanogan tribe of about 200 warriors was divided into
two bands, one residing on the Columbia River and the other near the
forks of the Okanogan River. In 1859, Agent Lansdale, of the Yakima

Indian Agency visited the Okanogan and reported "Although some of the

Okanakane Indians, or such as were through that part of the country, are

jointly chargeable with hostile demonstrations last Summer, I have no

question as to the friendly disposition of Too-nas—cut, the present head

chief of the nation, he having been constituted chief by the Whites, * * *."

Iensdale was of the opinion that the Okanogan tribe numbered about 300

souls.-(Pet. Ex. l68).
29. Agent George Paige, in dharge of the Colville and Spokane
Indians, wrote to the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Washington

Territory in 1865, that the Okanogan Tribe was composed of several small

bands residing along the Okanogan river and that a majority of the tribe

lived north of the Canadian boundary line. He estimated that about 500 of

the Indians lived south of the boundary; Paige reported it was exceedingly
difficult to distinguish with respect to the Indians of the tribe living
near the boundary between those entitled to benefit "from our government
and those of British Columbia, as they are migratory in habit, and the

line may be said to cut the tribe in two. My opinion is that only those
who winter on this side can properly be considered as coming under our

supervision; or, do those who cultivate on this side during the summer

belong to us?" In his 1866 report, Paige stated the Okanogan resided

near the British line in the vicinity of Lake Okanogan and on the

Okanogan river, and in 1867 his report located them as "inhabiting the
country along the British boundary line and the Okinakane river and lake.“
William P

30. . Winans, in writing of the Indians under his supervision in 1871 reported that the Okanogan number 3&0 and that they resided on the Okanogan river and its tributaries. (Pet. EX. 285). Winan‘s
map Which he prepared to show what parts of the district the tribes
under his supervision occupied, delineates an area north of the
Columbia on both sides of the Okanogan River to the Canadian border as
being occupied by the Okanogan. (Pet. BX. 516), Winans in 1870 had

Teported To~was—kut as being the head chief of the Okanogan. (Pet. Ex. 266).

1+ 173

it 175

31. Emhnological studies supply more pertinent information respecting the Okanogan than do historical sources. Curtis (Def. Ex. 15) located
these Indians on the Okanogan from its confluence with the Columbia to
its source north of the Canadian boundary. "Strictly speaking," he wrote,
"the Okanogan were only one of several bands residing along this stream,
but because of its numerical strength its name was used to designate the
entire group. About the middle of the nineteenth century, Hustas—sumnahaikin,
Walking Grizzly-bear, chief of the Sinstupitsah, a band at Omak lake, was
influential among all the Okanogan bands," Spier (Pet. Ex, M92) states
that older writers did not distinguish between the Sinkaietk, or the Southern
Okanogan, (see Finding 33), and the Canadian (or northern) Okanogan. Spier
writes that the major distribution of the Northern Okanogan, or the Okanogan
proper, lies within British Columbia and that they entered the now State of
Washington only along the lower Similkameen River, and that section of the
Okanogan River from the Canadian border south to Tonasket.

32. Teit's study of the Okanogan (Pet. Ex, 397) deals chiefly with the
Canadian Okanogan. He found the Okanogan had at least two recognized divisions:
(1) The Upper of Lake Okanogan around Okanogan Lake, Long Lake and Dog Lake
in Canada, and (2) the Lower Okanogan, or River_0kanogan in the country along
the river below the former division. The Sinilkameen of the river of that
name, he wrote, might be considered another division. "The Okanogan below
the Falls," according to Teit, "did not constitute a separate division."

With this observation by Teit, Spier differs and states: "Teit, who denies
the Separability of Northern Okanqgan and Sinkaietk, nevertheless makes

some contradictory statements. According to the head chief of the Canadian

Okanogan, ‘the old dividing line between the Okanagon and Sanpoil people
was about Okanogan Falls. From there north the real Okanagon dialect
was spoken.’ _Un1esS Sanpoil-Nespelem were accustomed to visit the
Okanagon River near the boundary, which is quite possible, the reason
for mentioning then as the adjoining group is obscure. ‘But the Signir
ficance of this passage * ¢ * lies in the final statement, namely, that
‘the real Okanagon dialect‘ was spoken only in the north. This suggests
that the Canadian Okanagon recognized a distinction between themselves and
those who dwelt down the river, the Sinkaietk." Spier‘s map of Tribal
Distribution in Wasiaington (Pet. Ex, M92, pages H2.-1:3) sets s boundary
between the Horthern Okanagon and the Sinkaietk, or Southern Okanagon,
Rav‘s Tiativc Villages and Groupings," contains a map (Pet. Ex. 382, Page
103) of native territorial distribution nhich shows a boundary line
separating the ”Okanogan" from the "Southern Okanogan" with the territory
of the former extending into the United States across the Canadian border,
(399 also map, page ll8 of same exhibit).

33. The most thorough study of the Okanogan which appears of record
is "The Sinkaietk or Southern Okanogan of Washington" by Cline and Others.
edited by Leslie Spier, and published in l93S. In the preface to the work,
Dr. Spier srote: (Pet. Ex. M52)

The Okanagon are a Salish speaking people of north central

Washington and adjecent British Columbia, Their territory

comprised the drainage system of the Okanogan River and the

upper Methow River, both northern tributaries of the Columbia

River, from Okanqgan Lake and the Sinilkameen valley in British

Columbia, southward to the mouth of the Methow.

The subject of the present paper is the culture of those

Okanagon Bands nhich occupied the southern half of this territory,
from the Methow northward to Osoyoos Lake immediately north of

the Canadian boundary. Two tribal units may be distinguished
among these bands: the Sinkaietk or Southern Okanagon, occupying the lower Okanogan River valley, and the southern bands of
Okanagon proper or, as we prefer to call them, the Northern

Okanagon, situated above and bel0w'the international boundary.
¥##

Spier wrote that the Southern Okanogan "now live on and about the western
part of the Colville Indian Reservation“_and estimated their population

to be about 250 to 300. In this connection, too, Teit reported that with

respect to his Lower Okanqgan group in which he included the Okanogan
along the river in Canada and below the falls that “These people are nearly

all on the Colville Reservation in Washington, where they have received
allotments." (Pet. Ex, #97),
314.

The study of the Southern Okanqgan cited in Finding 33 contains
a section on the social structure of these Indians prepared by Miss L. V. W.

Walters. The author of this section based upon her research wrote:

The Sinkaietk [Southern Okanogan7 have only band chiefs and
deny that any man was ever head chief over their entire tribe.
Taking into consideration that each band is autonomous, it is
not possible to speak of the Sinkaietk as a tribe, if tribe be
interpreted to mean a group functioning as a unified political

' whole. Any unity diat the Sinkaietk possess may be explained
as due to dialectic identity, close geographical associations,
similar Customs and friendly relations which have been maintained
by constant intermarriage.

The Sinkaietk deny identity with the northern Okanogan on the

basis of political differences, although they speak an identical

dialect. * * * Miss Walters stated that the territory which the Sinkaietk formerly occupied
included the entire territory "from about six miles east of Condon's Ferry
on the Columbia River to Tonasket." According to this authority, the
Sinkaietk consisted of four autonomous groups, (1) the Tukoratum, (2) KonKbnelp. (3) Kartar. and (U) Tonasket Bands. The Tukoratum band had winter

hi

14 178

sites from Condon‘s Ferry on the mouth of the Columbia River to the mouth
of the Okanqgan River and up the Okanogan to about four miles above

Mouse, Washington. ,The Kartar band had winter sites from the foot of

Lake Onak to the Columbia River. Winter sites were located for the
Konkonelp band from about three miles above Malott to the turn of the
Okanogan River at Omak, whereas, the Tonasket band occupied the territory
from Riverside upstream to Tonasket. Miss Walters states that the territory
of the Inkamip band of Northern Okanogan was directly north of that of the
Tonasket band and that they wintered at the head of and on the eastern
shore of Lake Osoyoos in British Columbia. This band, according to the
writer, numbered about 200 people in l870. The village sites for these
bands, both Southern and Northern Okanogan, are located on a map in this
publication, (Pet. Ex, M52, page 85),

_ 35. Another section of the publication with respect to the Southern
Okanogan by Cline and others concerns "The Subsistence Quest" of these
Indians and was prepared by Richard H. Post. Their seasonal round in the
quest for food was similar to that related previously for all the Indians
in the area. (See Finding ll), Specifically, Post found that in the
spring the Southern Okanogan fished at the falls twenty miles below Oroville,
Washington, and.at Keller, Washington, on the Sanpoil River. From these
points they would go to Oroville (Northern Okanogan territory) to the summer
salmon camps where they remained in these camps or temporarily at the berry
and root grounds from June to October nhile the salmon were running and the
bulk of the roots and berries ripened along the river. Post states the band
wintering above Omak hunted about Moses Mountain and_Omak Lake, and the band

which wintered near Monse went into the Twisp country (area now claimed by

the Methow) for summer hunting. Trips were also made, according to Post,

to Wenatchi territory for camas and rabbits and to Watervil1e—Cou1ee City
area (claimed by the Columbia Indians) south of the Columbia river for

antelope. Berries were gathered near Moses Mountain and on the hills west

of Twisp (country claimed by the Methow). Bitterroot was gathered (1) in
the hills seven miles north of Pateros on the south side of the river;

(2) in the hills on either side of the Methow River from Twisp to Winthrop

(country claimed by the Methow); (3) around Duley Lake, twelve miles east of

Monse; (H) in the hills east of Waterville; (5) at the south end of Lake Omak;

(6) and near Kartaro; and (7) in Northern Okanogan territory_ Very little

camas grew in the Okanogan valley but some was gathered on the upper Methow

River and in Tumwater Basin east of the town of Okanogan. The bulk of the

camas obtained by these Indians was gathered beyond the Columbia River in

the hills north of Wenatchee. Wild carrots were dug in the areas (1) from

Twisp to Wintrop, (2) around Duley Lake, (3) in the Waterville area and

(M) in the Bridgeport area, south of the Columbia River. Tiger lily bulbs

were dug near Twisp in September and pine nuts were gathered at the same
time of year at the head of the Twisp River. Other roots were dug near

Oroville and between Pateros and Brewster. (Pet. Ex, M52, pp. 11-29).

(Tr. eho-2&1).
36. Ethnologists, the have studied the Sinkaietk, state that the

tribe was composed of four autonomous groups or bands and had only band

chiefs. These Indians, according to Walters, deny that any one was ever

chief of the entire tribe. Historical references to the Okanogan on

occasion made reference to a “head chief" or "principal chief" of the

Okanogan. (Findings 27, 28 and 30),

The Indian most prominently mentioned

in historical records by Government agents as being head chief, was one

Tonasket. According to Walters, however, Tonasket was head chief of only

his own band. (Pet. Ex. “S2, page 8”).

The Government agents, however,

did report him to be the Okanogan head chief and at a council in 1870,
Tonaskut stated "From the time I saw Capt Archer in 1859 I was made the
Head Chief of the Okanagons, and am so to this day, and by doing what is

right to the whites and_treating them as my friends I am never afraid of

being driven out of my country, * * *." (Pet. Ex. 260). Agent Winans'

census in 1870 reported the Okanogans to number 330 and that Tonaskut was

their head chief. (Pet. Ex. 266).

In 1877, Tonaskut was again reported
to be an Okanogan chief present at a council with representatives of the

Government. (Pet. BX. 383).

He was still mentioned as Chief of the
Okanogans in a report of agents of the defendant in 1888. (Pet. Ex. M17),
Although the Sinkaietk deny Tonaskut was their head chief, it is evident
that he was recognized by Government officials as head chief and spokesman
for the Okanogan, or at least a part of the Okanogan. This recognition was
undoubtedly due to the poliqy of the Government to attempt to organize the
detached bands and groups of Indians in order that they might be dealt

with more conveniently. (See Pet. Ex. 59, page 2; Pet. Ex. n9”. Page n12)It was undoubtedly the increasing contact with the whites that tended t0
develop in these Indians a tribal organization -- week, though apparent»
37. The Commission finds, based on the evidence of record, that
the Okanogan Indians exclusively used and occupied the area as delineated
for the Southern Okanogan on petitioners‘ Exhibit 532. The eVidenC8 With

respect to the exclusive use and occupancy of the large area delineated

on said map for the Okanogan lying between the Canadian border and the

1t 18(

>4 151

northern boundary of the Southern Okanogan is not as substantial. To

recover for this area not only must there be proof of exclusive use and
occupancy but also substantial evidence that the Okanogan Tribe had such
use and occupancy. Petitioners’ proof does not sustain finding that_such
en entity had this exclusive use and occupancy. It does show the existence
of two distinguishable groups - the Okanogan proper of Canada and the
Sinkaietk (Southern Okanogan), a group of Indians within the United States.
The Southern Okanogan denied "identity with the Northern Okanogan on the
basis of political differences“ according to Walters. The location of
Okanogan villages on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit 532, fails to show any sites
within the area on the map designated “0kanogan.“ The map prepared for
publication in "The Sinkaietk or Southern Okanogan of Washington" by Cline
and others (Pet. Ex. H52, p. 85) locates no village sites within the area
in question but does locate six sites along Lake Osoyoos in Canada for the
Northern Okanogano Spier wrote that the major distribution of the Northern

Okanogan was in British Columbia and that they entered what is now the State

_of Washington only along the lower Similkameen River and that section of

the Okanogan River from the Canadian border south to Tonasket. Walters
stated that “The Inkamip_£Sr Osoyo0é7band of Northern Okanogan winter at

the head of and on the eastern shore of Lake Osoyoos in British Columhiae
Their territory is directly north of that of the Tonasket band of Sinkaietko"
Althouth Teit, who was concerned principally with the Canadian Okanogang
wrote that he had collected no list of old villages from the Lower Okanogacg
(this division of Teit's would include Okanogan in both Canada and the

United States) he names five old village sites near the mouth of the

Similkameen River in the United States (Pet. Ex. M97, pages 207 and 208).
This group of villages, Spier writes, is the "second band of Northern
Okanogan within the state ” * T (the Lower Similkameen), a recent (Y)

division of the northern people." (Pet. Ex. M92. page 11).

There is no
evidence of record to show that these bands of Northern Okanogans had any
greater interest in the lands within the United States than did the other

Northern Okanogan bands such as Teit's Lake Okanogans. (Tr. 171).

The
record also shows that the Southern Okanogans made use of part of the area

in question such as at the salmon camps at Oroville, Washington.

35).

(Finding
There is no other specific mention made of other use and occupancy of

this large area by either group of Okanogan. The record is silent as to

when, if ever, these northern bands of Okanogans merged with the Sinkaietk

to form what petitioners call the Okanogan Tribe. Teit states that the

Lower Okanogan, which undoubtedly‘incIuded these bands, are on the Colville

Reservation, but Teit also gives population figures for the "Nkamip" and

Lower Similkameen bands as being on Canadian reservations in 1905. (Pet.

Ex. H97. pages 207 and 212). A study of the population figures for the

Okanogan indicates that at some period Canadian Okanogans, possibly from the
Lake Osoyoos region, came to be included in the American figures. Just
prior to the establishment of the reservation, Tinan's census reported
3M0 Okanogans (Pet. Ex. 28?). The reports of officials for years thereafter
remained approximately the same (Pet. Ex; 530). Teit‘s figures based on

the reports of the Department of Interior for 1905 show 692 Okanogan on the
Colville Reservation. Walters wrote that the Southern Okanogan "never much

exceeded three hundred since the fur traders came into the country." This

h 182

is significant when compared with Winans' census. The Commission finds
that petitioner, the Okanogan Tribe, has failed to prove exclusive use
and occupancy to the area on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit 532. designated

as "0kanogan" territory.

THE METHOW

C 38.

Thompson of the Hudson Bay Company reported he visited one of their

 

Historical references to the Methow are fragmentary. David

villages at the mouth of the Methov: River in 1311. (Pet. Ex. 500,
pages 53-54). Gibbs, in 185M, reported that the country of the Pisquouse
was immediately north of the Yanima and "under this appellation" he included the Indians "on the Columbia between Priest”s and Ross Rapids,

on the Pisquouse or Winatshapam river, the Enrte-at—kwu, Cheian Lake. and
the Methow or Barrier river.” Winans in 1870 reported the "Mithouic” to
total 301 and named En—e~moo-sat—sa as their head chief. He stated the
"Mithouies" were located on the'west side of the Columhia.River, from th
mouth of the Okanogan River down to the "We-natmchee, and includes the
country drained by the Mithouie, Lake, Chelan, and Enutee»at—ook Rivers."
In 1871, Winans reported the Methow residing on the river of the same name.
In his map showing the location of the tribes in his district, Winans

locates the Methow west of the Okanogan on the Methow River watershed and

clear to the Canadian border. (Pet. Exs. 266, 285, 516).

39.

Methow Indians.

Ethnographic sources are also fragmentary with respect to the
Mooney, like Winans, locates them on the West side of the

Columbia, including the basins of the Methcw. Lake Chelan, and Entiatook

Curtis, however, states the Methcw lived on the

(Pet. Ex. M69 ).

rivers.

1-: 18

Methow River and that "By some informants their name is applied as well
to the tribes on the western side of the Columbia as far down as Entiat
creek; but others include these under the term Wenatchee, which demonstrates the lack of any real organization among these Salishan groups.”
(Def. Ex. 15); Teit considered the Methow as a Wenatchi band and located

them on the Methow River and surrounding country.

95).

(Pet. Ex. 498, page
Spier writes (Pet. Ex. H92) that he prefers "Curtis' recognition
of Methow individuality“ in that he places them on Methow River only.
Walters, (Pet. Ex. §52, pages 86 and 87) states that a group of Methow
wintered on the Okanogan River between Sand Point and Malott, Washington,
wedged in between two Southern Okanogan bands. The Southern Okanogans
considered them members of another tribe because they spoke a dialect of
the Okanogan language more similar to the Chelan than the Sinkaietk;
Walters’ villages for this group are the same as those numbered H8 through
52 on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit 532. Bay, in his “Native Villages and
Groupings” (Pet. Ex. 382), does not list the Methow villages. He does:
however, list a Chelan village "on the south side of the Methow river
just south of the present town of Pateros.“ This village, Ray states.
"was the home of a renegade band of Chelan numbering fifty or 100.
Formerly, this was doubtless the site of a Methow * * * village. but Was
left unoccupied with the early dwindling of that people." Petitioners‘
Exhibit 531, however, consists of a list of Mathew villages prepared by
Dr. Ray and includes villages and camps numbered 55 through 73 on peti—
tioners' map, Exhibit 532.

1:0.

There is no ethnological study of the Methow Indians pertaining

to their subsistence pattern of record. There is substantial evidence

1418

of record, however, that at least the Southern Okanogan made consistent
use of the Upper Methow River drainage from about Twisp on upstream,

including much of the lands now claimed by the Methow, This use pattern

by the Southern Okanogan is set forth fully in Finding 35. The Commission finds, therefore. that the Methow Indians exclusively used and
occupied only that part of the Methow River watershed as delineated on
petitioners’ Exhibit 532, from the mouth of said river to the town of
Twisp. It is considered that for the purpose of defining the northern
boundary of this tract an east-west line extending between the east and
west boundary lines through the town of Twisp, shown on petitioners‘
Exhibit 532, will, for the purposes of this finding, fairly show the
area occupied aboriginally and to July 2, 1872, by the Methow Tribe.

Ml. In describing in the above findings the tracts of the several
petitioners it has been necessary, because of the manner in which the
proof has been offered, to consider them in connection with the boundary
lines shown on petitioners‘ Exhibit No. 532, but wherever, the boundaries
of any tract encloses a.part of the area of the reservation established
by the Executive Order of July 2, 1872, which is described in Finding 5
hereof, such part of the reservation shall be excluded from the tracts
herein determined to have been aboriginally occupied by the respective
petitioners.

H2. Prior to 1872, white squatters had occupied, with the knowledge
of defendant, substantial areas of the lands heretofore found to be held
by the petitioners. Most of these settlements were made east of the
Columbia River within the confines of the boundaries of the original

reservation (that of April 9, 1872). In this area it is shown that 500

to 600 settlers with improved farms occupied the land and had occupied it
from 10 to 20 years. It was this white occupation that had a bearing
upon the change in the location of the reservation from the east to the
west side of the Columbia River.

Following the creation of the Colville Reservation on July 2, 1872,
the defendant proceeded to locate thereon the several tribes for which
the reservation was established. The removal of the Indians from locations
outside the reservation to within the reservation took many years. Some
of the original groups were removed to other reservations. leaving the
petitioner groups remaining on the reserve. During the period of relocating the Indians on the reservation whites were pouring into the area
outside the reserve and occupying lands originally occupied by the
petitioner group without any opposition by the Government. The record
as a whole fairly shows that defendant never considered the aboriginal
rights of the petitioners to their non—reservation lands and beginning
on July 2, 1872, when the reservation was created, assumed definite control
over the non~reservation areas and excluded the petitioner tribes from the
use thereof and confined them within the reservation. In this manner, and
88" of that date, the lands aboriginally occupied by the petitioner
tribes, outside the reserve. were taken from them without their consent
and without compensating them for such lands.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 
 

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. K. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

1:12

