\..‘ I
t.

go--.n_.. --.4...‘ -ml.‘ 1.‘ ‘,1 T  -mpg .~ "3’-“_ .' ‘-5.. ;_.‘-_......!‘.r

I.‘ ‘I:'L-: _ 0 ‘,‘ . i. .. - a‘ '|- ‘ " _
.'- ~."....: l;:..'..t ..L.'. '.«'.5...'*..‘.. ~.J....:"...L.....-' ~..»s-‘z..--L.)J..L~-.L.

Docket Ko. 60

1.; UNITED ST; 53 OF é“7°I”i

--..'..;.rL:. U.‘ 3

Defendant.

4
*1
,0
\...z~../x./x...-v~....r\..»~..../~...z\../x.»

nci ed: Apr. 15, l?59 7'
Appearances

J. Duane Vance, attorney
for the Plaintiff.

Eaurice H. Cooperman,
with whom was Er. Assistant

 

i Attorney General, P0TFF'3Eorton, attorneys for the
Defendant.
O'PIEfIOE'E
T31’ '

N tt, Chief Conzissioner, delivered the opinion of the Conmission.

The Eakah Indian.Tribe, petitioner herein, filed an amended peti33%-H-6

tion on September 15, 1952, setting forth two distinct cl=irs.p One A.

claim.calls for a.mil1ion-dollars as additional compensation for lands

. _ceded by the petitioner tribe under the 1855 Hakah Treaty {I2 Stat. 139},

Q

the other asks ten.nillion dollars a

(I)

III R R ‘ ‘—v 3;. -.7‘
damages zor alleged Q3?TlJaolu“$

of fishi g r'g1ts reserved by the petitioner tribe under Article IV of

(D
‘Jo

‘£21853

(1!

'2'
53

said treaty. In order to facilit~te arly determination of the

t7?'1—.
we--u.

lnvolved in each claim, the Commission ordered severance and the assi

I

E ment of separate docket nnn7ers. Accordingly, the land cession clair

nu;
.q¢.

’
9:
on -I

7 Ind. Cl. o:::. 2.-,7?

f'\
j...'./

U1

I10’.-.' ears Do-cE~::et iio. (SC-A, I-r3:ile the present Docket Bio. 5:23 is concerned onl with the question of defer.dant‘s liability, if any, for

alleged den-rivation of j:.etitioner‘s right to talc :£'."'«.1r seals an

A

O‘

halibut. g/

Preliminary to determining the ultinate issue of liability, the
question of petitioner's capacity to bring and rzaintain the action is
aL'Lso up for decision. We shall make special note of this as our decision in this regard will in like manner adjudicate the identical suestion in Dod-cet 60-A, since ‘severance of both claims occurred after
hearing the evidence needed to resolve this point. Defendant in its
answer and brief has not seriously challenged petitioner's legal
capacity before the Co1':.n‘:Lssion.

It would seen that from the earliest recorded history of our
country, there has at-.*s.ys existed a certain group of -=-rican Indians
closely identified with the extreme northwest portion of "what is now

Eefashington State. This group inhabited the region around Cape Plattery

L and the entrance“’to the Juan de Fuca Straits , and is singularly identi'fied'b'yr  distinctiire linguistic characteristics. The members of this
tribe  "1.-tell ii-iznown for their sea faring prowess, earirg great repu as wha.lers and deejo sea fishermen. These fcoastal Indians have
at times been called E-Eakahs, Classets, people of the Cape, and Cape

Flatter? Indians, among others.

 

_J_./ Petitioner has subsequent to the filing of its guetition and the
conclusion of the hearing thereon, abandoned any claim for.
violation of its fishing rights insofar as the ta’;-rm of salmon
is concerned. Petiti-::ner‘s brief, pages 1;, 5 ,3*?. Petitioner's
proposed finding VIZ.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. LL77 L ‘ 53.1

From the early Spanish and kglish explorers we find first
recorded contact with the Hakahs of any worth. Of particular @terest and historical value are the early visits of famed English
explorer, George Vancouver, around the turn of the nineteenth cen-tury.

ter on toward C1850, men from the Hudson Bay Trading Company,
American Government officialsand ethnologists had increased the
frequency of white contact with the I-iakah tribe.

George Gibbs, who served as secretary to Governor Isaac Stevens‘
treaty Commission and who was present and participated in the l855
Hakah treaty, made several pre-treaty visits to the I-iakahs, and as
a result he wrote extensively on the life, custnms, and habits of
these Pacific Coast Indians. I. after the 1855 treaty the mtitioner
tribe retired to‘ the reservation use at Neah Bay, Washington,
where its members have continued aform ofgtriba1_ organization
ever since, g  

'In the post treaty era James Swan, famous as an ethnologist
and expert _onhPuget Sound Indians, spent a great deal of “time with
the 1-Iakahs, having taught among them at the reservation ,_during the
1860's. Under fthe direction of the Smithsonian Institute he compiled and published in 1868 a comprehensive and _ scholarlv report
on the Makah Indians entitled,_ "The Indians of Cape.+§lattery."

In 1911:, Edward P. Curjtis, noted author of the twenty volume

masterpiece , “The North American Indd.an*', and another lex' pert, visited the tribe at their Neah Bay reservation.‘ C '

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1-.77 512

Po. ulation wise, the best estimates at the time of the 1855
treaty place the number of Falcahs at slightly less than 800 while
the 1950 census sets the figure at 550 souls.

From all the evidence and facts as set out in -more detail in
the Commission's findings 1 through 1;, the commission finds that
the petitioner tribe is an identifiable ‘group of American Indians
within the meaning of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission
Act (60 stat. 1050), and have the capacity to maintain this suit.
In addition, we find that the petitioner tribe is the representative of those Fakah Indians whose ancestors negotiated the Hakah
Treaty of January 31, 1855, at Neah Bay, Washington.

Turning now to the principal task of determining whether or
not defendant iswliable for alleged deprivations of petitioner‘s
fishing rights, the Commission finds that the legal basis for this
claim arises solely from the language of Article IV of the 1855

treaty. Thus as pleaded, petitioner's claim is properly‘ before us

under Clause (1) of Section 2 of our Act; g I  it 9 I I 1 1:1.

 iélrtiicle IV,‘ 7insoi'ar as pertinent , reads 1 as at f ' '8

“The ‘tight ofitaking fish and   of easing or sealing
g at usual and accustomed grounds and stations is further
secured to said Indians in common with all citizens of

the United States, * * *" _
There is nothing new or unique in a finding such la provision in the
1855 Hakah treaty. More than a half dozen treaties contain suhstan...

tially similar provisions for the benefit of other northwest Indian

 

.2_/ 25 11.5.0. 70(a)... "(l) claims in law or equity arising under
the constitution, laws, treaties of the United -States . . ."

 

1- ---‘ ," '9' I 9 '0 0-; ¢- 1 - 4- _ ______ "'_"o’
ur_oes, a3?) llk€'th€ hazan trioe, cngoyed a naritiae econoayu ;g

,1 .-L'-' 9 0 '1 . 0' 3-__ T7 °.:. " -:..3—...."
tecitioner contends hat sirce toe in.) treaty, the MHIUGG ucates

'5 5 J. ‘ " 9 o c - _’
nas entered into certain l;38TEatlG§al agreezents, and by so do_ng, has

6

abridged and deprived the petitioner of its reserved treaty rights such
as in this case, to take the fur seal and to deep sea fish for halibut.
The international agreeaents relied upon are:' the four pouer convention
Of 1912 between the United Ststes, Canada, Japan, and Russia, as amended
and inplemented by legislation,'which conventionrtas concluded for the
preservation and yrotection of’the fur seals and sea otter which frequent the waters of the Eorth Pacific; and, the convention of l92h between Canada and the United States, as amended and implemented by legislation, which convention established the International Fisheries

Commission to administer a ;rogran.for the preserve ion of the halibut

fishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean (37 Stat. 1538; A8 3tat._6n8).
f'we have judged petitioner's legal theory'c5rrectly in its brief,
its argument is as follows. The fishing rights reserved under article

IV of the 1855 Eakah Treaty are inviolable to such an extent that the

tGovernnent cannot interfere with then in any'nanner even if it undertakes to enact or conclude a treaty or pass reasonable laws pursuant
thereto for the avowed purpose of conserving and erotecting the veryi
subject matter'upon which the exercise of the right depends. E0 one

disputes the paranount right of the United States, when acting in its

 

2/ See - Treaty wit. the Kisqual‘y3 Puyall , etc. (1853) 10 Stat.
1132, Art 3; Treat: with the e:eaaish,isuq;aaisa; etc. (1355), 12 U
tat. 927, Art. 5; Treaty with the Skallam (1355). 12 Stat. 933, Art.
° Treaty with the'§alla'Ealla, etc. {l8S5), 12 Dtat. 9d 5 art.
Tr§aty'eith the Yakima (1855 , 12 Stat. 951, Art. 3; Treaty with
Tribes of Eiddle Oregon (l855), l2 Stat. 963, irt. 7' ?roat' with the

L:

f

-2

L:
Quinault, etc. (1355), 12 Stat. 9 1, art 3; Treaty with ‘he Flatheads

(1855), 12 3t-t. 975, Art. 3.

.‘ ‘I #5?!‘ t ’F— J,
7  C1... C!'...;.'.'.’.g. ct’??? 
Sovereign cetacity, to take needed steos to rrotoct and conserve g:"e,

wild life, and other natural resources, but petitioner contends that,

.':‘ "' "" . .'|P'II - . - -C.-"" ‘ -."' In -I» .
1; such action interieres in an? aanner mlbh its treaty ri

‘D’

the defendant nnst respond in damages. Thus, the crux of petitioner‘s

argument centers about 3 orooer interoreteticn of the extent of the

rights reserved, for petitioner stetes qnite clearly in its brief:
Basically the proble2.presented in t‘is case is a

legal one involving a determination of what the plaintiff's

rights were under a proper construction of the Hakah lreaty.

(Pet. Brief, p. 2)

Needless to say, defendant argues qnite the contrary, its position being that such fishing rights claimed by petitoner tribe under
Article IV of the 1855 treaty were gratuitouslw given by the Govern&. -3- menu, that they are merely co-ecnal in extent with the rights of other

citizens, and es_such are subject to interference and control by necessaryxconservetion.measures.

‘we csninnster, the Commission is of theopinion.that the enswer to the
question lies somewhere between the extreme oositions takcn'hy the
party litigants, ane, thet petitioner's fishing rights reserved under
the1855treaty"are_indeed”superiorin sone resoects, that they cannot be abrogated or CH? offin tote: but nevertheless are not solenlimited and untouchable that they cannot be temnered, accomodated, or

adjusted.to fit changilg circlnstances such es'when the Governrent fines

it necessary to take reasonable steps to conser"e and protect fish “ed

‘wildlife and other natural resources which belong collectively to all

- 1an."Id..|‘u'»l"'

 

-._ .
"F be‘

..""' .-'_:"l "'

""" o H a q _"'\1 ;_ _ 4.-_1-* ‘H’. ,4‘, *9 -‘R If“ ""\ .;.‘.'
in the case 0; United staoes ;. einans, 1?: u.o. 371 {l;O3;, one

 

Supreme Court was presented an opportunity to construe the limitations

-D

1

of a substantially sini ar iishins right rescrveu'by the Eakira lndians
under their 135 treaty (12 Stat. 951}. The tourt made it quite clear
that such reserved fishing rights are indeed superior in nany'ways to
any corresponding right enjoyed by the white citizenry; so much so,
that they incose a servitude on lands subject to sale and even the
future grantees and the State of'§as%ington through its licensing reg~
ulations could not exclude these Indians from.enercising those rights

on lands ceded by then.i

Of particular interest and pertinent to our discussion is the fol%losing language from the court‘s opinion in the Kinans case:

 

The right to resort to the fishing elaces in controversy
was a part of larger rights possessed by the lndians, upon
the exercise of which there was not a shaioe'of iatedinent,
and which were rwt :uch less necessary to the existence of the
Indians than the atmosphere they breathed. Hen conditions
came into existence to'which those rights had to be acconodated.
Ch£3'a lio’tation.of then, however, “as n!Eessary and inten ed,

not a taking are , W * *. (198 U.S. p. 331}

And finally near the end of its opinion the 3o*rt made the £0 sowing statement:

M And surely it was within the comnetency or the nation
to secure to the Indians such a remnant of the great rights
they possessed as "taking fish at all usual and accustomed

nlaces." Eor does it restrain the state unreasonably; ii
at al;. in the regulation.of the right. (198 U.S., p. 33h)

P V‘ -at a—-Iu.q--  . -. —'~ 9 v‘ ,-v. r‘ ? .4--x '‘‘‘o--- --n
A lea gears iater in the case 0; Seulert nros. n0. V. Lnited otates,
. ' r‘ . ‘ -- . ‘ ~I- ' - 0% 9-'\
2&9 U.S. l?a (l9l7), the Court reaffirmed the principie o: the iinans

case, and.extended it with respe t to places outside of a ceded area.

In l9h2, the Yakima reserved fishing rights under its lS55 treaty

 

were again before the Court in the case of To
315 13.5. 681. The state h“-d convicted a l’aZ«:ina Indian for salmon fishing without first having obtained a license and paying the proper fee.
His conviction was reversed and the state's licensing statute held in'valid in this instance as violative of the Ya3.—:iz:1a's reserved fishing
rights. The Court reasoned that imposing a license fee in this manner
was a charge on the l’a‘=~:ima's exercise oi‘ his treaty rights , since such
licensing Alproktirision smacked more of a revenue raisirg measure than a
PUI‘3l3r'regulatory proirision‘indispensableto the statefs conservation

o

progranml  1\Ee*.fertheless, in ajoprov Ag its former holdings in the '.':"na,ns
and Seufert cases , the Court in clear, ur.:::ist*’.~:a"ole language deli::.'=.ited

 

to ”s‘o:.1e7e;:tent such Indian fishirg rights where state conservatgion f_3roO

graras are effect: gg _

---...-.. . I. -L

*  '?-'that while the treaty leaves the state ‘a-r:I.t'n ;oo—..w.=:;< _
impose on Indians ecf3.a3_1y with others such restrictions 0:‘ .-..
purely reg‘ tory natureg concerning the time and rarmer as
are “necessary for the conservation of fish, it 1‘ or-ecloses the
‘state from charging the Indians a fee of the kindgtin gaestion,
315 ms, 681, 681..   "   ‘ " t   i7 i

n':"""

In 1951, in the case ‘of:  Endian ..-::se  Schocstler 192 F.

25:, 59.21;, the United States Court of 33:.-peels, E~E.il th CiI'C‘.l_"*‘-.3, a3:-39.13.’-.:..g
*3: t~:~=«t~=- ' hing

the rule of the Lil ee case passed uyon the very .~....<ah ....:.. f :5

rights with 3:1-rich *-.-:e "we concerned. In that case the court held tast 

Q

- -‘I -56- L .. ' .. ..'¢-u on u 4-use .-\ 4- a- ‘I -'5' ¢'— - up on -u': * .
“here o, tre.t; the Lalahs were Aaranteed the right of taxing fish

:ashin~t:n to shar that the regulations pro:ulgated'by it which
' " "" ‘L "" ' ': "- I'''- ‘~39 --r -y\ . ¢"' ""- ‘P  _
nt as bu tlae an nanner,;ere zecessary ior e con

servation _of ;-. —!,.Sh ,

9?."-u

The Coraission.has read w'th sore interest the several state

cases cited by petitioner in.its brief. hnile they are informative, we
fail to see their pertinency or in.what manner they'o n possibly alter
or change a Supreme Court decision clearly delimiting an India streaty
right. Whether or not a state finds that its own conservation laws
and regulations interfere with or even abrogate per se Indian fishing
rights reserved under a treaty provision, such decision offers no
challenge to the Supre:eCourt‘s interpretation that the same treaty
risht may he linited'to so:e.extent by state regula ions necessary to
conserve fish. In the instant case there is no problem.of possible
conflict between state and federal law; nor is the Commission faced

‘with any interpretative ambiguities surrounding this particular treaty i

provision;~ In our ‘es the Supreme Court‘s language is clear in the

L Tulee case and we will fol3ou it.

 

:7

Ha lng concluded that the ilakah sishm rights reserved under the
1855 treaty can be limited to some extent by reasonable and necessary
conservation.measures we reach.the question whether those international
agreements, laws, and regulations adopted for the arowed purpose of grotecting, conserving and rehabilitating seal and halibut are so offensive

7 Ind. 01. Co::.. £977   - 518

and an unwarranted breach of petitioner’s treaty rights that the defend‘ t has incurred liability. ‘

The historical growth of the Alaska fur sea? industry and the

northern Pacific halibut fishino are akin in many respects. Both ran they

“D

ganut froneaarly superabundance to massive, reckless exploitation bordering upon complete destruction of the species, to government intervene

tion through international agreements and regulation to conserve and relhabilitate seal and halibut, and, finally, success through a carefully

a nfnistered cooperative effort between the interested countries resulting in a:marked increase in total yield, coupled with a noticeable imr
provenent in the physiological development of both species.,

Prior to and at the time of the lS55 Hakah Treaty, petitioner's an-i
cestors ahd hunted the Alaska fur seal for years eith.narked success.
Annually the great seal herds would.nigrate northward off the Pacific
coast toward their breeding grounds among the Pribilof Islands in the
Baring Sea. L tting out to sea in.their long canoes the Eakah sealers

would contact the herd and then with great stealth they would.silently'

"go anong the animals as they slept on the ocean surface and ki_l then.

‘with spears and.harpoons. This type of sealing, killing them on the
ocean surface, is known as “pelagic sealing.”

‘With the purchase of Alaska from.Russia in 1867, the United States
acqhired jurisdiction and control.of the Pribilof Islands and in like
manner inherited the lucrative sealing industry. Thereafter, the Government executed exclusive long-tern leases'with private companies who

took seals under fixed quotas. Sealing was then a Government monopoly'

_and the annual yield of skins was most satisfactory in producing a sizeable revenue.

E Around l87§, pelagic sealing was
on a large scale by independent sealers operatinn with firearms from
ocean-going vessels. British, Canadian, and even Japanese sealingi
vessels began to operate without restriction in the Bering Sea. Pela.gic sealingsras necessarily indiscriminate, and the slaughter of fe~
males cut seriously into the reproductive ability of the species. Use
ually her death resulted in the death of an.unborn pup or that of the
2: new born pup left alone upon the Pribilof Island rookeries to face inevitable starvation. By l89O the fur sealiareedingstock had suffered “

a serious decline. In lS93 efforts of the United States to unilater_ally police and regulate sealing in the Bering Sea were successively

all

challenged on jurisdictional grounds by Great Britain. In t-at we-r

[J

' '3

[Jo
0

urisd

(uh

the special Paris Arbitration Board, to whom.the important

 

tional question had been certified by mutual agreenent, ruled that
the United States could exercise no sovereign authority over foreign
nationals beyond the customary three mile limit; henceforward; the "

Bering Sea was no longer mare clausum.

~Theréafter by convention Britain and the United States sought to
restrict the number of seals taken by putting into effect a quota
system. _This%failed_sinply because pelacic sealing, the real culprit,
enained unchecked. Only absolute prohibition of this practice would
save the rapidly diminishing seal herds.
Not until 191 ‘was there concluded a firm international agreement
between Great Britain, United States, and Janan calling for a fifteen

year suspension.on pelagic sealing. It avowed eurpose'was the preservation and_protection of the fur seals which frequent the eaters

7 Ind. Cl.Co::1. 1+7? 5?-0
of the Earth E"-‘acific Ocean. I-Eotably exezapt from the prchibitic-n
against pelagic sealing were the I-‘acific Coast Indians who could
engage in the practice as traditionally conducted, that is, '».»:itI.'1out
Erearns and from open canoes. This exemption has been carried forward in succeeding conventions and in au inpleraenting legislation
thereto and is in effect today. 

In the years that followed the ratification of the 1911 conven--.
tion, the results achieved through suspension of pelagic sealing
have been most gratifying. The annudiyield of seal skins has increased steadily and the threat of extinction of the species, once

so imminent, has been removed.

The,Co'nr:1ission is convinced from all the evidence and facts as de- I

tailed  the Cor:mission's findings 7 through 12 that the circumstances
subsequent to theconclusion of the 1855 Hakah Treaty have justified
the defendant's action in entering into international agreeznentsr for
the preservation and protection of the Alaska fur seal. The regulations so adopted pursuant to said agreements are reasonable and neces-—

sary conservation measures. I Exemption has alt-:ay.s been medal for the

Pacific Coast Indians , including the petitioner, t tom’ engage 7 in pelagic it *  

sealing as traditionally practiced by their ancestors, namely without
firearms and from open canoes. This was the approved method of the I
Fialcahs at the time of the 1855 I-Eaicah Treaty and as such does not appreciably inte- fere with or undermine the purpose of the regulations.

 

_l_:,/ 16 U.~3.C. 632;. - liatives peraitted to carry on pelagic fishing.
"The provisions of sections 632. and 633 of this title “shall not
apply to Indians, Aleuts , or other aborigines d*.~.relling on the
Auierican coast of the waters raentioned in section 632 of this
title who carry on pelagic sealing in "canoes or xmdocked boats
propelled wholly by paddles, cars, or sails, and not transported
by or used in connecticn *.-:5..th other ‘vessels, and manned by not
more than five persons each, in the way 'therto prazticed by
said Indians, clients, or other aborigines, and .1-rithout the use
of firearms. . .. “

 

7 Ind. Cl. Corr... A7? a ' 521
'I“nere:'.‘ore such international agreements, laws, and regulations do not
abrogate the petitior:er‘s right to take seal as reserved under article
IV of the L355 l1Ia';«_:ah Treaty as judicially interpreted by the Suprers.
Court.

We reach the s.=.=.-7:-.e conclusion on the question of there being a
violation of petitioner's treaty rights relative to halibut fishing’,
and for substantially the same reason. .

Up until l2383 deeb sea ha-_'Libut fishing off of Cape Flattery and
the Juan de Eca straits was generally the occupation of the northwest coast Indians, halibut being a prime food item. The fa‘-rorite
I-Eakah halibut fishing  were the S:~rii'tsure Banks which lay offshore some eighteen miles.

with the ‘completion of transcontinental railway conémurricatixon and
the devielopr:-.ent of refrigerated cars, needed iingzetus was gtven to connzercial fishing, so much so that its rapid exp .nsion  coastwise over a t~.-;o thousand mile area and up into the Bering; Sea. ‘ In a
short period of tine .-'.-'=.a.ny fishing vessef s of variouslsizes and description, all equipped ~.».?.?::.th modern, highly efficient igear. era-.9
clustered on the better knot-rn banks. It was not Iongkbeiforiei these it it
highly productive areas felt the impact‘-of their  efforts.
with the increase in total yield of the nuzdber of halibut itazcen there
was a resultant decrease in the number taken per  of gear. In
other words, it took more and more equipnent toland thef'icorresponding

QC

number of fish, a strong indication that depletion was settig in. Con-:

tributing to this decline was the iznportanti biological fact that the

7 End. Cl. Con. #77 i . 522
Pacific haliout‘s rate of growth is tainfull s on with the female
reaching maturity at twelve years of age. t was uite possible then
that by overfishing a given area total denletion could he acconnlished
within the.:aturation period of a fish while incapable of reproduction.
Kutual concern.orer the prohlen.of conserving the rapidly expiring
halibut fishery was expressed by Canada and the ‘United States. Early
attennts at conpleting a program of unifore.regulation fell to the wage
side dne to Congressional inaction inadopting the recozmend*tions of a

joint study coz:1nission.. Finally in l"32l+ Canada and the United States

concluded a trestyestahlishing the international Fisheries Commission

I
I

to adiinister a program 5 for the preservation of the Northern Pacific
haliout fish cry. .'

The Co2r.issi.o.n‘s ;orirr;_e p0‘.'.'eI' aitaed at restricting the tota catch

rests in its e'o:?.lit3* to limit the open season for taking the hzzlibut.

-Q

Artificial tropagation of the species has proven scientilically unsound. Areas are .f.‘i:<ed and annual quotas established therein. —kfor ement oi‘ the regulations, which are applicable to c_;.J.‘=" fishers.-en,

° 3 ' ' s C e ..nc.iv‘i 6'overn;:: n s *2 ".:.ss«.:.'=.: no
Ind; ns included, 1 let‘! tpto th ‘ dual ., L V e t_- I e "

 conventions ‘of 1930 and 1953 have continued and strengthened the .-ex;-. 

q.'a

U-latory ‘got-rers of the ha_3.7 "out commission.

Over the years the results of.‘ the he. i‘i*.~'-.:-.t c ::*::issien's re _:_t:la,t=:ry

policy have been most gratif irzg. The trend toward depletion h.s.s been

arrested, md renlerishnent of e:«:hr-rusted stocks has been tgvrogressir.-g
through normal reproduction to such an extent ths.t%%%th.ew‘.<n-:1-m. fish:'-.ng
banks are ste.a..1ily appro" chin

growth in abundance has been acco;r:.panied by i::prove::.ent in the o'=rere.......

physical condition of the species.

 

'7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 477 523

Having set out in detail in the Cor.-srissionis Findings l3 through
21., the facts pertinentito the issue of petitioner’s fishing rights,
as they relate to h-= ibut, we find and conclude that the international
‘agreements and regulations adopted thereunto, designed to protect and

conserve the Northern Pac:L‘ic halibut fishery, do not Re; s_e_ breach
the petitioner’s reserved fishing rights under the 1855 1‘-'Ea1«:ah Treaty.
The Makah fishing rights, as we have indicated earlier, are not so
absolute and inviolate that they cannot be adjusted and  by
regulations which, as demonstrated to our satisfaction in this case,
are reasonable and necessary to insure conservation -of the ‘species.
While the regulations on certain occasions might prove some:-shat _~r*
irksome and inconvenient to the Indians by regulating the time and

manner in which they may f'sh f or halibut, it has been the gro'~.-.-ch

and sharp competition of corsnercial fishing more than anything else

 

L that has interfered with the I«ial:ah's abilitx rather than their right

to fish... r Customary "hand .111‘! ' e” fishing methods as practiced by the

Faakahs '3-::i'.th their present equipments cannot compete volume wise with

- the "long line" commercial fishirg boats, and acquiringand ‘outfit-F

ting‘ a modern fishing ,_ vessel is proh'b'tively e@ensive to the peti- _

§

tioner tribe. §/ See follo:-sing page

Even if it is conceded that the present regulations restricting
the length of the season make it more difficult for the I-Ecah fisherman to fish halibut commercially, still pet't_ioier has not proven a
breach of treaty rights. looking  :2-.l the evidence in a light znost

favorable to the petitioner we do n t find, amcgiother things, that

7 Ind. Cl. C033. 1+7? I 52;;

the present E'hah's dail' sustenance requirerents depend wholly upon
halibut, or even that the regulations in question have been enforced
against those Iniians who nonrcorm.rcially fish for halibut, or that
in complying wit these regulations the 2~iaE{ah Indian is unable to take
sufficient halibut to sustain his immediate'wants or those of his family. This is not to say that proof of any one or all of the above
facts would necessarily support petitioner's claim, but nevertheless
such facts do picture a situation more compatible and corsistent with
the nature and substance of the fishing rights reserved under the

l855 treaty,

In reaching our decision the Commission.has considered the provisions ofthe 1855 Iiakah Treaty in light of the ciaonditions existing at
that time. In so doing, we cannot attribute to the 1855 treaty'offi§
cials, as petitioner seemingly would have us do, a prophetic knowledge
of future events; the technical advances in.the science of fishing,
the tremendous growth of the commercial halibut fishery and the Indians‘
participation.therein, and the acquisition.and development oi the
Pribilof,§ealing industrvt ‘Certainly neither treaty participant in

-1855 could have contemplated that the then superabundance of halibut i

and seals would undergo reckless and destructive exploitation in.the‘

years to come, and that this in turn would result in the ado_tion of

 

,§/ Contrary to the positionf;aken by the petitioner tribe, the Cone
mission is of the opinion.that any question involving a breach of
promise by the United States to supply periodically to the haxah
Tribe new'fishing gear and other equipment is strictly collateral
to settling the present controversy of the extent of petitioner’s
fishing rights under Article IV of the l855 Eakah Treaty; and, as
such, micht be considered, if at all, as one of the issues in
Docket 60-A relative to adequacy of the consideration paid for the
‘Makah'land cession'uider that treaty.

-3 Ind. Cl. Com. A77 525

vital coeserv_tion measures through cooperative internationa_

*1
(U
\'..Jo
U}
0
F’)
cf‘
53‘
(D
O
*0
E’.
O
{I5
(+
33'’
(U

?a2reenents. The Commission, therefo

J‘

the Hahah £ishing“rights reserved under tre l855 treaty aiv _
no sense commercial rights, and on the contrary mean simply that
the Eakah Indians, as in the case of other west coast fish eating
-Indians, were to continue to have the right of taking fish and
other marine products from.the usual and accustomed places in
order to satisfy immediate wants and provide the necessary sustenance for themselves and their families consistent with their
then subsistence economy;

rtFqr;this Commission to go ahead now and supply a more exr

pensive interpretation to the 1855 Kakah fishi.g rights in the

form of a license for the petitioner tribe to adopt and utilize

 

without any restriction nodern techniques for taking seal and
' u w u no not * irus rate an ef a r n ' - it
_hallb t, ld t nly ’ t * d d e t p esent a_plic=ble
conservation measures but is not warranted or justified under

either the facts or law in this case.

In View of the above,plaintiff's case is dismissed,

Edgar E.'Witt

Chief Commissioner

I concur:

Eb, K. Iolt
Associate‘Conmissioner

 

._ ‘.~‘.‘F ..

