8 Ind, C1. Com. 220

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMHISSIOH

THE NEZ PERCE TRIBE OF INDIEKS, )
OR CHARLES E. WILLEAHS A33 }
JOSEPH REDTHUNDER, as repre- )
sentatives of the K32 PEREZ )
TRIBE or IPIIJIA )

)

Petitioner, )

)

V. ) Docket No. 175-A

)

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA, )
)

Defendant. )

Decided: ecember 31, 1959
Appearances:

Donald C. Gormley, with whom
were Charles A. Hobbs, and
George E. Lyman,

ttorneys for Petitioner.

John D. Sullivan, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General, Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
OPENION QE THE COMMISSION

HODT, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The Nez Perce Tribe, and certain individuals named in the petition,
filed a petition before this Commission (Docket No. 175) on July 26, 1951,
alleging three claims all for additional compensation for land ceded under
treaties and an agreement: i.e., (1) for land ceded under the Treat of
June 11, 1855, 12 stat. 95?; (2)

for lanl ceded under the Treaty of

, and f?) for land

271

272
.._ .L,.. — 4.... " ‘r, *,.,n, " ,_ , ,_,,__ ___._,__ i _;  r'- 1* ‘-"“
031" ...v\ .1-L ..~.'F-vf‘_’._ 1 : . _... 41".‘. 3- .. 1.... u .2 l"";.;..'  v..2«:‘:-:k.2_“..-fxfl.-S CA.  1\3€Z 

Tribe filed claims under Docket E09 l83 which were identical with the

F‘. "“ ‘I; "'. “ -7‘--r I r: ‘p----r -'-‘ 1- "-s-x-.‘ -~-: I‘ V1 r--v-.r-.
ciaims prexioasl. filed or too T-ioe tltn leofgct to (l) and (2) above,

On motion filed hr the petitioner in Docket No. 175 the Commission
dismissed the petition in Docket Nor leO, for reasons stated in 2 Ind.
Cl. Comm. 2&5. Later, by order of February 27, 1953, the petition in

“I —

Docket No. 180 was reinstated, and consol;¥f;ed for trial with Docket
1? 1 d 3 ~ a +‘ w H a s“ &1*. - v 8
no. 79. uosequcntly one goid and CTCSPQLD oiaim in Docket no. 1 O
was severed from the petition and given a new docket number, No. 180-A.
Hearings were held on the claim in No. lddma, and findings of fact made
and opinion rendered in which this Commission found that the United
tates would be liable in damages for nhst.ver uses of the reservation
by white intruders might be proved by the tribe (3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 571,
578) and for the value of such gold taken from the reservation which
the tribe might in further proceedings prove was acquired by defendant
in its mint. 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 571, S81, (1955).
During 1955 and 1956 petitioners and their attorneys in Docket
I‘! , c an 1 ‘ v
h4mb9rS 175 and 180 (which included l80ma) negotiated an agreement
“hereby; with the approval of the Commission, the claims remaining in
No. 180 (after l80~A had been cevereii and those in No. l7S would be
“steed into a single suit containina the several alleged causes of

-"‘+. \ ‘. 1. ‘ i""r"r"' -u .’--. g. '1
aconon nnoez the lop; and 18s; Treaties an: the l893 Agreement and the

;:~'yv~' T ('5. . .. ., ,.
Cliln in No. l3Q~a would continue to so prosecuted separatelv. Tnis

agreement was approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on
September 6, 1956, and by this Commission by order of December 8, 1957.

By the Treaty of June 11, 1855, 12 Stat. 957, II Kapp. 702, the
Nez Perce Tribe ceded, relinquished and conveyed to the United States
all their right, title and interest in or to the country occupied or
claimed by them in the then territories of Oregon and Washington,
which lands are described in Article 1 of said treaty. From such cession
was reserved an area of land for the exclusive use and occupation of
the Nez Perce Tribe. The reservation lands are described in Article 2
of the 1855 treaty and are set forth in full in Finding 3 herein. The
1855 treaty was not ratified until March 8, 1859.

The events which led to the disruption of the peaceful use and
occupation of the 1855 reservation lands by the petitioner have been
related previously by this Commission in the “gold claim,“ Docket No.
180-A, 3 Ind. 01. Comm. 571, and again in the findings of fact herein,
(Findings h through 9). Briefly, in the fall of 1860 whites intruded
on the reservation and discovered gold. By the spring of 1861 some 1800
claims had been prospected by white trespassers. Because of the gold
rush an Agreement was entered into in 1861 by the Superintendent of
Indian Affairs and the tribe whereby the tribe agreed to permit white
men to enter upon roughly the northern half of the reservation for
mining purposes but shortly rich placers were discovered south of the
line and the miners entered that area in large numbers. By the fall
Commencing

of 1861 some 5,000 to 7,000 miners were on the reservation.

in 1861 officials of the United States urged that a new treaty be

273

8 Ind, 61. Cor, T87

nede with the tribe for a cessicn of the gold land: but it was not
until the sunxer of 1862 that Congress a grooriated the money for the
purpose of negotiating a treatv with the has Jerce lnoians.

The Commissioners appointed to negotiate for the cession of the
gold lands began their meetings with the chiefs and head men of the
Nez Perce Tribe on May 25, 1863. After much discussion the Treaty of
June 9, 1363, 1h Stat. 6h?) fl Kapp. 8&3, was made and concluded by
which the Nez Perce Indians ceded a portion of their reservation to
the United States.

The instant claim, which was timely filed by petitioner herein,
is for additional compensation for the rose vation lands ceded to the
United States by the Nez Perce Tribe by the 1863 treaty for an alleged
unconscionable consideration. Petitioner claims alternatively that
it has a right to recover for unfair and dishonorable dealings resulting
from defendant‘s acts in acquiring the cessions of the lands. Defendant
does not question the identifiability of petitioner nor the capacity
of petitioner to maintain this action. The Treaty of June 9, 1863,
was not ratified and did not become operative until April 17, 186?,
Which latter date is therefore the evaluation date.

Besides the question as to the value of the ceded reservation
lands, which will hereinafter be referred to as the sutject tract or
the Nez Perce tract, on April 1?, 186?, the parties have raised a
number of subsidiary issues which required thorough study. These
additional issues are (1) the Northern Boundary of the ceded tract;

(2) the Western Boundary of the subject tract; and (3) the consideration

paid by defendant to the Ne" Force Tribe for

-..«4.’.J

19:5.

-1 _ _o
- :3 C€iS.'f-1011.

8 Ind. 01. Com. 220

NOR’l‘HERI~;’ B0Ul~ID.5Jil'

 

The treaty calls with respect to boundaries of the Nez Perce
reservation as set forth in the l8S§ treaty have resulted in much dispute between the parties to this action as they did also in ConSid€TatiOn
of the prior Nez Perce litigation with respect to the “gold claim” in
3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 571.

In that proceeding the Commission set the southern

and eastern boundaries of the reservation (Fdg. 13, 3 Ind- 01- Comm»

571, 578).

The northern and western boundaries were not questioned

during the proceedings then held with regard to the gold and trespass

claim.

The question of boundaries arises for several reasons. First,

because the reservation was never surveyed and secondly because of the
use of terms or names as treaty calls which are not recognizable on
modern maps and because some of the treaty calls are general in nature.
The northern and northwestern boundaries in Article 2 of the treaty

are described as:

Commencing where the Moh-ha-na-she or southern tributary
of the Palouse River flows from the spurs of the Bitter Root
Mountains; thence down said tributary to the mouth of the

Ti-nat-pan-up Creek, thence southerly to the crossing of

the Snake River ten miles below the mouth of the Al—po-wa—wi
River; % e r

In placing these boundary lines on a present day map, petitioner
includes a large area of land in what is now known as the Palouse wheat

region while defendant insists that this addition of some 670,000 acres

should not be embraced within the subject tract. Defendant contends

that the treaty calls are vague and that the petitioner in Docket No.
l80-A at the hearings in that case, where the southern and eastern

boundaries were determined, accepted as did defendant} the northern

27

C1‘)
#4
:1
C J
J
C‘)
C)
4
w
1
N
*-~J
Ch

bounéary 33 WEPPCG by Charles noyco, ldth Annual Rercrt of the Bureau
of American Ethnology, Part 29 If, of course as petitioner now contends through different counsel, the treaty calls mar be identified

so as to show Roycc's internretation of them was erroneous, then the

treaty calls and petitioner is not estopped to have the boundaries
properly identified. It should be noted that in the hearings regarding
the gold and trespass claim it was not necessary to determine the

northern boundary.

Petitioner herein has introduced a number of contemporary maps
which contain thereon the Indian names for streams which do not appear

on modern day maps. A careful study of these maps shows that the

‘Mo-ha-na—she, identified in the treaty as the southern tributary of

the Palouse River, is really the main branch of the Palouse as it is
known today. The Ti-nat-pan~up mentioned in the treaty is what is
known now as the south fork of the Palonse River. Certain land marks

are also shown on the contemporary maps, and their modern names identified by other evidence, which make it possible to designate the boundary‘

line. The maps shoe the Ti-nat-pan—up stream fl sine into the Ho-haCD

“a‘Sh€; or Palouse, at a point almost due south of a landmark named

Pyramid Peak which is now identified as Steptoe Butte. This landmark
is r" A '5--1 ‘ « ,.__.., _ .. ._... ".5 '5 "
located almost due DOlth of the present bOaE Ol Coliax, Washington,

which is at the confluence of the Palocse diver and the south fork of

the Palouse River,

1 ‘I
‘I

In View of the evidence as submitted by petitioner

"'7! ‘ 4'" ‘L ‘b I‘ . ‘'5 ‘-I---. qr---.:— . -i--'\v- .
-aueé that the n itnern bOh4Cgl. is .o»t line con—

U ...

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

WESTERN BGUND£R
Counsel for petitioner in Docket No. 26b, The Confederated Tribes

of the Umatilla Indian Reservation V. The United States, called the

-nu-uni--I-I-\   

attention of the Commission to an overlap of about lS0,000 acres between
petitioner therein and the Nez Perce Tribe with respect to the western
boundary as claimed by the Nez Perce Indians. Docket No. 26b involves

a claim of Indian title and the case has been tried and briefed. Counsel

for the Umatilla points out that the area as mapped by the Nez Perce
experts for the western boundary of the I855 reservation creates an
overlap with the eastern boundary as mapped to show the claim in the
Umatilla case both by the petitioner and defendant therein. The Umatilla
treaty described the eastern boundary as following the southern boundaries

of the Nez Perce purchase of IBSS. The treaties were made almost simultaneously in 1855 and the descriptions in the treaties which are pertinent
are set forth in»our Finding 25. The overlap includes two areas, the
larger in the vicinity of Elgin, Oregon, and a smaller area along the
‘watershed between the Wallowa and Powder Rivers. Counsel for the Nez
Perce Tribe urges the boundary is correct as depicted by its expert on
its map (Pet. Ex. 2h?). Mr. Brown, petitioner's expert, testified that
there was an Indian crossing at Elgin, Oregon, and that the words "Grand
Ronde“ as used in the treaty description referred to the "grand turn" of

the Grand Ronde River. Maps referred to by Nez Perce counsel show a trail

crossing at a point near which Elgin, Oregon, is now located. In View of

the above testimony and evidence, and in the absence of any other evidence

to locate the crossing referred to in the I855 treaty the Commission

9??

..... .o............... .............. ..

concludes that the

T . ‘I ‘nitxa the

J’.

way between the Grand Rondo and the mouth of the hell-low-how River; n

as drawn by petitioner herein is consistent

“thence to the crossing of the Grand Ronde River, mid“

34. at 95
I\ .f\

The Commission further agrees with the petitioner herein on the line following the watershed between the Powder and Uallowa Rivers which small
overlap was caused by the difficulty of follc*ing such a crest.

CONSIDERMTION

 

The General Ace unting Office of the United States prepared a

report (Pet. Ex. 23

-L‘6) in order to attempt to show what disbursements
were made by defendant under the provisiors of the Treaty of June 9,
1853, Supra, as consideration for the cession of the reservation land
by said treaty; The G.A.O. report identifies definitely certain items
which that office states were disbursed pursuant to 1863 treaty provisions. With respect to others, totaling $29h,OSO.6l, the General’
Accounting Office found it impracticable to render an accounting under
the 1853 treaty separately from the Treaty of June 11, 183,, 12 Stat.

957; Since Said treaties provided for similar objects, and in many

instances the moneys appropriated to fulfill one treaty were advanced

to disbursing officers together with moneys appropriated to fulfill the

other treaty.

Petitioner contends that onlv disbursements proved to have been spent

9

'1

yeauy may oroyeriy be allowed as consida reasonable allocation of joint disbursements under irticl~s h of the

two treaties were properly consideration. with respect to joint, or mixed,

disbursements under the two treaties petitioner suggested three different

---s

methods of allocating a percentage of the mixed disbursements to the treatie

All are admittedly arbitrary.
half and half;
two treaties commencing at the time of the first mixed disbursement which
would result in 52% being allocated to the 1855 treaty and b8% to the
1863 treaty; and the last method is based on comparing the expenditures
known to have been made under Article h of the 1855 treaty to those known
to have been made under Article h of the l863 treaty, or a ratio of 53%
of the mixed disbursements being allocated to the 1855 treaty and b7%

to the 1863 treaty. Of the suggested methods of allocation petitioner
urges this last one as best and by applying it to the mixed disbursements
petitioner contends only a total of $hl,9SO.Sl should be allocated to

the 1863 treaty as consideration. Together with this amount petitioner
concedes that $ll7,5h7.68 of the disbursements made pursuant to
Article h of the 1863 treaty is properly consideration, or a total
consideration of $l59,h98.l9. Defendant, on the other hand, contends
that the simpler method would be to take one-half of the amount paid
jointly between the two treaties, that is the sum of $lh?,O2S.30, and
allow this amount as part of the consideration. This sum plus the
disbursements which the G.A.0. Report shows as being expended under
Articles M and S of the l863 treaty, defendant urges, should be found

to be the consideration paid for the 1863 treaty, for a total of

$L29,272.16.

One method would assume the moneys were spent

another is based on the ratio of appropriations between the

Defendant concedes that t.e $690.00 expended under Article 6

T\)

C‘:
5-JO

M’?

and ea,66§.O9 disbursed wotsuant to Article 7 of the l8o3 treaty were not

The Commission nae made a thorouih study of the G.A.O. report and
concludes that neitacr the methods sueeested by petitioner nor that
set forth by defendant would be the proper course to follow in determining bh8 consideration paid for the l8é3 treaty. The Commission has
f0UDd (Fdg. 3S(a)) that the items shown hy'the G.A.O. Report to have
been expended under Article h of the 1863 treaty are properly part of
the consideration. These items total $l?h,S6§.2?. As to the amount
Of $107,831-59 shown by the G.A.O. Report (p. 1?) to have been disbursed
pursuant to Article 5 of the l8o3 treaty only a portion of the items
making up this total sum have been found to be part of the l863 consideration (Fdg. 38(b)). ertain of these items, i.e., Salary of SubChief, Pay of Hatrons and Buildings for Chiefs were specifically pro»
vided for in Article 5 of the 1863 treaty for the first time and
expenditures for these items are part of the consideration. The items
for Agency buildings and repairs, Hardware, and Erection and equipment
of hospital were not found to be part of the consideration since they
were for objects provided for in Article 5 of the 1855 treaty. The
amounts expended for the items Pay of Mechanics, Pay of Farmers and Pay
of Miscellaneous Employees were concluded to be part of the l863 conSideration for two reasons; first because the 1863 treaty provided for
additional employees and services and secon.ly because these sums were
expended during a period uten the 20 veer obl *atior to furnish the

Services of employees had expired under the 1955 treair. The item under

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

Article 5, disbursements of $26,l78.h0 for Education, the Commission
believes should properly be shown under Article b disbursements for the
l863 treaty. Article h (Fourth) of the l863 treaty rovided for the expenditure of $50,000.00 for the boarding and clothing of the children
attending the Indian schools and for equipment, furniture, etc., for

the schools. Permitting this $26,l78.h0 plus enough of the mixed
Article IV and V disbursements for Education to fill out the $50,000.00
obligation under Article h (Fourth) of the l863 treaty is believed to

be the fair and equitable method of allocating these expenditures.

Of the mixed disbursements the Commission has determined (Fdg. 39(a))
that one half of the Article L expenditures, or $6,516.18, is the most
equitable allocation of the joint expenditures to the 1863 treaty. As
to Article 5 mixed disbursements the Commission finds that those items
for Erection and equipment of hospital, Agency buildings and repairs,
and Erection and equipment of shops were properly obligations assumed
by the 1855 treaty and are not part of the consideration for the 1863
treaty; The remaining mixed Article 5 expenditures were for Pay of
Miscellaneous employees, Pay of Mechanics and Pay of Farmers. The

Commission allocated $32,1h9.20 of the total of these three items to

the 1853 treaty based on the ratio of the number of employees provided
for in the two treaties which under the circumstances appears to be an
equitable method to apply.

The G.A.0. Report shoes Article h and 5 mixed disbursements Of
$137,577.98 (p. 18) where the General Accounting Office could not

determine the proper Article under which to list these items. Of those

282

L

Article E (ThiT@i of the 1365 treaty provided for the expenditure of

'\

$10,000.00 for the es saw and flouring rill, only this sum

W
{"3
(3
C s.
1 J
O
0
PW‘)
Q‘!

is properly part of the consideration. Another item is $102,597.29

for Education. As previously stated a portion of this expenditure,

1‘

or $23,821.60 (Fdi. 39(c)) hrs been found to be part of the con~

(‘"1

sideration in order to fill out the obligation to expend $50,000.00
under Article h (Fourth) of the 1863 treaty. The item $h,h33.lO for
Hardware was an obligation assumed by the 1855 treaty. The $h33.00
expended for Fuel seems properly an Article h item and one—half, or
$216.50, is allocated to the 1863 treaty. The Comni sion concludes
therefore that the total consideration paid by the United States to the

Nez Perce Indians for the 1863 cession was $352,39h.9h.

THE NEZ PTACE TRACT

 

The findings of fact herein made set forth in detail much pertinent
information with respect to the Nez Perce tract concerning soil types,
Climate: topography, settlement, transportation, etc., and will not be
fully reiterated in discussing the valuation issue of the case. Briefly,
however, the subject tract being an extensive area of 6,932,270 acres

contains a variety of lands, topograohicallr speaking, including rugged

.1. D

D

mountains, deep canyons, fertile prairies and snail valleys. The
climate throughout the tract, generally speaking, is mild as compared

to similar latitudes east of the Eitterroot Kountains. The tract is

W‘ . , . - '9 I I
located in northeastern Oreaon, southeastern £asni.gton and north

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

As of 1867 the center of population for the region of the northwest
within which the tract is located eas Walla'Walla Valley just to the
west of the tract. This valley and the town of Walla Walla became the
trading center of the interior region for the Nez Perce and other mines
of the region following the discovery of gold in the 1860’s. The
Oregon Trail, which skirted the ceded tract, passed through Walla Walla
Valley and the Mullah Road ran northward from this point. There was a
primitive road from walla Walla to the town of Lewiston within the
subject tract. The major transportation route into the tract, however,

:as by way of the Snake River to Lewiston which was the supply depot

within the tract. Steamboat service to Lewiston had commenced in 1861

and during high water season three boats a week were operated. Six
primitive overland roads, or trails, had been established through the
tract by 1862.
During the height of the gold mining operations there were

thousands of miners and others upon the ceded area. The majority of
these, being miners, were a transient population and by 186? many of

them had left the tract for other mining areas. No exact figures for

‘the population of the tract are available for l867 but the 1870 census,
for Idaho shows for Shoshone County a population of 722 including 568
Chinese, for Nez Perce County a population of 160? including Th? Chinese
and 8h9 for Idaho County including h2S Chinese. Stevens County (of
which Whitman County was taen a part), Washington, in 1870 had a population of 73h.

Columbia, Garfield, and Asotin Counties were a part

of the large'Walla Walla County in 1870 and had a population of 5,300,

Q0

283

8 Inc, Cl. Con. 22: 284

which included the well settled Walla Malla Valley. The decade l870~
1880 saw the first appreciable population increase of permanent settlers
to the ceded area particularly on the agricultural lands in the northwestern part of tho tract. Whitman County was organized from a part of
5t€V€DS in l3?l and by l88O had a population of 7,0lh. Columbia County
which was carved out of walla Walla in l8?S had a population in l88O of
7,103 but only a portion of this county was in the tract. Asotin County
(all within the tract) and Garfield County (a part within the tract )
were still part of'Walla Walla in l88O which had a population of 8,716.
By 1880 the population for Idaho County was 2,031; Net Perce County
3,965 and Shoshone County £69.
From the time of the earliest settlement of the northwest region

it was known that many of the valleys situated therein were adaptable

to agricultural pursuits. Settlement of this region east of the Cascade
.Mountains really commenced with the opening in 1858 of the'Walla'Nalla
Valley and Umatilla Valley. The early settlements were made in the
valleys and along the water courses because of convenience and road
access and because the requirements of frontier economy favored claims
‘which furnished the best wood, water and grass; combined with as much
agricultural land as possible. In l86h it was discovered that the hill
soil in the vicinity of Halla‘%alla was suitable for the raising of
drain and this resulted in an increase in settlement in that area. ‘Within
the Nez Perce tract settlement progressed sloxly but steadily in the
Years following the valuation date. The famous Palouse wheat region

""11 - '  ' . . . . . .
°1b«3t9d ln Nhitman County received its first atpzeciaoie settlement in

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 220

.l869 when several families located on Union Fork. By l8?l there were
some 200 people located on Union Fork and around the Palouse Forks. In
this section it was erroneously believed until l876 that cereal grains
could not be raised on the hills because it was thought the altitude in
the area would render it subject to frost. The early settlers in this
county busied themselves with the care of their flocks and herds giving
little attention to agriculture, except for raising a little wheat for
themselves and wheat hay for their horses and other stock kept for use

on their farms. Livestock was the chief enterprise of this county until
the coming of the railroad in l883. As of l86? the settlers of the
northwest region east of the Cascades were hindered in getting their produce to markets because of the lack of adequate transportation facilities.
There was transportation by steamboat via the Columbia to the west coast
but two portages were necessary at the Dalles and at the Cascades of the
Columbia. The cost of transportation even by boat was exceedingly high
and as a result there was practically no outside market for the produce;
of the region. The increased settlement and wheat production of areas

such as the'Halla Walla Valley and its vicinity soon resulted in large

‘surpluses that could not be profitably marketed. ‘The region of the

‘ _northwest east of the Cascades had to await the coming of the railroad

'_ .1.-"-_v

at-"

'5 in 1883 before it was to have adequate means of transporting its products to market. Until such transportation became available, markets

for the northwest region were local and limited in nature.

VALUATION

j.—:—I-1-—--.....__.p.

The Commission is faced with the task of determining the value of

an extensive tract of 6,932,270 acres of land adaptable to a number of

f\)

286

uses at the remote date of April 17, 1537. The expert appraisers for
the parties, Kr. William C. Brown for petitioner and 0. Marc Miller

for defendant, agree that the proper standard to be followed in determining the value of the tract as of 185? is the fair market value approach.
That is about the only point on which the experts agree in this casePetitioner's appraiser concluded that in his opinion the fair market
value of the tract in 1867 was $18,250,000, for an average of approximately $2.63 per acre. Defendant‘s appraiser, on the other hand, stated
in his opinion the Nez Perce tract would have been worth $hO0,000.00 in
1867, or an average of approximately six cents per acre. Petitioner's
appraiser classified 1,16h,08h acres of the tract as agricultural land
at $5.17 per acre while defendant's appraiser was of the opinion that
probably not more than two per cent of the tract could have been classified
as agricultural land in 1867. Mr. Miller did not consider the disputed
Palouse area in the north as part of the tract in his valuation study.
.Mr. Brown classified 3,152,653 acres of the tract as timber land to
which he assigned a value of $h.ll per acre to the lands he designated
"first accessible" timber lands, the sum of approximately $2.05 to "next
accessible timber" and approximately $1.03 per acre for the "last
accessible timber land.“ The total figure representing the fair market
Value of timber lands according to Mr. Brown’s opinion amounts to
$5:0§9:l59.0O. Defendant’s expert classified h,0lO,l26 acres of the
tract as timber lands for which he reported there was ahsolntely no

demand in 1867. Petitioner’s appraiser classified 2,379,953 acres 85

the vast amount of grazing land in the region subject *

free range Policy. Mr. Brown agreed with petitioner's other experts

who prepared the valuation on mineral lands that the mininu

r
L.)

areas of the
tract in 1857 totaled 21,168 acres and had a fair market value of

$3,000,000.00. Mr. Miller, for defendant, was of the opinion that

mining activity in the tract had declined to a point by 186? that there
was very little value in the mining prospects of the ceded area.

Given these diametrically opposed views of the appraisers for the
parties it became necessary for the Commission to intensely study the
record to ascertain the actual conditions with respect to the nature of
the land; its then highest and best uses or those uses for which it
was potentially adaptable in the reasonable future; the demand for the
lands; markets; accessibility and salability as shown by comparable
land sales. ‘Some of these elements have been discussed previously while
others necessarily must be discussed in considering the methods of

valuation used by the appraisers.

CA study of the record caused the Commission to conclude, and it
so ultimately found, that the land classifications and the highest and
best uses for which the lands of the tract were adaptable as of
April 17, 186?, were more in line with the conclusions reached in these
respects by Mr. Brown, petitioner's expert. In considering the highest

and best uses of the tract the Commission, however, believes that as of

1557 certain of the lands, although known to be arable, should be

2

7

. ...up.o.--q.-—u-o-1-u-.—-n—-a-—--—-— - ‘ considered only as potential agricultural lands and that there was no
immediate value for a large amount of the timber that would have been
considered economically inaccessible in l8$?e

The Commission has set forth in detail in its findings of fact the

pertinent parts of the appraisal methods used by the experts in this
case. Mr. Br wn, petitioner's appraiser, presented a complicated and
detailed valuation report consisting of three volumes which was supplemented by a four volume valuation study of the mineral lands by peti-h
tioner's mining experts, Er. Philip J. Shenon and Mr. Roy P. Full. In
essence, Mr. Brown's appraisal method involved considering certain value
indications obtained from diversified sources which were subject to adjustments, then averaged and the final average value indication used as
the basis of setting a value for subject lands before discounting for
size. In considering these lands, Mr. Brown used principally five value
indications which were (1) index sales, that is sales within the tract
of small acreages; (2) comparable sales, or sales of small tracts in
adjoining counties; (3) railroad sales; (h) an adjudicated award given
to the Puget Sound Agricultural Company and (S) the adjudicated award

given to the Hudson's Bay Company by the Joint British-American Comhost of the 2,b53 sales considered by petitioner’s expert are
small sales which occurred during his "valuation period“ 1859 to 1902
K: ‘ ' """' 1" A ' I ~' '
Lia an averaée ValP;tlO§ date of 1882. The use of such an extended

period aPWears to result in applying to the tract an evaluation date

7)

much later than lsé?. In Mr. Broun‘s report in Ks: Peres Tribe v. U.S.,

jlED"i%-lax!-I -' H? "'

(

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

Docket l75-B (Pet. Ex. 89, p. lhj) the appraiser states the average PTiCe
for land in l88O in this area was $2.63 per acre which is his final value
conclusion in this case. It results in taking into consideration sales
during periods of tine when conditions are known to have changed due to
better transportation facilities, increased settlement and development,
and the occurrence of events unforeseen at the valuation date. ‘With
respect to the small sales Mr. Brown allowed only a ten percent discount
for improvements on the sales price for sales prior to 1557 and twenty
per cent for post treaty sales. A study of the location of the small
"comparable sales” indicates that many of these small tracts were chpice

locations along major routes of travel or favorably situated in or near

then existing communities such as'Walla Walla in the Walla Walla Valley.
As of 1867, Walla Walla Valley was highly developed and the town was

the trading center and center of population of the northwest region.

Mr. Miller, defendant's appraiser, urged that the small sales in many
cases were made for the cost of improvements only. In View of the record

the allowance of a mere lO% or 20% discount for improvements does not

seem reasonable.

Mr. Brown further complicated the appraisal by classifying the.
small sales as unmixed agricultural land or mixed sales through inspection of the lands in the various sales. Sales which included at
least 90% agricultural land were classified as unmixed while these conveying less than 90% were termed mixed land sales. This method, of

course, resulted in the necessity of allocating the purchase price to

the various classifications of land within a mixed sale. For timber

289

8    -C.'.._li.._‘I’ 

"V" I 1'! 15

land within a sale he ailowee the some as ior a riculturcl land while
for grazing land a four to one value ratio between agricultural and
grazing land was allove . This method of dividinc the consideration
shown in a small sale transaction is objectionable for several reasons.

chine certain portions of the sales price

L; c’)

First, the procedure of assi

but

to various types of land assumes that the br'cr of the small tract
purchased on that basis. It may well be the purchase price was largely
governed by the select location of the tract, its proximity to a nearby
market or water, or some other special advantageous aspect of the tract.
Secondly, as of 1867 we are dealing with a frontier economy in this

area and the immediate need of 9 buyer would be to operate a subsistence
homestead. Such a purchaser would look for a small tract that would
provide him.with sufficient agricultural, grazing and timber land to

meet his needs. To say such a purchaser would have paid on the basis

of so much for each type of land overlooks the need in the frontier
economy for a well balanced homestead to meet the requirements of subsistence farming. Finally the method of allocating the price and acreage in
mixed sales has the tendency to distort the sales prices of different
types of land and the acreages thereof that were sold during a period.
This is apparent when timber land in a small sale is allocated the same
Pr0P0rtion as agricultural lands during a time when there was a demand
for agricultural land and little for timber land as such.

Two valuation indications used by Er. Brcxn involved the adjudicated

awards made to the Hudson‘s Bar and Puret Oornd agricultural Companies

t '1...}’ V ' _‘_ . . . _ C . _ ‘
U. the JOlHu British-imerican Commission. ghe lands for the greater

Ind. Cl. Com. 220

part involved in these awards were located west of the Cascade Mountains.

The Puget Sound‘s Agricultural claims involved about l70,000 acres in

Pierce and Lewis Counties, Washington. The Hudson's Bay Company claim

i3V01V€d 179,280 acres much of it in the vicinity of Vancouver, Washington.

The Commissioners considering those claims rendered their opinions with

respect to the awards in 1869. According to the opinion of one of the

Commissioners considering these claims the Hudson's Bay claim consisted

of three items (1) the value of the company's post and lands, (2) the
value of the trade and (3) the loss and damage from acts (of trespass)

‘which had been committed. The Joint British—American Commission in

their opinions making the awards do not set forth the method by which they

valued the rights and claims of the Companies. They did not set a value

Separately for agricultural, timber and grazing lands nor did they indicate what part of the awards was for improvements or whether some was

to be payment for rights of trade or in damages for trespass.

Petitioner's expert, however, used these awards as value indications.

TF0 do this he allocated the awards in proportion to the composite testimony shown by'the evidence with respect to value as set forth in the

hearings on the claims of the Companies by the witnesses for the United

States who testified as to value of the different types of land within
the claims. Such a method of allocating the awards to various types
of 1and'within the claims is purely theoretical and mere conjecture.
It should be noted also that these lands were for the most part west
of the Cascades, closer to markets, in more highly developed country,

and with better transportation facilities. The lands involved in the

291

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

Companies’ claims were remote as far as comparison with the subject
tract is concerned.
It is not necessary to consider further the value indications

used by petitioneris appraiser with regard to the different types of
land within the tract since any final average of these value indications
would be questionable for the reasons set forth in anal'zing them. The
study of index and comparable sales do indicate, however, that there

was a market for small tracts in and adjoining the Nez Perce ceded area
at or about the date of valuation, especially for the agricultural lands
of the region. with respect to the grazing lands of the region there
were, according to Mr. Brown, very few sales of straight grazing land
within the tract or in the surrounding area. This was undoubtedly due
to the free range policy in which ranchers made free use of the vast
public domain on which to run their cattle. ‘With a slow but steady
settlement of the region being experienced in l8d7 there may well have
been some demand for large acreages of grazing land by ranchers interested in protecting themselves against homesteaders.

It has been previously pointed out that the lack of transportation

facilities and high freight rates had virtually cut off the northwest
region within which the tract was located from markets. This is esPecially true of the timber lands of the ceded tract. Even if it were
true that much of the timber on the tract was of a commercial nature

it would not have been considered economically accessible in 1867

except the comparatively small amount that would be needed to meet the

local demand. There were no sales of large tracts of timber lands

8 Ind. 01. Con. 220

within the ceded area until 1900 when the Northern Pacific Railroad was
extended into the timbored area of the tract. As of 186? the Great
Lakes region of the country was the center of the lumber industry while
the excellent forests of the Puget Sound area west of the Cascades were
available to supply the west coast markets. On the Nez Perce tract,
however, timber operations had been carried on even prior to the valuation
date. These operations were small in nature and served to satisfy that
local demand for lumber to be used in mining operations and for building
purposes. As of l867, timber operators on the ceded area would have 0
been interested only in select tracts easily accessible to water.

The appraiser for petitioner was of the opinion that 610 acres of
the ceded tract had a highest and best use in 1867 as town sites. ‘With
the decline in mining activity and the departure of many miners only
three communities remained on the subject tract in l867 and these were
Lewiston, Pierce City and Florence. iThe facts pertaining to the acreages
of these town sites and the method used by Mr. Brown to evaluate them
are set forth in Finding 33. The outcome of this valuation approach was
to place a value of $89,370.00 on the lewiston town site consisting of
550 acres and a value of $122,710.00 for Florence containing h0 acres.
This results in the larger, more promising and favorably located town ,
site being valued at a lower sum, than the smaller, remote and less
Promising mining community of Florence. As of l867 the mining camp of
Florence would, no doubt, be more comparable to the Pierce City town
At the time of

site of 20 acres which Mr. Brown valued at $13,625.00.

valuation the future importance of Florence and Pierce City as town sites

293

8 Ind. C1. C031. 220 294

would have been suspect because of the decrease in the mining population
and decline in mining activity in the tract. while these factors would
also have influenced the value of the Lesiston town site, which was
originally surveyed as containing approximately b0 acres until it was
Tesurveyed prior to August l8?b when it consisted of about 556 acres,
its favorable location at the confluence of the Snake and Clearwater
rivers and proximity to settlements in the agricu t rel lands to the
west of the tract would have then indicated that there was opportunity
for the continued development of this town site. Taking into consideration the findings of fact herein made and the record as a whole the
Commission is of the opinion that a prospective purchaser would have
believed he could pay the sum of $5,000.00 for the Florence tounsite,
$5,000.00 for the Pierce City townsite and $h0,000.00 for the tounsite
of Leuiston.

Petitioner in order to show the fair market value of the mineral
lands of the subject tract relied on the testimony and report of its
witnesses, Mr. Philip J. Shenon and Mr. Roy F. Full, mining geologists.
These witnesses were of the opinion that the mineral lands of the Nez
Perce tract had a fair market value of $3,000,000.00 as of April 17,
1867- The appraisal approach used by these witnesses involved the uses
of sales of placer mining claims in the Pierce City - OroiFino mining
district 0913 for the year preceding the evaluation date. First, however, these experts measured the mining districts to determine the
number of placer claims for each district. This was done by maiping

a ' 3 1 ‘ * - 0 c 3 9 q
nd measuring the streams and gulches within a mining district. Tne

UT

8 Ind. 81. Com. 220 29

streams and gulches included those not only for which they had documentation to indicate mining activity but also included streams and
gulches for which there was no such documentation in order to secure

what they believed would be a fair representation of mining activity

in l867. The length of the measured areas was then computed into mining
claims according to the length of claims as prescribed by the mining
district in which the gulch or stream was located. By this method the
witnesses concluded there were a total of l6,h62 claims consisting of
$13,363 acres in their “measured area.“ By using the average sales

price determined by a study of the claim transactions for the Pierce
City- 0ro Fino district for the year prior to April l7, l867, which was
$116.08 for 182 sales and by multiplying the l6,h62 claims by this average
sales figure they concluded the “measured area” had a value of $1,910,908.06.
These witnesses also found a value for lode deposits but only in the
Florence mining area. This was computed by estimating the length of the
lodes known to be in existence in 1867 by the number of claims on said
lodes. From the consideration shown in the sales transaction involving
lode claims the witnesses computed the average foot value of the lodes.
Applying this figure to the length of the lodes the petitioner's mineral
appraisers concluded the lode deposits of 305 acres in the Florence area
were worth $117,608.00 in 1867. The balance of the total final mineral
value figure of $3,000,000.00, or $9?l,h83.0h, was included to give a
value to what the mineral experts termed the “unmeasured area" consisting
Of 7500 acres, where there was historical evidence of mining activity but
for which there was not believed to be adequate information for assigning

value.

5 End. Cl. Con. 293 296

I1“ I-. ‘ ' -\ .'.. E‘... — ., 1- l - . r'~ rs J" ‘ '. - 3-"5 ' ‘ -,
;ne Shenon and Full 3uUCJ supports petitioner‘s COHh€Qi1OH that there

I

was mining activity on the suhgect tract as of the valuation date and cast

the known presence of gold upon the land would have added substantially
to the fair market value of the ceded area. The appraisal approach fails
to take into consideration several important factors, however. The
mineral experts made no allowance for improvements in considering the
sales of placer mining claims. The record indicates that as of l867
mining activity was on the decline in the subject tract and the inclusion
of all streams and gulches in a mining district assumes most of these in
the "measured areas” were paying properties and salable. The $97l,8h3.0h
assigned as a value to the "unmeasured area" is an arbitrary figure. The
value assigned to lodes fails to take into consideration that development
work may have been undertaken on the lode claims and was paid for in the
transactions.

Mr. C. Marc Miller, a qualified appraiser, testified as an expert
witness for defendant and prepared a valuation report. As previously
stated this witness was of the opinion that the fair market value of
the tract was only the nominal sum of $hO0,000.00, or an approximate
average of about six cents per acre. Although Mr. Miller studied sales
of small tracts in and adjoining the ceded area, he did not use these as
a measure of value since he was of the opinion that the consideration
stated in many of these transactions would have been but payment for the
imPTOVCments on the lands. Defendant’s witness went far aiield to fine
sales which he used as the nain basis of his valuation indications.

These transactions relied on by Er. Killer were the sales of Spanish

3 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

and Mexican land Grants in southern Colorado and northern New Mexico

These sales are far

close to a thousand miles from the subject tract.
too remote to be given any weight in determining the value of the Nez
Perce tract.

As of 1867, a prospective purchaser of the subject tract would,
or should have known, that the ceded area was then adaptable to the
highest and best uses of agricultural, grazing, lumbering and mining

pursuits. Such a buyer would have been aware of the importance of

the then existing townsites not only as markets for the residents of
the tract'but as an attraction in bringing other settlers to the tract.
The prospective purchaser would have known that while mining activity

was on the decline there were still many mining operations continuing

in the mining districts with claims being bought and sold. As of the

evaluation date it was known that the valleys and prairies of the tract
contained fine agricultural land but because of the altitude it was

believed the hill lands such as in the Palouse area and the valley lands

such as in.Wallowa Valley were not suitable for agricultural pursuits

although arable lands. These lands therefore may only be considered

as potential agricultural lands as of the valuation date. The prospective

Purchaser would have been well informed as to the transportation problems facing the settlers in the northwest region and the resulting inability to profitably reach outside markets. This buyer would have also

been aware of the free range policy with respect to grazing lands in the

region and the vast amount of public domain available for grazing and

C)

other uses. A study of the settlement and development of areas to the

1 ("N/"\"‘ 
8 Ind. Cl. Con. :20

west of the tract would are inforned the buyer that the region was due
for steady growth especially with respect to agricultural lands. The
Commission is of the opinion that a prospective purchaser would have
considered that the l,16h,05h acres of agricultural lands of the tract
had a value of $1,000,000.00; the timber-lands, consisting of 3,152,653
acres, a value of $1,600,000.00; the 2,377,953 acres of grazing land a
value of $1,000,000.00; that the known presence of mineral deposits on
the 21,168 acres of mineral lands would have added $1,000,000.00 to the
value of the tract; and that the 610 acres of townsites would have added
$50,000.00 to the value of the tract. he Commission is further of the
opinion that such a prospective purchaser would have purchased this extensive tract with a View to resale and that he would have been aware

of the long period necessary to dispose of said lands; the expenses to
be incurred such as taxes, fire protection, surveys and sales expense;
and that he would allow for risk, return on his inves cent and profit.

The Commission, taking into consideration the findings of fact

herein made and the record as a whole, and giving due weight to the

size of the tract and the multiple highest and best uses for which it
“as adaptable, concludes that the fair market value of the Nez Perce
tract consisting of 6,932,270 acres as of April 17, 186?, was
$h;55O,000.O0. The Commission further concludes that the consideration
of $352:39h.9h paid to the Nez Perce Indians by the United States for
the cession of a part of their reservation aevinc a fair market value

A) I I 1 -3 1
Of @4:550,000.00 was grossly inadequate and unconscionable. Defendant

ls entitled to credit $352,39h.9h expended under the Treaty of June 9, 18+

against the $h,6S0,000.00 fair market value of the tract, leaving a
balance due to petitioner tribe of $h,29?,60§.O6, from which will be
deducted the offsets, if any, to which defendant may be entitled under

the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

I concur:

.Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

Commissioner'Watkins took no part in the consideration or decision of this

(38.38 .

