‘I“1nd. c1. Comm. 137 137

BEFORE THE IHDIAH.CLAIMS COMMISSION

nm roar sum Amcrms.
Petitioner;
ea. Docket No. 30

THE UNITED STATES O? AMERICA.

N-IN-I\..J'\-uI\-an-I‘-ufh-.-IS-niiu-I

Respondent.

Grady Lewis. with whom was Herbert N. Shenkin,
. Attorneys for Petitioner. e

Ralph A. Barney and Leland L. Yost. with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney General A. Devitt
Vanech..Attorneys for Respondent.

SAY 8 Eéés

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

 

? Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

This claim is presented by the Fort Sill Apache Tribe. It is alleged
in the petition that petitioner is a tribe of Indians now known as the Fort
Sill Apaches.and that members of the tribe, or their predecessors. were
formerly known as the Warm Spring and Chiricahna bands of Apache Indians.

The petitioner has set out its claim in one count in the petition bnt
has alleged separately two causes of action. Ihe first cause of action is
based on the alleged false arrest and imprisonment of approximately #50
members of the Warm Spring and Chiricahua bands of Indians by the Respondent.
This has been designated as “the imprisonment claim." The seoond cause of
action is for the alleged confiscation. without compensation. by the Respondent of certain land in New Mexico claimed to have been owned and pose

eossed by the Warm Spring band of Apaches for many years before the white

3

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 137 H. 133
A02:-0

man appeared in the southwest; This has been designated as the “land claim.‘
As both petitioner and respondent have used these designations, we will here
after in the opinion refer to the first cause of action as “the imprisonment
claim" and to the second cause of action as the “land claim.“

The Respondent has filed its motion to dismiss the petition on the

following grounds:

(1) Petitioner is not the proper party to maintain this action.

(2) The Commission is without jurisdiction at the subject matter of
the petition in that

a. ‘An indispensable party or parties is lacking to
prosecute the claim. and

b. The claim referred to as the imprisonment claim.
based on false arrest and imprisonment. is individual and personal in character and not within
the scope of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

(3) The petition fails to state a claim upon which relief can be grani
upon the land claim in that it appears on the face_of the petition that the
alleged confiscation of lands was a mere revocation of an Executive Order.
which did not and could not constitute a taking of land for which responden‘
is liable.

Petitioner having thus separated its claim into two causes of action;
considering the motion to dismiss. we will consider first the imprisonment

claim 0

The Imprisonment Claim

 

The material allegations in the petition relating to the imprisonment

claim are in substance as follows:

1 Ind.tCl. Comm. 137 139

.....3...

In 1886 Respondent falsely arrested and imprisoned approximately 450
members of the Warm Spring and Chiricahua.Apache Indians and confined them

and their descendants as prisoners of war in various Forts or Barracks until

i 1913 when the 275 survivors were released at Fort Sill. Oklahoma. the last

place of confinement. The confinement was in such a manner that it was not
only injurious to their health but was the cause of the premature death of
many of them during the first three years of confinement. When released in
1913 a portion of the survivors returned to the Mescalero Reservation in New
Mexico, near their ancestral home. and the rest remained in Oklahoma and became officially recognized by the Respondent as the Fort Sill Apaches. The
petition requests an award on the imprisonment claim of $?,500.C00.00 “as
damages to compensate it for the harm, suffering and humiliation resulting
from the-arrest and imprisonment by the Respondent of the Warm Spring and
Chiricahna Apache bands.”

The Respondent's position is that this imprisonment claim, based as it
13 03 alleged false arrest and imprisonment. is individual and personal in
character. and the Indian Claims Commission.Act (60 Stat. IOH9) does not confer Jurisdiction on this Commission to hear and determine individual claims.

An examination of Section 2 of the Act shows that it provides that the
Commission shall bear and determine five specified types of claims against
the United States. on behalf of. an Indian tribe. band, or other identifiable
groups of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the
Rnited States or Alaska. The five types of claims are then set out in th6

subsequent part of Section 2. but need not he referred to at this time.

§ 1 Ind. c1: comm. 137 _'; ' 1   .i “ C‘   ‘f- A.’ ~ ;140
. “nu _

I

It will thus be seen by the language of the foregoing provision of the

Act that Jurisdiction is conferred upon this Commission to entertain claims
a on behalf of three classes of claimants. namely; a "tribe"; a "band" or an
“identifiable group“ other than a trihe or band, which have group rights;
There is no grant of jurisdiction to hear claims on behalf of individual
Indianso
We do not believe that Congress intended to confer jurisdiction on this
Commission to determine individual claimsol/for when Congress does intend to
so include individuals as claimants in Jurisdictional acts it expressly designates individuals as distinct from tribes. bands or groups. cf; Blackfeather

ve‘United States. 190 U.S. 368, 378. This was not done in the Indian Claims

Commission Acto

 

_;f “MR. McCASKILL. Those were individual claims. I think they would not
_ come within the purview of this bill at alle This bill. I think: if I
am not mistaken, only relates to tribal claims or claims of bands.

CHdIRMAN JACKSOH. That is the wording of both billso
MRo McCASKILLe It would not cover individual claims of Indians.

CHAIRMAN JACKSON. The language reads:

The Commission shall hear and determine all claims of any nature whatsoever against the United States on behalf of any Indian tribe. band, or
other identifiable group of American Indians * * *e

MEo McCASKILL. I do not think we have regarded this as applying to
individual claims. ' C

CHAIRMAN JACKSO§. No: I would not think it was the intention of Congress
to do thata That is a good point.”

(Hearings on H.R. 1193 and H.R. 13u1. p. 77. before Committee on Indian
Affairs. House of Representatives. 79th Congo, lst Sees. This conversae
tion in said hearing was between Mr. J. C. HcCaskil1. Assistant Comnissr
ioner of Indian.Affairs. and Chairman Jackson of the Eouse Committee.)

1 Ind; c1. Comm. 137 p. ‘ ~ - ‘  s '% « - . 141

. i 5 ;

But the petitioner presents the imprisonment claim as a tribal or band

claim on the theory there has been a violation of tribal rights by the imprisonment of all the known members of the two bands. Whether there has such '

a violation depends on the substance of the cause of action as stated in the
petition. For the purposes of the motion to dismiss. the allegations Of the
petition relative to the imprisonment claim may be taken as true that all

these Indians arrested were members of the same band or bands, that they were

‘all arrested and imprisoned at approximately the same time and endured the

,suffering. all as alleged in the petition. Yet the allegations deal with and

concern the rights of and obligations to the individual Indians. members of
the two bands. not the rights of the two bands. The rights violated were
those of the individuals and who in turn experienced the "harm. suffering and

I

humiliation” as a result of the alleged wrong. Thus it would seem that a
personal or individual wrong has been inflicted on each Indian which damaged
him individually and even though all the individual members sustained {heir
respective injuries by the same common incident (arrest and imprisonment at
the same time and place), the rights of each individual for the injury so
sustained would be and remain_severa1 and independent of each other.

The Respondent. in support of its contention that claims such as the
imprisonmentclaim are individual claims that cannot be asserted asia tribal
or group claim;'cites in its brief the case of Blackfeather vs. United States.
37 0. C13. 233, 239, 190 U.S. 368. In that casefit_in substancefheld that

claims for the destruction and loss of personal property of individual Shawnee

Indians caused by the deprodatione of white settlers. were c1aims_of individual

1 Ind. ci. Comm. 137 ' ' ’   14,

1‘6Ia

members of the Shawnee tribe of Indians and that Jurisdiction over the claim
of individual members of the Shawnee tribe was not included in the grant of
iurisdiction to the Court of Claims by the Act of 1890 (26 Stat. 636) to hea
and determine the rights of the Shawnee Indians to money, lands and rights
which may be due to "the.eaid Shawnees" under treaties and agreements. nor
was such Jurisdiction conferred by the Act of 1892 (27 Stats 86) which enlarged the scope of the earlier Act so as to include all claims of the Shawn
‘tribe. or band; of every description whatsoever arising out of treaty relati
with the United States. rights growing out of such treatiesg and from contra

expressed or implied; under such treaties;

This rule was followed in a later case before the Court of Claims in

Sioux Tribe of Indians v. United States. 89 Cto 0184 319 38 (1939). This we

an action by the tribe to recover for the alleged failure of the United Stat
to fulfill its obligation to furnish seeds and agricultural instruments to
heads of families adopting agricultural life, and which was promised in a
treaty. The opinion is by Judge Littleton. In the opinion the Court said:

"In addition to the fact that the evidence submitted is not a
sufficient to Justify the conclusion that the United States
has violated the provisions of Arts 8, we are of the opinion
that the plaintiff tribe cannot maintain suit and recover on
this character of claim for the reason that it is not a tribal
claim but concerns the rights of and obligations to individual
Indians, members of the Sioux tribe. * * * * Blackfeather v.
United States. 190 U.S. 363. 374. 375. 3789 The Jurisdictional
Act of June 3, 1920. 41 Stat. 738. authorizes plaintiff to
institute suit in this court only for amounts claimed to be
due such tribe or band. or bands thereof, as tribal claimso
The jurisdictional act does not give the Court jurisdiction

to hear and determine the legal and equitable claims of indi~
vidual Indians. Cherokee Nation v. United States. 80 Ct. 0130
lg 3. 4. The petition is dismissed."

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 137 -. _ ' ‘ . . ‘K. _ i   « 143

'5 7?

Thus the Supreme Court and the Court of Claims in construing such ”
statutes permitting the Government to be sued for tribal claims have refused.
to consider groupings of individual claims that are filed as tribal claims.

We have examined the case of Baltimore and Potomac Railroad Company vs.
Fiith haptist Church; 108 U43; 317 (l883), cited by the petitioner in support
of its contention that the alleged wrongful imprisonment of the menbers of
the two Apache bands of Indians caused injuries to the bands as entities as
well as injuring the nenbers of the bands individually; The difference we
see in that case and the imprisonment claim before us is that it deals with.‘
rights in property belonging to the Church corporation and the injuries sustained by the Church in the use of its corporate property. while the imprison»
ment claim, as we have pointed out in this opinion, we are dealing with the
rights of and obligations to individual lndians. The injuries that are set

‘out in the petition herein and for which petitioner seeks damages are harm,
suffering and humiliation sustained by the individuals imprisoned, not injuries
sustained by the tribe.j We consider arrest and imprisonment a violation of personal rights of
individual Indians. ‘It is a personal wrong committed against each individual
Indian concerned and not against the tribe or band of which the individual
19 3 member. .Any right to a claim for resultant damage suffered by such wrong?
rui act is individual in nature and remains in the individual Indian and is not

3 Tiéht accruing to the tribe or band that can be asserted under the provisions

of the Act as a.tribal or common group claim against the United States as the L

J‘

alleged wrongdoer.

-3...

The Land Claim

 

The second cause of action is the land claim on which the material‘
allegations of the petition are in substance as follows:

From time immemoriai the Warm Spring Apaches owned and occupied an area
of land around Warm Springs in southwest New Mexico. lnpa treaty of 1852
l0 Stat. 979) with various Apache tribes. including Warm Spring Apaches, the

respondent agreed to “designate, settle and adjust" the territorial boundarie

‘of'the Apache tribes. By Executive Order of President Grant on April 9. 18?1

'a tract of land 750 square miles around Warm Springs in Hew'Mexico was "withdrawn from sale and reserved for use and occupation of such Indians as the

«Secretary of Interior may see fit to locate thereon." This area was redefin

and.reduced to 700 square miles by Executive Order of December 21. 1875. and
teithdrawn from sale and set apart for use and occupancy of the Southern

.&paches and other Indians to be known as the Hot Springs Reservation." The
December 21, 1875 order was revoked on August 25. 1877 and the tract of lané

qu-.

was restored to public domain.
_ Petitioner seeks an award on the land claim of $_560 .000. plus an amo:
in.lieu of interest, for damages as a result of the alleged confiscation of
the land, without compensation.

Ehe Respondent position is that this claim would have to be asserted t

§he‘Warm Spring and Chiricahua Bands of Apaches, if they do exist as bandse

or by either or both the Apache Ration and the Apache Tribe of the Mescale:

Reservation.

6

C

It appears from the pleadings and supporting exhibits that the survivors
of the Chiricahua and Warm Spring bands of Apaches and their descendants were

living for many years at Fort Sill. Oklahoma, as prisoners of war. and when

r released in 1913 one—third remained at Fort S111 and the other two-thirds.

moved to the Mescalero Apache Reservation in New Mexico. (Respondent Exhibits

I "A" and "G"). Those who remained at Fort Sill are recognized as the Fort Sill

Apaches (Par. 8 Pet.). while those moving to the Mescalero Reservation are ene
rolled members of "The Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation in.New Mexico"
(a corporation under no Stat. 981;, Respondent's Exh. "r").

The Chiricahua and Warm Springs bands were not recognized as such bands
at the Mescalero Reservation (Resp‘t. Ex. “I") but in 19b6, the year the
Indian Claims Commission law was enacted, the business Committee of the Apache
Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation, recognized that claims of the Chiricahua
and Warm Springs bands were separate and distinct from those of the balance
of the members of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation. and refused
to present their claims but did authorize them to organize for the purpose
of presenting the claims of the Chiricahua and Warm Springs bands to this.
Commission. .A committee was elected to represent the Chiricahua and Warm
Spring Apaches at Mescalero (Resp't Exhibit "H") which committee on September
30. 1948 entered into an attorney‘s contract "by and between the Chiricahua
and Warm Spring Tribes of Apache Indians. referred to as the Tribes * * ‘.
and Roy T. Mobley, Attorney * * *." On January 7. l9b9 the Acting Commissioner
of Indian Affairs executed an endorsement approving this contract, with the

statement in the endorsement that in approving said contract “no attempt is

9.1 Ind. c1, Comm. 137 r- l 3 i. -. i*9 .i « j  s £45
1 .   s 510% '

_being made to decide whether the contracting Indians represent an identifiable
group within the meaning of that term as used in the Indian Claims Commission
ticto" (Resp‘t. rxh. "D")  

‘ The Respondent calls to the attention of the Commission a proceeding
(Case Re. 22) now pending before the Somnission entitled "The Apache Nation,
ex; rel., Fred Pellnan et also and the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reserve»
tion against the United States“, wherein it is alleged in the petition in

"that case that there is no tribal organization with authority to represent

-1!the Apache Nation.

thus it appears from the pleadings and supporting exhibits submitted.
‘that the Apache Ration does not have an authorized tribal organization. the
Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation has refused to present claims to
_this Commission on behalf of the Chiricahua and Warm Spring bands and thep
members of these two bands at the Mescalero Reservation have set themselves
up in l9h6 as the Chiricahua and Warm Springs Tribes of Apache Indians. The
petitioner herein, on the other hand; has alleged in the petition that it is

.'a tribe of Indians now known as the Fort Sill Apaches and that members oi

this Tribe, or their predecessors, were formerly known as the Warn Spring and
Ghiricahua bands of Apache Indians, and maintains a tribal organization
officially recognized by Respondent. The Respondent apparently does not
dispute the fact that the Petitioner Tribe is composed of members of the
Chiricahua and tarn Spring bands who have continued to live at Fort S111. and

are now known as the Fort Sill Apaches, nor that they have an interest in any

c1aim.those two named bands may have. Respondent does contend, however. tb0

"1 Ind. c1. Comm. 137   ’ . 147

.S11 Petitioner is not the successor of the two bands and cannot maintain this

action and represent the larger number of the two bands new at Mescalero
Reservation or the “Ghiricahua and Warm Spring bands of Apache Indians."

This contention of the Respondent may be correct in the event the petitioner

'fails to establish by its proof that it is the legal successor of the two

bands, but we believe that it is only after proof of all the relevant facts
and circumstances has been received on this issue that the Commission may, in
view of the allegations in the petition. determine petitioner's right to gJ
maintain this action for the claim of the Warm Spring band of Apache Indians.
The Respondent further contends that the petition does not state a cause
of action for the taking of the Hot Springs Reservation. The petitioner
alleges ownership from time immemorial of certain land around Warm Springs,
New Mexico by the Warm Spring Apaches and the confiscation thereof by the
Respondent, without compensation to the Warm Spring Apaches. of which band
the petitioner alleges it is the successor and has succeeded to its claim.
The petition refers to the Treaty of July 1. 1852 between the United States
and the various Apache chiefs. acting on behalf of Apache Nation. including
Warm Spring band. as agreeing to designate, settle and adjust the territorial
boundaries of the Apaches which was not carried out, except the action taken

under the Executive Order of April 9. 187M reserving the tract of land of 750

square miles at Warm Springs. New Mexico, the second Executive Order of

‘December 21, 1875 reducing that area to 700 square miles and the third Executive

_ _ .

3’ Railway Eipress Agency vs. Jones. 106 Fed. 2nd 331.

7 1 Ind. C1. Comm. 137 7 ‘ '_ I 143

_'12._

Order of August 25, 1877 revoking the former order of'December 21, l8?5 and
restoring said tract of land to public domain.
The facts alleged in.the petition appear to set up rights to certain

land based on the imnenorial possession of the Warm Spring band of Apaches.
nhich land is alleged to have been coniiscated by the United States. without
compensation. We cannot say as a natter of law that such rights do not'exist,
because this can only be determined aiter a hearing of the evidence. Therefore
this question of whether the petition states a cause of action for the taking
of this land should not be disposed of in a summary manner gut should be deter-i
mined only after a full hearing has been had on that issue.

We recognize the rule that a motion addressed to the dismissal of an

o each of the scpar to causes of aciion is usually

_ denied in its entirety if one of the causes of action is sufficient, but we

are of the opinion that it is discretionary for the Commission to regard the
motion as addressed separately to each cause.g/

The motion of the Respondent to dismiss the first cause of action desig&
nated as the imprisonment claim will be sustained.

The motion of the Respondent to dismiss the second cause of action designs

ated as the land claim will be overruled.

Commissioner O‘Marr concurs in the above opinion.

3£..e._‘frL69  °

4' 5.4.». can

   

.§f Jefferson Hotel G09 Vs. Jefferson Ins. C009 D.C. l9Q8, 7 F.R.D. 722
Construing Rule 12 {b}(6) (failure to state a claim) of Federal Rules
of Civil Procedure, and which rrle is in effect the same as Section ll(b)(4)
of the General Rules of this Commission.

' 53/ Blacker vs. Drury 3.0.  191:8, 3 r.a.n. 325.

