‘P .*.-n~33 1:3 -2.3: ":'-1:32 cs c»~‘;.z=.:rsc-:-:.n.., )
consisting of the four cenfeder- )
ated bands of Pawnee Indians, )
namely: Cnaui or Grand Pawnee, )
Kitkerabk; or Republican Pawnee, )
Pitahauerat or Tappage Pawnee, )
and Skidi, Loup or wolf Pawnee, )
Claimant, )
V, ) Docket No. l0

Um an STATES, )
Defendant. )

Decided: June 17, 1957

Appearances:
Arthur B. Honnold, Deceased
John‘E. wheeler, John.Wheeler, Jr.,
and Robert L. Wheeler,
Attorneys for Claimant.

Ralph A. Barney and Robert E.
'Fraley, with whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General, Perry‘W} Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPII‘.‘IO?:§  THE COE*l'iISSION'

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case is now before us a second time. as shown by the explanaV

tory statement preceding tne findings of fact, the Court of Claims in an,

1

opinion fi_ed Feo_~a_y 3, 1953, set aside this Connission‘s original

determinations, adverse to claimant, of the first fi

*4
(U
0
}....J
E3
:3
U1
*0
"'3
(D
U)
(D
C5
(I
(D
Q:

in the petition filed herein. These five claims were remanded to the
Commission for further consideration and the making 9 new fi“di.gs of

fact thereon. (l2h C. Cls. 32h). In its opinion, the Court of Claims

S 269

die ussed the evidence presented to the Commission by the parties, and
also certain additional evidentiary material not before the Commission
which that Court deemed relevant to the issues in the first five claims,
and which it says should be taken into consideration by the Commission in
reconsidering these claims. The additional evidence referred to has now
been suo.itoed as exhibits by the parties.

The first four claims presented in the petition are based on the
alleged original Indian title of the Pawnee Tribe of Indians to the
lands described therein and also on their recognized or acknowledged
title to said lands. These claims as now asserted by claimant are as
follows:

he first claim is for jnst compensation for 668,000 acres in a strip
of land ten miles wide and exten ing 104$-miles‘west from the Blue River
located in north-central Kansas. Claimant_contends this land was taken
from the Pawnees by the defend"nt without their consent or payment of
compensation and assigned to the Delaware Nation under the Delaware treaty"
of September 2h, 1829 (7 Stat. 327).

The second claim is for the value of approximately 2l,579,2OO acres
in a tract of land lying south of the Platte river in Nebraska and extending south to the Arkansas river in sonthern.Kansas. The boundaries
of this tract as new described by claincnt are set forth under Claim 2

otnt of land claimant now contends the Pawnees

1
H

in Finding 2. This is the
held by original Indian title "south of the Platte river" and ceded to_the
United States by the treaty of October 9, l533 (7 Stat. hh8) for an alleged

unconscionable consideration. This ces ion included the land covered in

Clahn l.

xo
(1)
O
W
m
U)

The third claim is for the value of llC,Ll
land north and paralleling the south bank of the Platte river,
ing Grand Island, in central Nebraska, ceded by the Pawnees to the
United States by the treaty of august 6, l3L8 (9 Stat. 9&9) for an alleged

.
unconscionable consideration.

The fourth clahn is for the recovery of the difference between the
amount the Pawnees received for all their remaining lands located north
of the Platte river in Nebraska, and the value thereof at the time they’

ceded the land to the United States by the Treaty'of’September 2h, l8S7

(ll Stat. 727), except the reservation set aside to the Pawnees by

DJ

t at treaty. while the treaty contains a description of the boundaries

of the cession, claimant now agrees in its proposed findings of fact

that hecause of overlapping clahns of Sioux Indians on the west and of
Ponca Indians on the north of the ceded area, that said tract of‘land now
claimed shall be bonnded as follows: "On the south by the Platte river
and the lands ceded.August 6, l8h8; on the west by the Fort Laramie
Treaty (11 Stat. 7&9) line running from the junction of the north and
south Platte rivers, northeast to the mouth of'White Earth River; on

the north by the divide between the Elkhorn and Niobrara Rivers; and on’
the east by the lands of the Omaha.Tribe of Indians." Claimant contends
the area within the above-described boundaries, excluding the 288,000
acres reserved, contained at least 9,577,900 acres of land for which the
tribe is alleged to have received an unconscionable consideration.

-In " " " ‘ II I 0 1 c It
.At this time, by agreement of the parties and the order thereon of

IL‘ . 9 0 I . .
this COEm‘SSlOP determination

“"""‘- 4, an iv -n-an-50¢-u— -Ir!-9

than -‘.c:<':*.*..:c: T1!'\‘.'..L' b.:::'."'r'\~r-:3 11:: are '1-in-s-'.+::r%
o--O : : 3 A é 3 a o 6 o v € 1 B nu‘-II tuna...’ MA

I
O“V'|"'l

4.‘ .
3 ad: L
V <::.-.'.b. the lam . uhe

0'!
oi he question whether or not uncer the evidence

C

claimant has established its title, interests or rights in or to any
of the areas of land described in Claimsl to h, inclusive, and if so,

IIthe extent thereof.

Y 5

with respect to Claim 5, which arises out of an error made in the
original survey of the Pawnee Nebraska reservation established by the
1857 treaty, the only questions are the location. and description of
the land area Comprising the b80O acres admittedly taken by the defendant, and the date of taking.

The claimant has the burden of proving exclusive occupancy and use
of the lands involved in the first four clahns, or that the Government
recognized the tribe as the owner of such lands. ‘We held originally
that the proof failed to establish either aboriginal or recognized

title to the Iands,

'5

On the question of clainant‘s original Indian title to the lands in
issue, it appears from the defendant‘s proposed findings of fact and
brief that counsel for defendant is willing to concede the evidence
establishes that the Pawnees were living along the Platte and Loup
rivers in.Nebraska and the Republican river in southern Nebraska and
southern Kansas at least as early as 1700, and were located in substantially the same areas in 1803 when the United.States acquired the
lands from France by the Louisiana Purchase. Counsel contends, h waver,
that after about 1809, all the perm nent villages of the Pawnees were on

‘Q

the Pl toe.and Loup rivers in Keoraska, and that while they may have

hunted in or traveled over most of the claimed areas, the evidence establishes that the P*"nees did not at that tine occupy and use all of the

Cj F--Ea-u-C-3;-3 my: C: -5- -F ' ;, r_--,~-n-;1s¢-:_ av»  C':"!-\,""';“'l| -rs-ur-3-5 4'»!-g '- Tn-: ‘ruggc :5 .-- --.3-. an-3:-:55;-3
‘La----3:-'I V-III» C.‘ ....a..... ‘JO  -.r¢."..\-v-n--«I-o..p..'...\-I 1.3 \-‘.4... Vulao‘--v4. -n—Lo\.A...—C'u..'.§ L... ..,t-.)..a-_pQ ‘in: C:-..;. ab.--in-.éN-L

- 3-it-uni-r'

defense to the first four claims, counsel contends that any possessory
rights the Pownees may'have had at some thee or another in all or part
3f the claimed areas were terminated by the subsequent abandonment of
such areas by the Pawnees.
Claims l and 2
The first two claims will be considered together as a single clahn,

as did the Court of Claims, since the cession by the Pawnees under the

1833 treaty involved in Claim l was intended to and did include the

strip of land claimed to have been taken from the Pawnees in 1829 in

Claim 1. Counsel for claimant also new concede in their brief the 1.833 treaty

cessionrr*'have cured the 1829 taking. The land in Claim 1 willioe
referred to herein as the Delaware "outlet," although recovery is now
sought for only that portion thereof which extends west from the Blue
river in northern Kansas. ‘

The Pawnee Tribe is now composed of the four coniederated bands,
namely: Grand, Republican,_Tappage and Skidi or Loup. .According to
the evidence, from the time of first white contact during the l6th
century until the Louisiana Purchase in l803, the Pawnees were lways

Q

located cy explorers and traders in the Platte, Loup and Republican
river valleys in what is now hebrasha and northern Kansas. Following
the Louisiana Purchase, the first official Government expedition to

visit the Pawnee territory :as that of Lewis and Clark in l80h. They
reported that the Grand.Pawnees were _ocated on the Platte river, and
hunting on the south side of that river and‘on the head of the Kansas"

river. ‘The Pawnee Loups were located on the Lcup river, and the Republican band on the Republican river. ‘They did not mention the Tappage

S 273

Band 01 Pcwnees. The report also describes the Osage Indians as hunting
along the Arkansas and Osage rivers and nearly up to the Kansas river

in what is now southern Kansas, and the Kansas Indians as hunting on the
upper part of the Kansas and Arkansas rivers. (Finding No. 5). Other
Government officials who visited the Pawnees after.Lewis and Clark, reported the Pawnees in.substantially the same areas, except Major Sibley
reported in l8ll that two years previously the Pannees on the Republican
river had moved their villages to the Platte river, but stated that

"the Pawnees hunt over a very extensive country;"

The Tappage band of Pawnees was not separately identified by the

a.

Government officials until they were recognized as a separate band by

the first treaties of peace and friendship made by defendant with the

-D C no __ _ I9 I! .
LOU? Pawnee bands in June of ‘“‘“ T“ rcpcrt;ng on the treeelee: the

a—q.- <5 -4.... -I--nu":-I-I. ¢'h.¢4

treaty Commissioners described the Pawnees as a "narlike‘and powerful
tribe inhabiting the country about the riyer Platte, stretching immediately between us (St. Louis) and the Spanish settlements." On September

30, 1825, the United States concluded another treaty of peace and friendship with the Pawnee tribe whereby the Pawnees agreed to allow all author»

hp

ized persons to pass through their country; In reporting on that_treaty,
the Commissioners also described the Pawnees as a numerous and strong
tribe, locating the villages of the Grand and Loan bands on the Platte

river, and the Pawnee Republics on the Republican fork of the Kansas

Q

river; They said the Pawnees were well armed and held "a prominent.

stand among their neighbors, as a warlike and brave nation. n~n-a-They”

" ° ....:.‘x1...... .: . ., - ,... .. ~ .:~,."“ 4:-... - leave their 1;&;G6eS in the spring cnC.L&Li, and go ler into the plains
*1';g¢' ' '

'1

¥ "‘ ‘In 94' -no . F! . ;l;‘QO -'1 Jun uh : .;'|' G ‘ -ax 4-I '
no the south, west end noronaese, in.pareu1e of ouffelo, and succeed

in supplying themselves with an abundance of

for food, and their skins for robes." (Finding 9}.
By l”2S, the Government had decided to acquire a strip of land

just west of Missouri in what is new Kansas for resettlement of emigrant

COIN

this land waS reported by the Secretary of War to

he held “almost entirely by the Osage and Kansas Indians,“ a treaty was
concluded on June 2, 1825 with the Osage Indians by which they ceded
"all their lands lying west of Missouri and.Arkansas, north and west

of the Red River, south of the Kansas river and east of a line drawn

from the head sources of the Kansas river southwardly through the Rock

Saline.”

A treaty was also concluded.with the Kansas Indians on June 3,
l82S, wherein they ceded all lands_nhich they then occupied, or "to
‘which they have title or claim,“ lying west of the State of Missouri
within the boundaries fixed in the treaty, and a reservation was.secured
to the Kansas tribe extending west 30 miles in width through the cession.
As to the area in the Kansas reservation, this Commission

the Kansas Tribe v. United States, Dockets

   

in the consolidated cases of

33 through 35, that the reserved area was a tract of land thirty miles
‘wide fnmn north to south and approximately 3hl miles long from east to
west, thus the reservation extended across the entire northern part of

Kansas. (See Finding No. l0).

The Government in 1828 had delegations of emigrant Indians visit

and inspect unoccupied lands of the United States outside the limits of

states and territories before their removal. Rev. Isaac ECG y, a GovernIT*°"“L "“"‘-"""" ‘P’ 79% -'- rt ":71: car: ""'.v'v'- '-. o3‘§'?'''r *1 9 1 1'7 """' * ‘m:-._ 7-wt or: m c'’‘ 5‘
cur-bot} ohm;  :‘.-.O G-CCC.-.pC--.J.uu& Lisa-6 ed‘:-PHI:-A-h\I.L.Oa'.¢.  G-JAG. _  naval» ilsogpb 

the land visited had been assigned to enigrant tribes and that but a

has determined '

snail part of the lands ceded by the Osage and Kansas Indians remained
unassigned. hcCoy-suggested the need for purchasing additional land
from the Pawnees and other indigenous tribes for use of the emigranti
tribes.

The Delaware Tribe was one of the emigrant tribes settled in
eastern Kansas, and in.l829, the Government granted that tribe as an
outlet, a strip of landitenpmiles wide immediately north of the l82S
Kansas treaty reservation. Isaac McCoy who surveyed the outlet in l830,
ran.the line 150 miles west terminating at the Solomon river about to
miles west of the Republican Pawnee village on the north. hcCoy reported to the Secretary oi'har that he considered the western part of
the outlet was on Pawnee lands, and if any outlet was granted north of
-t’-.

he Delaware outlet it would run sti 7 further on to Pawnee lands, and

\

he suggested the purchase of lands from the Pawnees who, us to that
time, had not been requested by the Government to cede any of their
territory.

The assignment to the Delawares of land claimed.by the Pawnees
resulted in immediate and continuing hostilities between the two tribes.
That the Government was aware of the Pawnees‘ claim to a portion of the
outlet land as well as other lands south of the Platte and the need for
the extinguisnnent of their occupancy title to the same, is shown.by the
reports of the Pawnee Indian Agent, John Dougherty, the Superintendent
of Indian Affairs, Hillian Clarh, and Isaac McCoy made in l33l (Findings

15, 16, 17). In 1832, pursuant to the inst;‘ctions of the Secretary of

1

war, the Pawnee claim to the outlet land was invest’

3-:

‘JD
(1)
(‘P
(D
Q.

9
D3’ {."3V:'3l"'.-.' as. 31". U

\

agents who recommended that the Governn nt treat with the Pannees not

only for the pur hase of the portion of the outlet claimed but for all
Paxnee lands south of the ?latte river.
The report of March 30, 1832, of.‘ John Doughert. 3* (Finding 1.8) who

“ 4-‘ ‘ .:..: .:.- .-... .. .-’ —‘--‘
made the invesolg oion of the Pan.ee claim COHualRS Cer

cf“
0)
*4
{:1
Ul
cl
(1)
C?
93
(D
U
cl
0'}

which we think have a signilicant bearing upon the Pawnees occupancy of
the lands south of the Platte river, as it is apparent that his findings

and recommendations were adopted by the Government. On the subject of

Pawnee lands, embraced in the tract assigned to the Delaaares, he said

that the Delaware outlet

"leads into the heart of the country claimed and occupied by
the Pawnees as their hunting grounds, and over which they
regularly pass when going south for buffalo and other game.
% * % Those hunting grounds through, and to ".ich that slip
leads, are, and have been, since the country was first known
by the whites, claimed and.owned by the Pawnees."

A4-\-r \J--I-vup-. .._,\.ur-n.n-q.r\..m--A.I

\

"whether they hold claim.to the land in question by conquest,
or by ancient possession, I am not able to determine. That
they'had possession of that region of country, and occupied.
it as a hunting ground.on our first acquaintance with them,
-is, I think pretty certain; and they have continued that
posséssion.down to the present moment, is also equally certain. land, furthermore, they have even considered their
hunting lands intruded on.by other tribes, if found there,

% % *; I must consider their claim to that country as resting
pretty much on.the sane base as the claim of all other Indians
is to the lands on which the whites first find them. % %-*”

From the report it will be seen that Dougherty concluded from his investigation that from the time of white contact the Pawnees had exclusively

occupied and used as hunting g-ounds a large area of land south o’ ‘h

.1. Lu;

Platte river in southern Nebraska and central Kansas, including at least

1

a portion of the Delaware outlet, and that ii the loud was to be used by

4- c
other trih

J-‘L.
ULL

(D
(D

___ I 9‘ "0 '0 . ' 94- Q .
s Government snouiu.purcnase lu from the Paxnees.

S 277

in 6

1a 1532 (L State 595), provided

country set anart for emigrating Indian tribes west of the Mississippi
river and to negotiate for the adjustment of boundary disputes or any
other difficulties existing between the various tribes. The Commissioners appointed under the act were given specific instructions to

C

investigate the Pawnee claim to the Delaware outlet and to give great
weight to the reports and recommendations of John Dougherty, William

Clark and Isaac McCoy. They were also authorized to make arrangements

satisfactory to the Pawnees if it was detemined their claim was correct.
The record shows the Commissioners made their investigation and

concluded that the Pawnees and the Ctoe-Missouria Indians held the

Indian occupancy; and use title to a large area o.f.‘- land lying '-ibetx-seen

‘\

in southern Nebraska and northern Kansas

the Kanzas and Platte Rivers"

which would have to be purchased by the Government in order to remove

the cause of war between the emi rant and indigenous tribes in the area.
D 8

As a result, Commissioner Henry Ellsworth concluded a treaty of cession

with the Otoe and Iviissouria Indians on Septenfoer 21, I833, whereby they
‘lc to that portion of

ceded to the United States all their right and ti.
their lands lying south of a line beginning on the Missouri river at
the mouth of the Little Nemahaw river “and runnin westerly with said

Little Nemahaw to the head branches of the same; and thence ;=:*::.-.nni_n'* in

9

a due west line as far west as said Otoes and 2-Eissourias, have, _or

pretend to have any cla:'-.::=.." And, on October 9, 1833, Commissioner

:'-.l with the four Confederated

’% '01- I ‘ ‘ fit‘ 9- 4:: '
:..ll raOI""m'.'1 and John Born-._.nert.;r met in ccunc

V In In -. . . _
Bands of Paenees and concluded a treaty where» U

" 2'3.“ -'-I’
"1'-‘i-¢"(i;s""

relinquished to the United States all their right,

(D
'1

in and to the lands lying south of the Pl*tt iver, with the provision

,that until assigned the lands would rcnain a connon hunting ground for

Pawnees and other friendly Indians oermitted to hunt thereon by the

President (Finding 23). The Pawnees were told by Commissioner Ell worth

Pin the treaty council that when the Delawares were given their land the

Government did not know the Pawnees claimed any part of it, and to remove the difficulty the Government would.supply them with agricultural
aid and goods if they would cede all their lands south of the Platte
river, stating, "You have land enough that is good without this," re1

ferring to Pawnee lands north of the Platte river.

Since one reason for
making the treaty was to settle the Pawnee claim to the outlet land, we
believe the responsive statements made in council by the Pawnee c.iefs
show they understood_and considered that by the treaty the Government
was acquiring not only the outlet lands but all other lands south of the
Platte which the Pawnee claimed.and exclusively used as a hunting ground.
The boundaries of such area intended by the parties to be included in
the cession were not described in the 1833 treaty, except for the northern
boundary, and apparently were not discussed in the council. However, when
the Commissioners made their report to the Secretary
l83h, they said the Pawnees had ceded in the l833 treaty all their lands
"from the waters of the Kansas river to the south side of the Pl tte and
from the Otoe and hisonri reservation west to its (Platte) source."
Counsel for defendant, while admitting that prior to 1833 the Pawnees

I C

made regular semi-annual hunting expeditions as far west as the forks of

- ‘Jpn

tk   ‘#51. ‘V’ ‘vs ‘ 11 . ‘Fe j.v'-& ":"'.“"';: D5‘!-\11‘!'\.] ": r"b"'* ‘an: -*3-ya ‘-ya-'--: -y-yon 9-; ‘gm an; «L... ' ',...
«-6 ¢ .4... UV 4|. ..... Ye;  Sou.-Ea; ....¢.'.UO LN..--..p 4.3.-....-:.J\..A..4u.i..........:.\.rGu-:1 J...-'..V up... Q4. G-...'_-;:;-5::-f\.v5 .i...'.'.S..'-S ‘-933 time

f'War on February lo,

I\)

(T)

‘N

areas traversed should be considered as land traveled over as distinguished from land occupied or exclusively used and possessed, and
contends there is insufficient evidence to establish definite boundaries,
or exclusive use of the areas actually hunted upon by the P wnees.

It is true that in l829 and l833, the permanent villages of the
Pawnees were all located on the Platte and Loup rivers in Nebraska,
but the evidence shows they obtained their subsistence largely from
hunting. we think that such lands south of the Platte river as were
used in connection with their hunting and controlled by the Pawnees
should be considered as being held under Indian occupancy and use title

the same as their village areas. It is noted that the Commissioners who

idealt with the Pannees in l833, estimated their number at l2,000, so it

is not difficult to see how such a “c"~r’“‘ and znncrcus tri

nu‘--no :I€¢OI§¢-1'\uIb1

1.. _ -..‘1.'t
wt; wsJu..L.L.&

R
L

C

necessity occupy in Indian fashion and control a large territory as hunt-p
ing grounds. That the Pannees had a concept of ownership of such lands
and some idea as to the extent thereof, is shown by their reactions'when‘
the defendant assigned a portion thereof to the Delawares. This also
finds support in the reports of John Dougherty and the treaty Commissioners previously referred to in this opinion.

In determining the approximate limits of the area of land south of
the Platte river exclusively used as hunting grounds by the P wnees at
the time of the l833 treaty cession, we think it appears reasonably certain
from the evidence they used and controlled the lands at least as far south_

"" " --an ' ° -1'-4-‘ . an‘ not ‘an A r’ .f\ ' cu’: ' 'as the menses reservation €So;3:l hen 0; the lc2p Kansas treaov. Jhile
-L I N O I Is» A g I
the Pannees used and made clean to lands further south, the evidence inV 0 .
‘.1   ‘-=d'\y-u JP .‘ ‘son -.—--- . 4-my-r-I: _II'- fl; ."F,"'='_-f ‘.1 -:0 0'! 0'5-u--- ..‘- all an»... «C--..C.....»-....._. O u..'...Z“ :r.3".-C.,;._c..-.:. Lz':".l.O‘C'S LL.-.'."‘;;..«"'..:Q ::'...'..... I‘Cc.I?1€...-. C ‘u... what; area <:_;;C. lb c:."'..'.}’.f'::-:.I":p

uouotzul whether anv one tribe was in control.

0

Es to the eastern boundary of the Pawnee l833 cession, the lands ot
the Otoe and.Missouria Tribe adjoined the Pawnee lands south of the Platte
river. In the Otoe-dissouria case, Docket No. ll, this Commission found
the western boundary f the Otoe lands to be a line beginr he at a point
on the south bank of the Platte river at the Range Line between Ranges
5 and 6 East of the Principal Meridian of‘Nebraska and extending south
along that range line to the Big Nemaha river in Nebraska, Although
claimant insists the eastern boundary of the Pawnee land should.extend
on south along the Big Blue river through the Delaware outlet to the
Kansas river and southwest along the Smoky Hill river, we think the
evidence justifies fixing the eastern boundary as the western line of
tOtoe lands, and extending south to the Big Blue river, thence southwest
to the point where the Republican river intersects the northerh boundary
of the Kansas 1823 treaty reservation. This would include that portion
of the Delaware outlet which extends west from the Republican river.

The claimant now concedes that the line established by the Port
Laramie treaty of September 17, 1851, as the eastern boundary of the
lands of the Cheyenne and.Arapahoe tribes shall.form.the‘nestern.boundary
of the 1833 Pawnee cession. This line commences at the junction of the

north and south forks of the Platte river and extends southeasterly through

the Kansas l82S reservation to Dodge Cit" .K nsas.

uy, ?here is considerable

evidence in the record of Pawnee hunting expeditions regularly extending
west to the forks of the Platte river and south along the Renublican

river

nd ‘*~ ‘

lvb tributaries, and we think there is suffic

Ha
(I)
{J
("I
'0
F
A
0
I4)
0
*t
("I
33'
(D

S 2

.'--<."x
~.2\J

5 281

Pawnee tribe‘s exclusive use as hunting grounds and control of the
area east of the l8Sl Fort Laramie treaty line at least as far south

as the Kansas rservation.
It is therefore the conclusion of this Commission, based on all

the evidence now in the record, and giving due consideration to the

boundary'concessions made by claimant, that in l829 and l833, and long
prior thereto, the Pawnee Tribe held original Indian title through
exclusive occupancy and use in the usual Indian fashion.to the lands
south of the Platte river lying within the boundaries as_set forth and

described in Finding No. 30, and which were the lands ceded under the

treaty of October 9, 1833.

This claim arises on; of the treaty of.iugu:t 5, l3L3 {tates all their right, title, and interest in and to a tract of land

located in central Nebraska described as follows:

Commencing on the south side of the Platte river, five
miles west of this post "Fbrt Childs"3 thence due north

to the crest of the bluffs north of said Platte river,
thence east along the crest of said bluffs to the termination of Grand Island, supposed to be about sixty miles
distant; thence south to the southern shore of said Platte
river; and thence west and along the southern shore of the
said Platte river to the place of beginning.

The treaty contained.a sketch map showing the area ceded. On this man,

1

the latitude and longitude of a point immediately south and a little

east of the sout“west corner of the ceded land (apparently Fort Childs)"

is given as "Lat. hO° 33‘; Long. 99°."

_____.__q.-The claimant contends that the ceded area embraced approximately
llO,l*.l8 acres of land, and counsel for defendant does not appear to
question the correctness of this acreage. Counsel for defendant urges,
however, as they did in Claim 2; that ‘while the ceded area was a pa%
of the lands used by the Pawnees as a roadway to their hunting grounds
there is no proof of its use for hunting purposes or village locations,

We have found in Claim 2 that the lie-..-nees held original indian
titlein 1833 to the lands south of theflatte river extending both
east and west of the area ceded in 3.81:8. The evidence also shows that

rom at least as early as 1700 and until l8h8, the Pawnee had their
villages in central Nebraska along the Platte and Loup rivers. During
all these years the area ceded in 18148 was an integral part of the lands
which were claimed, possessed and exclusively used in lndian fashion by
the ‘Fairness. Moreover, we found no substantial evidence in the ‘record
indicating that anylndian tribe other than the Pawnee tribe ever
occupied, used or claimed the ceded area at any time prior to 181:8.

_ That the Government considered ‘the exclusive Indian possessory
rights in the lands ceded  l8h8 were held by the Pawnees, is Lndicated
"we think by the reports of Government officials in the area and the
action taken by the Goverrrnent to extinguish such rights.

It appears that the establishment of a military post in the vicinity
of the ceded area ‘as first recommended by Got-errment officials in l83h,
for the pmtection of the emigrant route west to the Rocky Mountains as
well as the Pawnees and other Indian tribes in eastern Nebraskatrho had
indicated a desire to settle down permanently and follow agricultural

pursuits .

282

5 283

Although a rr.::::ber of Pa‘-' lees had continued to reside on the land
south of the Platte ‘river ceded to the United States in l833, most of
them had moved to villages located north of the Platte by l81;3, where
they were subject to attacks by Sioux war parties. As a result, those
Pawnees who had remained south of the Platte refused to move north and
many who had moved returned." This situation was reported by.Goverrr1ent
officials in the area with recommendations‘ that the Government provide
protection for the Pasmees from the Siom war parties. In his annual
report of September 10L, 181.5, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in
St. Louis reported on thelfrequent difficulties occurring from the
passage of emigrant trains for Oregon through Indian country wiehout
permission from the Indians, and suggested that "for the safety of the

 a-q.—.-J -air‘:-u .a.‘ A

.........g.._.......;. <1J..l'u.. uut; tr-anqui_:..u.y or the Indians“ a right of way through ...1ch

lands for roads to Oregon “be purchased of the Indians o'r.m:i.ng the country."

He recommended one such route cross the Missouri river at Council Bluffs
and pass through the Pottawatomie, Otoe, and Pawnee lands.

on May l9, l8l:,6, Congress passed an Act (9 Stat. 13) Providing for
"raising a Regiment of Mounted Riflemen; and for establishing Military
tations on the Route to Oregon," and authorized the expenditure of

"a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars for making compensation to Indian tribes which may own or possess the ground

on which the said station may be erected, and for each station."

Under the authority of the l8LL6 Act, the Secretary of War issued an
order on June 1, 1897, cirecting the establishment of a milita-E} ‘station
"near Grand Island where the road to Oregon encounters the Platte river, 1’

and a second station at or near Fort Laramie, and authorized the Commanding Officer of the Hissouri Mounted Battalion -"to enter into a treaty with the Indians for the purchase

of the grounds for these sites, which will be as extensive

as the appropriation will procure.“

After receiving the order, Lt. Col. P well, Commanding Officer, wrote
to the Secretary of ‘(Jar on January 21L, l8l:8, suggesting the purchase of
the land from the Pawnees be made with goods rather than money because
of the Indians‘ ignorance of the valuenof money and that in any event
more land could be procured with goods. Thereafter, on May 29 , l8}.;8,
Col. ‘Powell and the Indian Agent for the Pawnees, John Miller, met in
council with the four bands of Pawnees and a greed upon the treaty providing for the purchase of the lands in issue. However, the treaty
was not signed by the parties until August 8, 18148, when the purchase
goods were deliyered to the Pawne-es. The treaty was rati..ied on
January 8, 18h9.

As the language of the l8h8 act and of the order issued pursuant
to that Act show, the Government intended that the treaties were to be
negotiated with those Indian tribes found holding the Indian possessor;
rights in the. lands acquired for the military sites.

The negotiations

and execution of the 181:8 treaty would seem to justify the conclusion

that the Government considered the Pawnees to be the own.ers of the Indian

title to the lands ceded under that treaty. Moreover, the Government
dealt with the Pawnees on the basis that they owned such title.

It is therefore the conclusion of this Commission the clamant has
established by a preponderance of the evi"ence that the Pan .ee tribe
held original Indian title, through exclusive use and occupancy, at the
time of the August 8, l8h8 treaty, and for many years prior thereto, to
the lands ceded under th t treaty and which lands are specifically

described in Finding 3»

lfailed to prove it had Indian title to any part of the ceded area on the

5 285

Clahnlz

The fourth claim involves the lands north of the Platte river in

8

Nebraska ceded by the Pawnee Tri‘ to the United States by the treaty of
September 2h, l8S7. The treaty description of the area ceded appears in
Finding hh, and is also shown as tract hO8 on Royce‘s map of'Nebraskao
The boundaries of the diminished area within the cession which the
Pawnees now claim was held under original Indian title until ceded in
1357, are set forth in Finding hé.

Counsel for the defendant concede in their brief that the Pawnee

an .mp4 I-m-In-“"""“

tribe occupied an undefined area along the Loup river within the l8§7

{Q gs...) r.l'J-‘WI

treaty cession “from very early times,“ but contends that claimant has

4’, , _,..._...;.4~_o I"a:'

date of the 1857 treaty, either by reason of é&UluSiV8 occupancy and use, 2
or by recognition of such title by defendant, except as to the area reserved by the treaty. _ T 3
As has been noted in the discussion of the first three claims, the:
record shows that for a period of the hundred years or more prior to 1857,
the Pawnees occupied a large area of land north of the Platte river, with

their main.villages being located at rarious points along the Loup and

_.—-use-‘.nI :!‘Platte rivers. The Commissioners appointed under the.Act of'July lb,

5 .0 F9‘

1832, supra, and who were instructed to examine the Indian country west

of the Mississippi river and report on the Indians residing there, eported
in l83h that three tribes, the ?awnees nmibering'l2,000, the Omahas numhere_
ing lhOO, and the Poncas numbering 800, occupied approximately 16,000,000
acres of land north of th Platte river in hebraska. The boundaries between

«L

the three tribes were not given, but the P*"nees were said to be

. -.— -—— ?“' '

"I v. 

U1
}_1
(I
C1
(1)
C?‘
(0

C1(D

(I1

t of the C-nahas and Poncas on the Platte and Elk-horn”
rivers, which is within the area now claimed.

¢\-IRA

A.-“.“:.er l83J.L, when the Pawnee tribe 1~:"s materially reduced in numbers
by disease, there were numerous raids in the Pawnee territory by Sioux
Indian war parties, but there is no record that the Sioux ever attempted
to establish villages in the area now claimed or made use of it as a
hunting ground... In fact, there is no record of any Indian tribe other
than the Pawnee tribe ever having villages in the claimed area at any
time prior to the l8S'7 treaty cession. This is confirmed by the testimony of dei‘endant‘s witness, Dr. John L. Champe, an anthropologist who
is chairman of the Department of Anthropology at the University of
Nebraska. and has conducted extensive research studies of the history of
the Pawnees and other Indian tribes in Nebraska. According to Dr. Champe,
the Pawnees migrated into central Nebraska during the _l?th century and
settled in the Loup--Platte river area, and while their village locations
changed from time to time, except for the two villages on the Republican
river, these villages were always located  the traditional homeland
along the lower course of the Loup river and the adjacent Platte river
until the Pan .ees removed to Oklahozaa in l873.l

The increasing tide of white emigration to the West Coast-passing
through the Indian country west oi‘ Iowa and Missouri, coupled with the
demand for making all or part of these Indian lands available for white
sett ement, resulted in Congress passing the act of March 3, I853 (10 Stat.

226, 238), authorizing the President to enter into negotiations with

Indians west of Iowa and Missouri to obtain their consent to settlement

. ..-._...—-u.S 286

5 287

of whites upon lands held by the tribes there and to obtain relinquishment of Indian title to all or part of such land. This Act applied to
the Pawnees.

The Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Mr. Manypenny, was appointed
to conduct the necessary negotiations and his instructions were to make
a preliminary trip to the Indian country "to explore it, and to obtain
such information as would be useful and necessary in preparing full and
detailed instructions as to the terms and conditions of the treaties to
be negotiated," which he did in the late summer of l8S3. He reported
that he had visited all but three of the tribes located immediately west
of Iowa and Missouri, but due to lack of time had not visited the Pawnees,

Kansas or Osage Indians "with whom, although their lands are not contiguous to the boundaries of either of those States, it is desirable that

treaties also be made,” Since all Pawnee lands south of the Platte river.

had been ceded in l833, it is apparent that the Commissioner considered
the Pawnees had Indian.possessory rights to lands north of that river
which should be extinguished by treaty.

In this connection, we believe the table appearing in the report
submitted by the Indian Office to Congress in l8Sh has a significant
bearing on the amount of land north of the Platte river the Government
believed the Pawnee tribe held by Indian title in l8Sh. <At that time
Congress had.under consideration the terms on which the treaties should
be made with the tribes then located west of Iowa and.Missouri and undoubtedly requested the Indian office to supply the necessary infonnation

regarding the Indian.. The t

(0

ole shows the names of the different tribes

involved, the country'from which they came if emigrants, their population,

. ......—..-. ...._...-—n--.-_

{"‘*-W‘.-.'-4' 

_..,,.,I'

the quan.ity of land held by each, whether by treaty guarantee by the
Government or by Indian title in the case of the indigenous tribes.

The Pawnees are shown as an "idigenous" tribe with a population of E500
Indians residinc on l2,800,000 acres of land held by "Indian title." The
boundaries of the lands held by the Pawnees in l8Sh were given as "north
by Platte, East by Qmahas.“ we are in agreement with the suggestion
made by the Court of Claims in its opinion in this case, that the”North
by Platte" was obviously a misprint and should have been "South by:
Platte," because after the l833 treaty cession the Pawnee lands remaining
were bounded on the south by the Platte river and the Omaha lands'were
all north of t.e Platte. The Omaha Tribe is shown as having a population
of 1300 Indians, owning h,h80,000 acres of'land which was bounded on the
south by the Platte river, on the east by the Missouri.river, and on the
west by lcng’tude_98° west. ‘

_The United States concluded a treaty (10 St t. lOh3) on March 16,
l8Sh;with the Omaha Indians and obtained a cession of'all their lands
west of the Missouri river, except a reserved area. Thereafter trouble
developed.tetween the Pawnees and the white settlers on the lands in
the western.part of the Omaha cession, which land the Pawnees insisted
belonged to them. On April 21, 1857, the Pawnee Indian.Agent, William
Dennison, held a council with the Pawnees to investigate the complaints
made by'white settlers against them and the Pawnee claim to the disputed
Omaha cession lands. In the council the Pawnee chiefs insisted their
actions'were justified, since the land belonged to them and they‘“had a
right to do as they'pleased with their own land." They'expressed a

desire, however, to make a treaty cession of a part of their lands.

5 289

As one chief stated, We have a great deal of land, hope that if we
succeed Ln making a treaty with our Grand Father, that it will be such

a one aslwiu afford us a living for many years to come; we received but
little nhenine made” our last treaty and non  lands have become increased in ‘value, expect to receive a much larger amount."

Thepcomznissioner of Indian Affairs, Mr. Denver, wrote to the Secrea . .
4. L

tarytof the; Interior on I'i1ayi23, l8§7, ‘directing  attention to the. report
of Agent.Denr1ison' on the council with the ‘Pia:-rnees and also to prior re...
ports oi‘ thetemmissioner of lndian Affairs in  l8SS and l8S6, all
recommending’ that  treaty be made Keith the Davgnees, ‘and’ suggested that a
delegation of Pawnees be brought  Washington for the purpose of entering
into a treaty '*,.4herebj.,r- the hawnees would cede”."their lands north of the

Platte river” and ac_:_cept a  area fora perr.-:a'nent- home, This was not
done. Instead, Commissioner of Indian Ai‘i"airs Denver was authorized by

the Secretary oif Interior  a‘ letter dated August l5, 1857, to enter into
negotiations  the Indian tribes west of Iowa and Missouri pursuant to

the provisions ofduthelct I"larch'3, 1853: supra. His instructions were to
visit the ‘Siouic, Enonca Pawnee Indians,‘ among others, andto examine their
countrir and ‘obtain. allxinfonnation necessary to the preparation of instructions
as to the terms and conditions of treaties to be made with them, -or any other
tribes. I-Ieiwas ajdgthorized, however, to enter into a treaty with any of.‘ the

tribe, ii‘, "onhis trip of inspection and investigation, he deemed it ex“-L
C

pedient and proper to ‘do.
On Septe:=.1ber'2h, 1837, Cormissioner Denver met in council. with the
an-nee tribe and concluded a’ treaty whereby the Fairness ceded and relinquished
to the United States‘ all-their right, title and interest in and to all

“i

la-nos than or.-med or claimed by then *it':"-.in-the boundaries

(Finding hh) described in the treaty, except for an area reserved

within the cession. north Of the Plaite

?his land, of course, was all
river. While the council proceedings are not available, the evidence
indicates that Commissioner Denver had determined from his investigation

and.prior reports the extent of the Pawnee tribe‘s occupancy of the land

8 north of the Platte river and included in the cession the lands which

he was satisfied belonged to the Pawnees. In this connection his report

or November 9, 1857, to the Secretary of the Interior when he forwarded

the Pawnee treaty contains certain.significant statements which are, in

part, as follows:

There have been acquired hereby all the lands which these
Indians own or claim, except a reservation of 288,000 acres;
the number of acres acquired will reach, by approximation,
the amount of ll,8h2,980 acres. %-%'*

After giving a description of the boundaries fixed of the ceded area,

he says:

I could.here remark that the Pawnees claimed.much further
east than.was allowed by me, but I was satisfied that they
justly owned.up to Shell oreek, which includes a space of
about thirty miles in breadth, embraced.in.the purchase:made

of the Omahas in l8Sh. (Underscoring supplied.)

 

 

It is obvious from the record that this report of Commissioner Denver
was before the United States Senate when it had the ratification of the
l857:Pawnee treaty of cession.under consideration. The Senate ratified
the treaty on March 3l, 1858 with only an.amendment respecting the annuity’
pa;ments,'which was accepted by the Pawnee tribe on April 3, l8S8, and the
treaty was proclaimed on May 26, l8S8.

From.what is recited above, it will be seen that during the

period from.1833 to l8S7, and.prior thereto, the Government and its

5 291

9 ‘hivarious officials alw ys recognized tCau the Pawnees held exclusive
Indian possessory rights or title to a large area of land north of the
P tte river. And, we think the evidence indicates that in the IBS7
treaty the Government fixed the boundaries of the area it believed was
held by the Pawnees under original Indian title. while it is true, the
treaty contained no express recognition or acknowledgment of such title
in the Pawnees to any part of the oession, except the reserved area, it
seems unlikely that the Government would have agreed, as it did, to pay’
such a large sum to the Pawnees in the way of perpetual annuities and
other benefits for the lands being ceded (totaling over $h,OO0,000 as

Of 191:?) if it had not considered the lands, or the major portion thereof, as belonging to the Pawnees. We think this evidence strongly supports

their claim of Indian title to the lands non claimed. \

It is contended.by counsel for defendant that the Pawnees had
abandoned and oeased'to use or exclusively occupy any of the lands north.
of the Platte river by 1851, thereby'termin"ting their Indian title to

such lands. In.support of their contention counsel cites the case of

The Quanaw Tribe of Indians v; The United.States, l28 C. Cls. hS, where 

in the Court of Claims affirmed this Qommission's findings of fact and
decision denying the Quapaw‘s claim of origina_ Indian title. However,

we think that the situation in the instant case is clearly distinguishable
on its facts. In the Quapaw case the tribe clanned original Indian.title
to approximately b5 million acres of land _ving west of the Mississippi

river and south of the Arkansas river in the tates of.Afkansas and

Louisiana ceded by the treaty of Aucust 2

I
L.
No
P-‘
(1)
1...:
D
/'*~.
\0
U)
(1
D)
(‘I
o

175), with an

55

"-'_r;-'- -f. , .. * 9 .3.‘ .9 -'._...;. '1..- l " A, u-oa being r€S€?v83 LO: then 0; approx; aoelv ,loh,0oO acres lvang

“. .
""'*s-pi".

Q \- ‘°—. -.—. ‘ 4 ‘ O "N "_ ‘I ‘ ‘T _L_‘ '
immediately south of the arxansas river. ;Re iacos ICUEQ oy this Com: c , o . ,. 0 0 QI;‘_ ; ; ‘ H _;_'
mission rare, that from the time of first white contact in lphl un. l

some thus after l700, the Quapaw tribe occupied an area in northwest
Arkansas a_ong the west bank of the Mississippi river, extending from

Q

the vicinity of the St. Francis river to the Arkansas river. The trioe‘s
principal village was at the confluence of the St. Francis and Mississippi

rivers until they began movie? southward, and about the year l8OS were

#4:‘

located along the south bank of the Arkansas river within the area

reserved in the l8l8 treaty. ‘we held in effect that the Quapaws failed

to prove that they had ever occupied any part of the area cededvin 1818,
except.th area reserved in the treaty.

In the instant case, it is quite obvious from the-record that the

Pawnees, unlike the Quapaws, were the aho-iainal occupants and exclusively

if

'\

11

used substantially all of the area now claimed north of the Platte river
for several centuries prior to the time of the 1857 tre ty'cession. The
Pawnees did.move to temporary village sites on the south side of the
Platte river around 1851, due evidently to the defendant's failure to
protect their permanent villages north of'the river from the raids of
Sioux'war parties as the Pawnees had understood'would be done if they
remained at peace. However, we think the evidence indicates that the
Pawnees did not abandon and cease to use the lands north of the Platte

river which they are shown ‘o have occupied and used and claimed.since

t is also quite plain that when the

HQ

"’)
cl"
‘r

1857 treaty cession oC)
(D
I-’
|.Ja
(D
4
(D
cl
:1
(D
I-’
I‘?
L1
0
U)
h
FL
0!
(‘.5
{D
ID
C.)
W
{:5
0.
P
in
[1
U!

y the Pcwnees and, as stated above,

_ 0 9 $5 I I. I ‘-9 -g. 9;
onere is nothing in one record £5103 CODvl3C88 us that they old.

5 29a

.5 ' .1 J. - ‘ .:.'
:8 lands as ootalned one Goternnent itself did not

5 293

-5
.the Sioux Tribe on the west and of
the Ponca Tribe on the north of the Pawnee l857 cession, the claimant

tribe has filed herein stipulations made with those tribes wherein

reed with the Sioux Tribe that the eastern boundary of

0
I9’
h
C5
(‘F
TD’
fl)
U1
(1)
Gt:

Sioux lands as established by the l85l Fort Laramie treaty shall form
the western boundary of the l85? Pawnee cession; and with the Ponca
Tribe on the northern boundary of the Pawnee cession as a meandering
line beginning at the Fort Laramie treaty line and running generally
east and southeast to the Omaha l85h treaty cession. This line is
shonn.on a map of'Nebraska marked Claimant‘s Exhibit lhh as the northern
boundary of the lands identified thereon as "Claim h." Claimant also
accepts as the eastern boundary of the l857 cession the line fixed by
this Commission in the Omaha case, Docket 225-A as the western eonndary'
of the Gmaha lands.

And while claimant insists the Pannees held Indian

title to the entire 1857 cession, it is here asserting a claim only'to

the lands north of'&n3PQatte river nithin.the above described boundaries

and disclaims any interest in the remainder of the cession.

From our consideration of all the evidence now in the record, and
apylying the requirements heretofbre made by this Commission and the
Court of Claims for establishing original lndian title, it is our conclusion that the record justifies a finding of aboriginal Indian title

03)

in the claimant tribe at the time of the l

to, to the lands north of the Platte river in hebraska as snecifical.y“

described in Finding Ho. L5.

.. 3.‘
linr,"

57 treaty, and long prior thereI
'‘‘.L'. . Z-I-1:’
I v..l_";é.!'.£:_‘_.

Claim 5

 

This is a claim for the value of hEOO acres of the land reserved
bv the fownees out of the Eebraska lands they ceded to the United
l8S?, which land was erroneously
excluded in the original survey of the reserved area. This shortage
was discovered upon completion of a resurvey on May 8, 1873. In 1875,
Congress appropriated the sum of $6,000 or $1.25 per acre, to pay the

claimant for this h8OO acre shortage. Claimant contends the land was

worth at least $3.00 oer acre in 1875, and seeks to recover the difference between the value of the land and the amount paid, plus the

equivalent of interest. The defendant concedes the land was taken but
contends that claimant has been fully compensated for its value.
when this claim was orig.nally considered, as found that by the

'5

error in the original survey the defendant had taken hECO acres of

N

clainant‘s reserved land but denied recovery'because the record did not
disclose the precise location of the land or when it was taken. The
issues now before the Commission are confined to a determination of these
two questions.

.9 ‘

The first article 0; the l8S7 treaty provided.that out of the
Nebraska land.ceded by the Pan.ees they reserved “a tract of country
thirtyzmiles long from east to west by fifteen miles wide from north to
south," the east line of which was to be a point not further east than
the mouth of Beaver Creek. In.making the original survey of the reserved
area the surveyorznade an error by rrnning the east-nest line only 29%
miles east.

as a result, a tract of land one-half'nile'wide and fifteen

Inlles long on the nest end of the tract, containing LEOQ.acres, was

PO

no

'1

~ - ~ .:. .'- ..-_
J the terms or the treaty.

excluded from the reserved area called for
This error was disclosed on May 8, l873 upon completion of a resurvey'
of the reservation ordered by th Secretary of the Interior.

The shortage of land in the reservation shown by the resurvey was
reported to the Commissioner of Indian.A€fairs on June ll, 1873 by the
Superintendent oi Indian.Affairs at Omaha with a statement that he had
been informed the excluded strip of land "is all settled by whites,"
and recommended that the United.States pay the Pawnees for the land
since he considered “the Indians already have an excess of land, and
there appears to be no occasion for interfering with the settlements on
said strip of land." This report was submitted to the Secretary of the
Interior on December 20, 1873, and on January_S, 187b, he recommended
to Congress that the Pawnees be inden iiied for the shortage of their
land. By the act of'March 3, 1875 (18 Stat. h20, hh8), Congress approé
priated the sum of $6,000 for that purpose which was paid to claimant.

with respect to the location of this land erroneously-excluded
from the Pawnee reservation, it has been established by the evidence
and counsel for defendant now concedes, that it was a strip of land
one-half mile wide and fifteen.miles long from north to south located
immediately adjacent to the western boundary of the reservation in
Kebrasha as originally surveyed.

As to the date of taking of this land by the defendant, the claimant
now urges that the land should be va_ued as of May 8, 13?}, when.the

r‘ I"-‘Q-agngq ‘t 5'" ‘n. .. G ‘ ;- ‘ . . £0‘ é pl» 0-. .
government lirst discovered ch shortage in the reserve area. it 18

[D

-‘ 9 -o‘.-III\J"'|I-I-U-I ":"' In 4‘ ‘I-‘-\ — ‘L 4'!-.--In any-1--u I‘ . 4‘
clear laqm the text 0; the i857 treacr th t the Pa&n€9S had a recognised

 A?“ If. F. N - O 1 1 . o 5 , . q. , 4.‘
-- » r'*“" -Y‘. "' ''''r':»''* *1--'* '—-.1‘ ..:: '- '.-'v~:.x 'n'.''‘'\ r --2:.-:-----r-a 4- v- - - -':---~v-s '‘ "-‘--5-t C--A-L-k_»_JC'—+-('.:__«’ C5-nus t.-.22.‘:-‘ U....u....-w U0 u..-..- ...-n.a.;.'."."'-.3 a «gal a("'~..':~...-. ur'<:.C .4 Cl. :]..C.-.;'..... (:23

.
Z
‘I’

"‘ 7::‘;;.:;5.'.-*

described in the treaty. That a shortage in the reserved area existed
was disclosed in l873 by the resurvey, but obviously this resurvey did
not affect any change in the Pawnees? title to such land. However, wh r
Congress with fall know edge of the facts passed the Act of March 3, 1875,
a_propriating the money to pay for the land, we think this action constituted a taking of the land, and that the Pawnees‘ title thereto ras

in effect extinguished as of the date of the 1875 Act. we accordingly
conclude that the L800 acres in question should be valued as o£‘March 3,

1875.

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:

   
 

Associate Commissioner

