8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 638

.BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE UINTAH UTE INDIANS.OF UTAH,
Plaintiffs,

V. _Docket Nos. 44 and 45

rm: UNITED suits or AMERICA,

Defendant.

*u/\a’\u'\/\/N-/\u/\u/\./

Decided: June 13, 1960

Appearances:

~Ernest L. Wilkinson, with whom
were Robert W. Barker, F. M.
Goodwin, and Glen A. Hilkinson,
Attorneys for the Plaintiffs.

Keith Browne, with whom was,
Mr. Assistant Attorney General,
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

Watkins, Associate Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission
.The above numbered Dockets are now before the Commission for consideration of a Joint Motion,of.the parties seeking approval of a proposed
compromise settlement of the claims of the plaintiffs.
In prior determinations, after a joint hearing on the issue of

liability, this Commission found in favor of the plaintiffs in both
cases. Separate findings of fact, opinions and interlocutory orders

were entered in each Docket number.

The purpose of the proposed compromise stipulation is to make a lump

settlement of the two claims, and all matters involved in them, by the
entry of judgment in the sum of $7,700,000.00 against the defendant

and in favor of the plaintiffs.

s Ind. Cl. Corrrn. 620 639

We have found that the said plaintiffs have been fully advised of the
terms of said proposed settlement and the reasons for it; that their
officers and membership apparently understand it; they have given their
unqualified approval of the document entitled "Stipulation for Entry of
Final Judgment," which is set out in full in our Findings herewith.

All the formal requirements the Commission has previously adopted
with respect to the proof of a valid approval of a compromise settlement
by the plaintiff and defendant have been substantially complied with.

No hearings on value have been held on either of said Dockets.

The only matter left for consideration is the question of the fairness_

of the proposed settlement.

In Docket No. 44 the Commission found that the plaintiffs had original
.Indian title to a certain area of land in central Utah, the boundaries
of which were fixed in Finding No. 3 of the original findings and it
concluded as a matter of law that, "Defendant is liable to plaintiffs
for the value of all lands within the boundaries of said area which
plaintiffs may hereafter prove were disposed of or acquired by defendants."
The Order went on to provide. "That a time will hereafter be set for a
hearing of such proof as may be offered by either party to this case
touching on the deprivation of plaintiffs of the lands in said area
and the value thereof; provided, however, that the hearing as to the
value of such lands shall not be had until therephas been a determination
of the lands the plaintiffs have been deprived of and the dates of such
deprivation." The Order was dated the 21st day of February, 1957.

In connection with this order we have found in_Finding No. 14 here1

Vith» that the area described in said Finding No. 3, supra contains

3 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 540

6,369,280 acres based on a stipulation of the parties to that effect.

Also we have found that the provisions of the interlocutory order, for the

holding of hearings to determine when lands within the subject area had

either been disposed of or acquired by the defendant, and to determine

the dates when disposals or acquirements had taken place, had not been

carried out. Without these hearings and the determinations which would

result therefrom, there is very little direct evidence in the record
bearing onHfb€ Value Of the'trackS which were actually taken by defendant

out.of the subject tract. Also, there is a limited amount of evidence
on acreages taken and the dates when they were taken.

However, on these matters the Commission in its opinion on the issue

0

of_liability made this explanation and conclusion:

The other theory is that the Indians were deprived
of their lands when the defendant disposed of part to
settlers and others under the public land laws of the
United States and converted parts of the area to its
own use. Such deprivation necessarily extended over a
period of many years and the plaintiffs at the time of‘
the hearing were not prepared to show all disposition
of their lands by defendant but did show disposition of
a substantial part of the area described in Finding No. 3
and it was agreed,by counsel (Trans., p. 310) for the
parties that insofar as the interlocutory determination
of liability was oancerned, the showing of such disposition
by plaintiffs was sufficient, leaving to the plaintiffs the
right to offer proof at a later hearing of other disposition
of lands within the area described in Finding No. 3 should
the Commission hold defendant liable. 3

We therefore, are of the opinion, and so hold, that
.the defendant is liable to plaintiffs for the value of such
part of the lands within the area described in Finding
No. 3 as the plaintiffs may hereafter prove to have been
disposed of or converted to its own use by defendant,
the time of such deprivation to be determined when the
proof thereof has been submitted.

The original Findings made by the Commission on the issue of liability

Shows that the plaintiffs had established Indian title to 6,369,280

s Ind. c1. Comm. 620 6-’+1

acres as of February 23, l86S, the date the so-called Spanish Fork treaty
was signed by the plaintiffs and the defendant.

The treaty failed to be ratified by the Senate so the title to the
lands, which were to be ceded by the plaintiffs to the defendant by virtue
of the treaty, did not go to the defendant by that instrument.

The theory of our interlocutory order was that the defendant actually
took parts of the area in question from time to time. When and how much
were facts to be determined in hearings which have never been held.

In view of such a situation we think we should, in this proceeding,
assume that if the case were litigated to a conclusion, that the plaintiffs
would recover the surface and sub-surface value of the said 6,369,280 acres
based on one or more taking dates beginning with February 23, 1865, and -..i

ending with the last taking. Ordinarily the later the taking date the

higher the market value of the lands would be.
This is a highly speculative situation, we admit, which makes for

uncertainty as to the amount of recovery in a fully litigated case.
The matter we have just discussed, together with the views of some

members of the plaintiffs tribe who.be1ieved they should have had a larger

settlement, has induced us to review at some length the compromise settlement which we have found to be fair.

First of all it should be remembered that Utah is a semi-arid state and
that successful agricultural development except for a few dryland grain areas,
is impossible without irrigation. The Norman pioneers soon found that they had
to provide adequate irrigation systems at heavy cost before they could have

successful farm enterprizes. So important was water that irrigation rights

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 642

in most areas of the state were worth several times as much as the lands on

which they were used, and that continues to be true. This is so because
even with all the waters of the state fully developed, it is estimated that
only about 4 percent of the area of Utah can be placed under cultivation.
Most of the area of the state is mountainous and much of it lies in
areas far from.the limited supply of water which the state possesses.
The early Morman pioneers were very poor. They had to flee from their
homes without realizing anything from them or their personal property.
The area that Brigham.Young'and his followers selected for their new homes

‘was considered at that time the least desirable of any of the vast lands in

Western America which were open to colonization.

For many years after the arrival of the Tieneers in Utah, the new
settlers who adopted Utah as their home were members of the dominant church;
many of them from northern Europe. The new immigrants were even poorer than
the pioneers. They had very little money to buy lands or anything else in
those early years. Barter was the common means of doing business and at one
time there was a local form of money established because of the lack of
United States currency. Later, but.within the early development period,
minerals were discovered and a successful mining industry followed which
brought in many new settlers and helped to relieve the economic and
financial situation.

The policy of Brigham Young and the other Morman leaders was to send out
colonizing groups throughout the then Territory of Utah, which was much
larger than the present State of Utah - to establish settlements in areas
where both water and land were available. This policy did tr: down the

demand for lands within the central part of Utah as it would take potential

buyers out of the market.

5 Ind. (21. Comm. 520 643

The area in Docket 44 is located in the central part of Utah which is
now a center of intensive agricultural and industrial development. Comparatively speaking, it is one of the best watered areas in the state; but
even so, there is not nearly enough water in the area to irrigate all of
the lands susceptible to irrigation.

The early settlers built irrigation systems along the water courses
of the streams in the area. Years later additional lands would be brought
under cultivation further away from the streams, until the water supply

was exhausted.l Storage of flood water for later use was not in the 1800's

a common practice in the Territory of Utah.

The valley lands in Utah, Juab, San Pete and Millard Counties, all
within the subject area, were very fertile and produced large crops of
vegetables, hay, grain, and in some areas, fruits. These were considered
the best lands in the_subject area. Most of the area was made up of
rugged mountains, deserts,a and wastelands. The high mountain areas were
forested and received a greater rainfall, and were highly regarded for
grazing livestock during the summer season. Other lands not under cultivation
.were used for grazing of livestock in the fall and winter seasons. Prior
to the establishment of national forests and grazing districts these lands
.were open to the public under a system of common use.

The market for the commodities raised in the central Utah area during
the period in question was largely within the state because of the high
transportation costs to markets on the outside, but the west bound
travelers in the California gold rush bought heavily of the products of
the area. This was a source of considerable revenue to the people of Utah

at a time when it was badly needed.

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 544

with respect to Docket No. 45, the Commission found and concluded that
the plaintiffs were entitled to, and were in the rightful and exclusive
Possession.of the Uintah and Ouray Indian Reservation lands in the Uintah
River valley in the then Territory of Utah, and that the defendant in

placing the Band of White River Utes thereon, without the consent of the

plaintiffs, and without compensating them therefor, is liable to plaintiffs
for the value of an undivided one-half interest in the lands of said
reservation.

The Commission entered its Interlocutory Order that the plaintiffs
should recover from defendant the value of an undivided one-half interest in
the lands of said reservation as of August 15, 1882, less such off-sets and
counterclaims or other demands as are allowable under the Indian Claims
Commission Act.

.The Uintah and Ouray Reservation lands are located in northeastern
.Utah in the Uintah River valley now known as the Uintah Basin. This is
also a comparatively well watered area. Its principal streams have their
sources in the high Uintah mountains and enter the valley area through
deep canyons. .Along the river courses irrigation systems can be constructed
at.reasonable cost. But to irrigate the higher bench lands which are

extensive} very costly reclamation projects are necessary. These larger

projects are now authorized for construction under the Colorado River
Storage Project. There are thousands of acres of low grade land susceptible
to irrigation for which no water will be available.

Farming and stockraising are the highest and best uses for which this
area could have been used in 1882.

At the taking date of this area (1882) by the defendant it was remote

and largely isolated from the rest of the Territory of Utah. Transportation

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 545

to the areas outside the Uintah Basin was principally by horse drawn
vehicles over unimproved highways and through high mountain passes, closed
for the most part during the winter months. Farmer's crops were largely
sold in the Basin area to livestock growers and to non-farming residents

The climate is typical of the Rocky Mountain areas of similar elevation
and latitude.

Since none of the subject area was for sale in 1882, the taking date,
there were few comparable sales on which to form.a judgment on market
values of that date.

These are only some of the important factors which would have had

some bearing on land values in that area when the White River Band of Utes

were moved on to the reservation, then owned and in the possession of the an

Plaintiffs.

Also, matters relating to the history of the settlement of Utah and

its early economic development heretofore recounted are applicable in some

respects to valuation of the subject area in Docket 45.

In passing on the fairness of the proposed settlement as it affects

Docket No. 45, we are taking into consideration that under the rulings

.of the Supreme Court the plaintiffs contentions that they would be entitled

to interest on the value of an undivided one-half interest in the reservation
lands taken by the defendant for the use of the Band of White River Utes
for the years 1882 to 1960 are valid (U.S. vs. Creek Nation 295 U. S.

103 97 L ed 1331' Shoshone Tribe of Wind River vs. United States 299

 

U. S. 476).

a.

Within a few days after the hearings had been held we received a

telegram from a faction of Ute Indians objecting to the appearance before

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 620 646

the Commission of some of the witnesses for the plaintiffs who testified
at the hearing on the Motion. The telegram did not object to the compromise
settlement. .The testimony received by the Commission showed that some of
the persons sending ghe telegram were present at the meetings of the tribe
where the compromise settlement was considered, and that these same Indians
voted for the compromise or at least did not vote against it. There was
no evidence offered in the telegram which would disqualify any of the
witnesses who appeared before us in behalf of the plaintiffs.

In arriving at our decision we have taken into consideration the

values we fixed on lands in other states in other cases which have

been before us. We found as the work of the Commission proceeded

“Qi ¢¢uI-‘- -up-an -~_—_._»-.1.

.......... c...-.5...-.3 M-....~.n.-: s.u.u.bL 1:: cuutsidc-:a.c.-.d on .Li..b' (Mu mt.-:'.t'i.L":s, and that there can
be no standard of values adopted which will fit the specific situations
that occur in each claim before us.

Previously we have referred to the views of some of the members of
the plaintiff tribe that the Ute Indians should receive more than the.
proposed compromise settlenent provides. We have taken into consideration
these views. We have considered the records made in the two docket numbers
under consideration. We have also taken judicial notice of many facts
and factors that bear on the valuation of the subject lands. we have
great respect for the very able counsel who have represented the plaintiffs
and defendant in these cases. It is their judgmen that the comprcnisc
settlement is fair. Plaintiff‘s counsel should surely know better than
anyone else the merits of their claims; the costs of carrying them to a
final litigation; and also the benefits which vonlo inure to theil ;}ients

if the cases were compromised and settlement was made aL once.

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 620 647

The compromise settlement is certainly not unconscionable. On balance we
feel that under all the circumstances probably the settlement is more favorable
to the Indians than to the defendant. In any event it is a settlement that‘

should not be denied approval.

Let final judgment be entered in accordance with our Findings and this

Opinion.

3/ Arthur V, Watkins
Associate Commissioner

 

5/ Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:_

s/ Edgar E. Witt
Chief.Commissioner

 

