1 incl. c1. Comm. 333 333

BEFORE‘. TEE Il\IDI1'LN CLAIMS COMMISSION

The NOOKSACK TRIBE OF

IEDl£NS on relation of
Joseph Louis, Chairman
iof the General Council,

Claimant,
‘vs. Docket N6. 146

mm Uitm:-an some on Aivil-ERICA,

WWW HVVVW

Defendant.

Kenneth Jo Selender, with when was
Frede:iek‘W. Post, Attorneys for
Claimant,

Ralph As Barney, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
A. Devitt Vanech, Attorneys for
Defendant,

.313; 1 4 1950
;@»:oen:¢no1 oszmon

O'Merr, Associate Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

Qhe petition, as amended, sets forth a claim of the Hooksack (also
spelled Hookmsack) Tribe of Indians, by Joseph Louis, a member of that
tribe and as the representative of all its menberso Louis is also do».
scribed in the petition as Chairman of the General Council of the Tribe,
but such.a11egations have no bearing on his capacity to bring this action,

‘An answer has been filed by the defendant in wniohg among other

things, there has been set up (1) a defense to the effect

cf’
'3'
h
1'?‘
er?
:3’
(D
0
.4
is
w
13

herein asserteé is barred by the decision of the Cones ofrslains in case

l'Ind. Cl; come.f333 _ «  w ;   pp, -~ ' i  ' ‘- 334

, Q

.2.

H09‘ 30'-‘.375 (79 0. C10. 530),  (2) that the claimant is not a tribe,
band or other identifiable group of Indians under the Act creating
the Indian Claims Commission; (060 Stat. 1039; 25 U.S.0. 70).

Because of the nature of those two defensesthe Commission agreed
with the parties that they should be disposed of before the case is
heard on its merits, so a hearing was had on the 8th day of June, 1950,
solely upon the two defenses. I

RES JUDIGAEA

his claim was presented to the Court of Claims under a special
33-Tisdictional act, presently to be considered, in case F-275 (79 0. C13.
530). In that case nineteen Indian tribes, including the claimant herein, Joined in an action against defendant to recover the value of certain
described lands locatedin the State of Washington. The claimant herein
filed a separate petition therein alleging it had resided from time immenorial on 188,080 acres of described land which had been taken from
the tribe by defendant without compensation and without its consent,‘and
it asked Judgment for the ee. of $3,735,600. (Def. Ex. No. 7). V

The identical claim is here presented and the defendant pleads the
jxzdgnent of the Court of Claims as a bar to the present claim, '

T.‘:Le first suit was brought under the jurisdictional act of February
139 1935 (143 Stat. 886), which authorized the parties to certain named
.t'ea’-ties and six other named tribes, including the Nooksack, with when
no treaties had been made, to submit their claims to the Court of Claims

for adjudication. The act applying to the Nooksack and the five other

'\

1 Io.c1.; c1. com; 333' C’ ._ _3.35

-3...

nontreaty Indians reads hswfollows:

3‘ " 9 that all ‘claims of whatever nature, both legal
.and equitable; whic-h the ivhiclcelshoot, San Juan Islands
" Indians; IIoo}o~Se.ek_. Suattlc, Chinook, Upper Chehalis,
Lower Chohalis, and Ebimptulip ’i‘ribes or Bands of Indians,
or any of then (wi th when no treaty has been made), may
have against the United States shall be submitted to the
Court of Claims with rztglit of appeal by either party to
the Supreme Court of the Un ted States for determination
and adjudication, both legal and equitable, and jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon the Court of Claims to hear
and determine any and all suits brought hereunder and to
render final ,jud.g:'_1ent therein; Provided, That the court
shall also consider and determine any legal or equitable
defenses, setoffs, or eounterclains including gratuities
which the United States may have against any of said tribes
. or bendso" '

As proof of the former adjudication of the Hooksack claim by the

‘ Court of Claims the defendant has offered excerpts from the findings of

fact and the oginion of that Court in F-275 (79 C. Cls. 530), (See

lDefendant*s Eli. Koo 9). Since the exhibit does not include the final

decree of the Court,_ so have examined the whole record of the Court of
Claims in order to determine how the Court diwosed of the Hooksaek
claim.

case He. 3.<"--275 was instituted in the Court of Claims by nineteen
Indian tribes under the Jurisdictional not mentioned above. Thirteen
of the tribes asserted claims based upon treaties specified in the
Jurisdictional Act and the Court decided they were entitled to recover
$?1L,1+96..1+5 (see Findings of Fact nos. an, rm, zen and rim, 79 Ca Cls.
530, 538, 531, 513-8, 557.) These tribes are referred to in the findings
and opinion of the Court as Treaty Indians. 81:: of the tribes, with.
when no treaties had been made. including the llooksaeic tribe, were

parties to the some action and referred to in said opinion as nontre aty

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 333 336

O-II!-‘tuIndians. but the Hooksack filed a separate petition. The final order of
the Court of Claims, after setting forth its findings, reads as follows:l

, "Conclusions of Law; "Upon the foregoing special

-findings of fact, ehich.are made a part of the jud5D¢nt
herein,_the court decides as.a conclusion of law herein,
that the plaintiffs are entitled to recover $7l,¥96.h5.
The defendants counter-claim exceeds this amount, and the
petition is therefore dismissed."

The nineteen parties to the suit filed separate petitions but the petitions‘

were bound togetherwand the cover named the nineteen tribes and designated

the Pleading as "Consolidated.Petition." (Def. Ex. so, 7). ‘While the

Judgment set forth.above considered by itself is confusing, a reference

to the opinion of the Court shoes that want the Gen

1,. —.....- .-.s-u--u-- ---—-up -Iv a-rt ulorder was to dismiss the Nooksack.petition (as well as the others), and
for the reason hereafter stated‘

In its opinion (79 C; Cls. 530 at pp. 597-600) the Court first discussed generally the claims of the nontreaty Indians, which included the
Nooksack, and the failure of the proof to show sovereign recognition of
the Indian rights or titles to the lands for which compensation was sought,

and then observed:

"Tribal Indians claimed by right of occupancy such vast
unlimited areas of lands, encompassing in many instances the
greater and better portions of what are"now States of the
Union? that had it ever been the political policy of the
Government to accord then the same proprietary right that
attaches to a title superior to that of occupancy, and open
the courts to suite as and for their taking when thrown open
to public settlement by the United States, Congress and the
courts would have left open no doubts ‘pen the subject,“

and concluded with this statement respecting the claims of all the nontreaty tribes:

  1 Ind. 01. Comm. 333 337

-5...

t"We are of the opinion that‘th1s court is without
jurisdiction in a case between tribal Indians and the
‘United States for the recovery of the alleged value of
lands thrown open to public settlement by an act of
Congress, in the absence of a treaty or an act of Con»
gress recognizing the Iniians‘ title by right of occupancy _
to the same; .Tho.specia1-jurisdictional acts do not confer‘ '

such jurisdiction (Mills Inc Indian.case, sngra), and the

issue is a political and not a juaicial one.”
In specifically discussing the Hooksack claim (ppo 605-5) the Court
said:

“The'Nooksaoks were never a large tribe; they were as a
rule peaeeable and industrious, they cultivated the soil to
some extent, and preferred the chase to fishing or exploiting the adjoining bays and streams as most of the so-called
‘Sound’ Indians did. Why no treaty was made with them is
not important in this case. whatever may have been their
original status, the Goternnentzs relationship with than
apyears as stated, and unfortunately for the tribe no governw
mental recognition of its claimed rights to occupancy of lands
appears, ané judgment may not be awarded."

Thus, it will be seen, that what the Court decided with respect to
the Hooksack claim, was that the claim was based upon the aboriginal
rights of those Indians and since they had never been recognized by
defendant the Court, under the Jurisdictional Act, has no power to make
an award therefor, This position of the Court was reaftirmed in Alcoa
Band of Tillaaooks vs United States? 103 C. Cls. h9h, 556, where the
Court, in referring to its holding in the Dnwanish et E13 Tribes V.
‘United States, 79 Ce Cls. 530, said:

“The Duwanish case did not hold or intend to hold.

that an Znaian tribe conla not recover compensation on

the basis of original En£ian‘use and occupancy title as

50? a taking if the jurisdictional act authorized the

bringing of a suit and rendition of judgment for coupon»
sation on the basic of-on h original titles”

In
\

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 333 3 338
.. ‘s ..

And when the.A1cea case, supra, came before the Supreme Court, that 00933
discussed the Iluwanish case and reached the same conclusion as the Courtof Claims as to what was decided in that case. (329 U. S. 140, 50-51).

It is obvious, therefore, that the Court of Claims did‘ not ‘dismiss

.the Eeoksach petition in F—275 £79 0. Ole. 530) on the.nerits, but because it had no Jurisdiction under the Jurisdictional.Ac% to entertain

a claim for the value of land based.upon original Indian.title. The rule
is settled that a former ediudication does not bar the prosecution of a
second action between the some parties on the same cause of action unless
the first action was determined on its merits, and c dismissal of the

former action for want of jurisdiction is not a determination of a case

on its merits. Hughes v. United states, no. s. 232, 13 1.. Ed. 303;

$z:1ith v. Meseai, 109 U. s. 1427. 27 L. Ed. 986.

It accordingly follows that the defense of res judicata must be
denied.

Caggcitv of Claimant to Sue

As we have stated above, the defendant claims the Hooksack Indians
is not a tribe, band or identifiable group (per. 3 of First Defense), and
in the Third Defense the defendant alleges they are a subordinate band
of the Emmi Tribe.

The Neoksack (Nooksak) means mountain men. This small tribe was
located east of the Lummi tribe along the Nooksack river and in the Mount
33k0T region. These Indians were not a subordinate band.of the Lummi but,

according to Coleman (cited by Leslie Spiel‘ in De:£'en:3.ant'e Ex. so, 3), a

J. Ind. Cl. Comm‘. 333 , 339
.. 7 .tribe distinct from the  and differing in language, manner and modes
of life. There is a statement in Defendant's Em, Ho‘, 13 to the effects
that the Nooksack were allied with the Lutnni and Slcagit but the character
or purpose of the alliance is not shown or in anynise .8.I.§._"‘£).]__.3i1'.i(?df so We
-cannot ear that such a statement may be accepted aS*‘pI‘00f that the Iiooksack
are a part of the %]'.«u::1mi. '.1‘he fact is that in all of the documents offered
by the defendant (Exliibits :sos., 3, 1+, 5, 6,, 10, 11, 3.2., 13, 11;), consist--.
ing of a general series in Anthropology, reports of Indian agents, super-u
intendents of Indian Affairss the I-Ioolcsaelc were spoken of as a tribe.
Following such reports the jurisdictional act of 1925 authorized a suit by
the Noeksack tribe and the Court of Claims in its findings of fact and
opinion treated the claimant herein as a tribe. Tme, the authorization
to sue the Government is not conclusive on the question of the tribal status
of an Indian claimant, yet when given the right to sue as a tribe there is
a strong prcsunption at least that the Congress considered it a group of
Indians coming within the designation of a “tribe,” and when that presumpéa
tion is considered in corneetion with the adnini_strative references to the
Nooksae}: as a tribe in practica3.l:; every document offered by the Government,
we must conclude that at the tine complained oféin the petition herein the
Eoolcsack was an entity lclotm and considered as a tribe of .9..:3erican Indians
coming within the meaning of the torn “tribe” authorizzed to {submit a claim
to the Indian Claims Commission.

Our conclusion is that (1) theuclain set forth in the petition is not
barred. by the j‘t1dgmeI1‘C- of the Court of Claims in said case I:;'o., F~27§3, and

(2) t.;.a.t the l‘lZ’oo1-zsaclz Tribe of Indians is a “*’tribe*5 of dnerican Indians

\

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 333

...8—as that term is used in Section 2 of the.Act creating the Indian Claims

Commission.

The Commission is of the present opinion that the formal order de~
termining the matters new under consideration should be postponed until
the case is beers on its nerite, nowevcr, if counsei for either of the
parties hereto hevc a contrary opinion the Commission will consider such

views as counsel may wish to present.

Chief Commissioner Eitt and Commissioner Holt concur in the above

opinion.

July in, 1950

K‘
.... .1...-..n...r.-"..'.ui ; :..'_-5-Iilii

