8 Ind. C1.Co:3, 759 759
BEFORE THE IKDEAX CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE bzsz PERCE min: or mn1s~._:~:s,
OR CHARLES E. WILLIAMS AKD
JOSEPH REDTHUNDER, as representatives of the NEZ PERCE
TRIBE or INDlA.Ix‘S,

v. Docket No. 175-A

.THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

)

3

)

)

)

. )
Petitioner, )
)

3

}

)

, )
Defendant. )

.ADDZ~'.TIOl\IAL Fmoiuss or FACT

In this case the Commission has found and determined that the Nez
Perce Tribe of Indians of the_State of Idaho, aboriginally had Indian title
to certain_iands located in the states of Idaho, Oregon and Washington,
and that by a treaty with the defendant dated June 9, 1863, the said tribe
ceded to the Qnited_States_6,932,27O acres of said 1ands.,

It was found that the consideration the petitioner received for the
ceded lands was $§52,394.94; and that the value of said lands on April
17: 1357. the date said treaty nas ratified by the United States Senate,
was $&,650,000.00.

The Commission then concluded that by reason of the.disparity between
the consideration paid for such lands and the value thereof, the consideration
Paid 5? ihe defendant was rneonscionabie. An interlocutory Order to this

2 C __ ‘ . _ _ _ __ _
eitect was then entered by the Commission w- .

1...!
F?’
u
N‘
er
I)

. further provision that
..¢c..4..L..

the a11°“ah19 9555933. if 83?: U563: the Indian Claims Cc"”‘ssion Act.

 . .. . 7" "\ '1. 4- .".' .. ; " -0
shou-- oe decneteo f-om tt, said value or the land *6 that the petitioner

(‘(.2.-.L

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 759 760

should recover the difference from the defendant.

The proposed compromise settlement which is now before us for approval
relates largely to the amount of offsets to be deducted; lt also affects
the status of a companion case, Docket No. l8_O-A, which also involves
the Nez Perce tribe of Indians.

In this Docket Number this tribe sought to recover from the United‘
States the value of“ gold removed by white miners who came on the Nez
Perce reservation during the period from 1860 to 1861; and compensation
for the use of parts of the reservation taken by non-Indian intruders
during the same period of time. It was claimed that these trcspasses were
committed while the petitioners were s’.-;::~°.ll in rightful possession of the

reservation lands .

Inn.

On December 31, 1959, the Comnxission entered its Interlocutory Order
which [finds that there is due petitioner from defendant $3,000,(.)00.i00.

-The Commission has heretofore made findings‘ of fact 1 throngh do in
175-A and now makes the following additional findings which are supplemental to those already made:

41. That on June 10, 1960; the "parties herein filed iwith the
Commission a Joint Motion for Entry of Final Judgment based upon a.
Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment in the above entitled Docltet,
executed by Donald C. Gormely, Attorney of Record for petitioner; Perry
W. Morton, Assistant Attorney General ofithe United States; and ‘John D.
Sullivan, Attorney for defendant. Said stipulation is set forth in words
and figures as follows, to—wit:'

STIPULA'I'..T.0N FOP. ENTEY OF FIR-’aL JUlZ‘C-.}IE_.NT

   

8 Ind. Cl, Came, 759 T 751

t is hereby stipulated between counsel for the parties
that the above-entitled case shall be settled, compromised ~
and finally disposed of by entry of final judgment as follows:

lo There shall be entered in
ter all allowable deductions, c

he shove-entitled case,
r it
ment in the amount of $h,l57,605.0o.

.s and effects, a net judg2. etry cf finel judgment in said amo

F:
U
cl‘
U)
:3‘
{D
;..J
;...I. 1...!
Ir’:
‘-3:
£3
‘E3
‘<1

. 1
asserted, or could have asserted, with respect to the subject
matter of this claim, and petitioner shall be barred thereby from
asserting any such right, claim or demand against defendant in
any future action, i“ “

I

1

. 3. »try of final judgment in the aforesaid amount shall
finally'dispose of all rights, claims, demands, payments on the
-__c1ain.eounterclaine or offsets ehich the defendant has asserted,
.er conld hare asserted, against the petitioner under the provisions
=,o£ section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, (e. 9&9, 60
Stat, l0SO), and defendant shall be barred thereby from asserting
any such rights, demands, payments on the clairs, ceunterclaims
or offsets for the period nly l, 1861, through June 30, 1957,
against petitioner in any future action, It is agreed that defendant shall not be barred L this stipulation or by entry of judgment pursuant hereto from ela;ming in any futnre action offsets‘
arising prior to July 1, 1 al, or acerning subsequent to June 30,
1957. This stipulation an al judgment w nld include all offsets,
counterclaims, and payments on the claim, to nhfeh the United‘States
may'be entitled in the case of Charles E, Eilliens, Joseph Red—“
thunder and Barry Cehi, as Representatives of the Nee Peree Tribe
_vs The United States of lnerica, Docket No, 180-A, as well as those
to nhich the United States eonld be entitled in the present case,
,Decket No. 1754A. The purpose of the inclusion in this case of "
settlement of offsets in Docket No, l80-A, is to permit the entry
by the Commission of a final judgment in Docket Ho. l80—A, at this
time, Either arty'in that case may then prezptly appeal from
the decision of the Commission in that case. It is, however,
understood, that while the partie. hereto asive appeal or further

as

Q,

CLCD
‘N

. - ' - ' 1 «I. 7 .0 ,. . . . ' ‘t
review 1niDocaeo h . l75%A, no na_ver of appeal would be mace by
1: J: .. "' 0- 0
either party in.Deeket £0, i80~A, It is nnderstoed that a
9 "‘ . ' “'|"'\ . c--I- —¢—-- - --u - 0-1- Q-n. k.- ’ . seperate soipelation as be agseed to ,5 LJ3 p2rtL€S in Docket
ho. l80—A permitting the Coenlssion to enter a final judgment
therein snbject to riaoo of apes‘.
h ''‘'''-'''''-'c''‘ "- “H"' O'o‘Iun—- -II-t-u-'----It -o -- a--I- - a-- I. - ‘rd-.
15° -59 t---3 31- :z-'—‘-*- - “J? ‘J L-.—-'.. _: .» '.-if .. ‘E L» C‘: {_,_?.=':~'.'..-‘ rs ..‘....*I‘«1‘.-.C .:..:~
. PH‘--Q p--q.--_-ya. sag.‘ ._,_,.. " .'1‘__.'_~ __ 1 .._\ _ f'''I_-- 1- U_ in ‘Lon _ C
"31 -.?~u:.-.'£".~:«:.‘-.-.,;.?-.'l:. .—> .’:'..s_: - -  G r:_ 11‘. E-.'-.1 ".3 1.‘: 3'1 _  C “' ‘(_.:‘_1E S::’€~L.'.C.-  Z_-‘T-’C- '3, E‘
not intended to pgeilgde, r e-'-o:i:; i psi", the sets at: right

8 Ind. Cl. Conn. 759 762

asserted by the government to a deduction from the proceeds of
timber sales of 10%, more or less, for administrative costs.

In the some manner, neither is the settlement intended to prejudice
the right of petitioner to claim that such deduction is invalid

or othernisa improper, on grounds apart from this settlement.

5. The final Jud went, entered pursuant to this stipulation
shall be by way of compromise and settlement and shall not be
construed as an admission of either party for the purposes of
precedent or argument, in any other case.

6. iThe final judgment of the Indian-Claims Commission pursuant to this stipulation shall constitute a final detennination
of the case by the Commission, and shall become final on the day
it is entered, both parties hereby waiving any and all rights to
appeal from or otherwise seek review of such final determination.

7. The parties agree to execute and file with the Commission
a joint motion for entry of final judgment pursuant to this stipuy
lation, submitting a proposed form of final order for the approval
of the Coemission. C “ '

8. Attached to this stipulation and incorporated herein by
reference are resolutions of the Nez Perce Tribal Executive Committee, Nez Perce General Council, Colville Business Comittee
and Colville General Council authorizing counsel for petitioner
to enter=into this stipulation on the basis outlined in.paragraphs 1 through 5 hereof, and a copy of a letter approving the
termination of the case by the Secretary of the Interior or his_
authorized representative.

Attached to said Ctipulation were properly signed and executed
approvals by the officials of the Indian organization representing the
Nez Perce tribe of Indians, etitioner in both Docket Nos. 175-A and
180-A. The signatures on said authorizations of the lndian organizations
were properly authenticated.

Also attached to said Stipulation were appro*als by the heirs
0f.Kenneth R. L. Simmons, deceased, who was at the time of his death one
of the contract attorneys for petitioner, and Hazel Day Simmons, deceased;

and there was also attached the approval of said Stipulation by the Law

8 Ind. Cl. Com.. 759 753

Firm of Eilkinson, Cragun, and Barker (former named Hilkinson, Boyden
and Cragun), contract attorney in Docket No. ITSLA, by right of assignment of an interest in said contract-from Kenneth R; L. Simmons, esquire.
Supporting document in evidence is Exhibit l—A.

L2. At an open hearing before the Commission on June 13, 1960,
oral and documentary evidence nas received showing approval of said
Stipulation for Entry of Finsl Judgment by the petitioner at regularly
ca.1ed:mcetings of said petitioner and its governing bodies. Resolutions
duly adopted, signed and authenticated authorizing its officials in
behalf of said petitioner; to sign approvals of said Stipulation, were
adopted and documentary evidence thereof nas received in evidence in
Exhibits 1.0, 1-D, 1-E,_l-F,l1-G, 1.3, 1-I, 1-3, 1-K, l-L, 1-2-1, and 1-N.

h3. Attorneys contracts of employment provide that the attorneys
will be subject to the supervision of tho_Commissioner of Indian Affairs
and they shall make no sottlenent_or adjustment of the claims or.matters
‘of controversy‘ except with the approval of the tribe and the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs. in approval in accordance with the attorneys contracts —
and also as required by this Commission - of the proposed Stipulation
f°r EDtTF'of Final Judgment is contained in a letter (Exhibit 1-B) dated
June lb, 1960, from George'W; Abbott, Solicitor for the'Depertment of

Interior, acting for the Seoretary of the Interior and addressed to

. .5 , _ " __ ‘R . _o. 1-“ .
This let;-r revises the requesc for tee approval of the compromise agree8 Ind. C1. Comm. 759 76“

-¥‘é-§'c1‘£This refers to your letters of May 5 and 16, 1960, concerning the
proposed compromise of offsets in the cases entitled Nez Perce ,
Tribe of Indians v. United States, Dockets Nos. l7S—A and lb0—A,
YE3B?5*the_IEdian CIEiE§"Commission.

 

You request our approval of the compromise of the offsets and
entry of final judgment without the right of appeal by either
party in Docket No. 175-A, and the compromise to excluse any offsets in Docket No. 180—A, with the right of appeal by either
party from the $3,000,000 judgment entered in No. 180-A.
Offsets, if compromised, would be deducted entirely from the
amount awarded in Docket No. 1754A and not frOm.150-A- The
compromise of offsets in the amount of $lh0,000 without the
right of appeal in Docket No. l?5~A will leave a net judgment
in favor of the Nez Perce Tribe of $h,l§7,60S.06. The proposed
compromise to exclude any offsets in Docket No. 180-A would
leave as just indicated, a $3,000,000 judgment which could be
appealed from immediately by either party. Our approval of the two compromises is required in view of your
‘attorney contract with the Nez Perce Tribe and the contract
between the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation and
Cobb and Weissbrodt, and other attorneys. Both the Nez Perce
contract and_the Colville contract contain provisions to the
effect that the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
and/or the Secretary of the Interior and thetribc is required
for the compromise, settlement or adjustment of any claim or
matter in controversy; -In addition, Assistant Attorney General
Morton, in his letter of May 13, 1960, accepting your offer of
compromise, a copy of which letter has been furnished us, has
agreed to the proposed compromise on condition that it be
accepted by appropriate and satisfactory resolutions of the Nez
Perce Tribal Executive Committee, the Nee Perce General Council,
the Colville Business Council, and the Colville General Council,
and that all said resolutions be approved by the Secretary of
the Interior or his authorized representative, and that the
proposed compromise itself also be approved by the Secretary of
the Interior or his authorized representative. a

You have furnished us copies of the resolutions adopted by the
two Indian tribes ih general council and of the two governing
bodies of the tribes accepting the proposed compromise. You
have also furnished us copies of the minutes of the meetings of
the different groups. Your letter of Key 5 furnished us the
reasons why you believe a compromise of the offsets in Dockets
Nos. 1754A and l80~A in the amount of $lh0,000 and the entry

8 Ind.Cl. Corn. 759 765

of a final judg3'::ent in the amount ofii-h,lS7,&3>5.06 in Docket
No. 175-A is advantageous to the Indian clzzir-_;~nts and should
be approved.

The Acting Area Director, Portlzznd Area Office, Bureau of Indian
Affairs, has reported th:.t the proposed compromise was thoroughly
and accurately emlained to the Nez Perce and Colville Tribes by
a representative o.-. your firm and that it was: approved by the
tribes by formal resolutions. He believes that it ‘is advantageous
to both tribes to effect a settlcr:.ent at this time and that the
compromise is fair, just,‘ and equitable and he‘ recommends its
approval. The Regional Solicitor at Portland has also considered
the proposed coraprord. so and advises that it appears meritorious
and in the best interests ‘or the Indians and reconzaends its
approval. The Commissioner of lndian Affairs recommends acceptance
of the proposed settlement of offsets and waiver of appeal in
Docket No. l75'—A and the stipulations to be entered into in Docket
.1300 18O"ALo ‘ A

It appears from the information made available to this office

by your firm and the Bercau of Indian Affairs that the proposed
offer to compromise the offsets and waiver of appeal in Docket
No. 175-A and entry of ;ju.dg:nent in Dc-c';«:ets I-foe. l75—A and 180-—A_
were fully explained to the Indians. It also appears that the
meetings were properly conducted and that the Indians fully
understand the terms of the settlement. It also appears that
the procedures outlined in the case of Cmaha Tribe of I‘Iebr.:s‘.:a v.

4'

United States, 8 Ind. C. Comm. 392, 1:07, have been follot-:ed.

 

 

Upon full consideration of the infoisaation before this office
and in the light of the a rev"-ls of the cone-roni se give':r. by the
Nez Perce Tribe and the Cglvillo Tribes and ‘E3  iCome1i:ssioner
of bdian Affairs, we hereby approve on behalf of the Secretary
of the Interior the proposed compromise set out in your letter

. of April 18, 1960, to Assistant Attorney General Morton and the
resolutions adppted on April 22, 1960, by the Roz Perce 'h'ibal
Executive Ccr-.an.ttee, the resolution adopted on April 23, 1960,
by the Nez Perce General Council, the resolution adopted on
-‘1P1'’i1 27, 1960, by the Colville Rlsiness Council, and the
and the resolutions adopted on April 27, 1960, by the Colville
General Council, all resolution.s a proving on behalf of the
Indian groups involved the proposed compromise as con tained in
the aforementioned letter of A- ril 18, 1063.

Under an agreerae-n't a; proved ‘r:-3:  Act-i=:g »::-:5-.i sionsr of 31:5‘:
Affairs on Sej't::::~er 6, 195;», ycrar firzziz was   r-ig':;t to
prosecute the cl:-=.».:::s of  .:c:; Force ‘Ir-i‘:»e :3’-..:.3 DooE:s=‘T:- lie. 175-A.
Ti‘.-9 C..‘:-'3 a._-d ‘.*.'e.t_s.;‘.:»""o:Jt fir?“ ties giver: 'l.'.”'*2e 1*:'i.gh‘3:- to 1:-:."ose:o.';."?:.e
the claims of the Re: Pczr cc l’ri'ce "1 Do*‘:et Z-io. 13-ILA. This

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 759 756

agreement also provides that any judgment will inure to the
benefit of all Nez Perce Indians in Idaho, ‘£~Iashingtc.‘1, or wherever
situated and the attorneys shall take such action as necessary

to have the Commission or the courts to so order.

The report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and your letter
of May 5, both refer to this l95'6 agreement. A resolution was
adopted by the Nez Perce Tribal Ebcecutive Committee on April 22,
1960, and one was adopted by the Colville Business Council on
April 27,‘, l960, proposing to amend the 1956 agreement to divide the
judgment fond between the Colville Tribe and the Nez Perce

Tribe according to population. The Commissioner of Indian
Affairs in recommending acceptance of the compromise of offsets
and settlement of the cases reconsnended that the resolutions
modifying the l9S6 agreement be not approved. He recommends in

. this connection that the resolutions modifying the 1956 agreement not be approved until they have been amended to provide that
all Nez Perce Indians wherever situated be allowed to participate
in the judgments if otherwise qualified. ‘For these reasons no
action at this time is being taken on the resolutions to supple
ment the 1956 agreement.

 Nez Perce Tribal officials and other Nez Perce Indians testified
in substance as follows: I l I .

RICHARD A. HALFMOODI of _Lapwai, Idaho, is a full-blood Nez Perce Indian.
50 years of age. He attended Catholic parochial schools at Sikpo Mission
in Idaho and at Pendleiton, Oregon, graduating from High School during
1928. I He spent a probational period for priesthood at College in Gonzaga,
served about seven.years as a United States Special Deputy and then tour
or five years with the Umatilla Ordnance Depot at Hermiston, Oregon, as a
guard before entering the United. States .-'m:Iy. Upon his discharge in 19145 ,
he becameand is yet employed as a security man with the Fire Department
‘with the Potlatch Forest Lumber Mill in Ieeiston, Idaho.

I-Ielhas served on the Ercectitive Committee of the.}.’ez Perce Tribe
since 1951, and as its chairman for the past five veers, a posj_‘bj_on he

no»: holds. The Executive Committee consists of nine members elected by

._.-.—_— -ju-.....j._._.._..._......__._..

8 Ind. C1. Gone. 759 767

the tribal members at the annual General Council of the tribe.

At a meeting of the Executive Committee on April 22, 1960, with a
quorum of eight present, the compromise of offsets in Docket No. l7S—A was
approved by a vote oi‘ 7 to O, the Chairman being permitted to vote only
in event of a tie.

At a meeting of the General Council called at Lapeai on April 23,
1960, attended by around 200 of the enrolled membership of 1886, of which
over 700 are minors under 21 and not permitted to vote, 1111 members voted
in favor of the compromise and 1 voted against it. Fifty eight present
did not vote. Notice of the meeting had been given all members. Eighty
or ninety percent of the Tribe speak English; honever an interpreter was
used at the meeting to assure understanding by all. Halfmoon RIDGE-IS the
fmatter had been discussed among members residing on the reservation, is
familiar with each member and approves the settlement.

,Each meeting was attended by Superintendent William E. Ensor, Jr., who
did not participate or attempt to suggest-how they vote, and by Attorney
Donald C. Gormley. T1l_?._I{'.in11'[’.eS of that meeting as presented in evidence
here are accurate.

mm noses,‘ of Nespelem, a iull-blood Indian 39 years ni age, is
a rancher, a member of the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation,
has been a member of the Colville Business Council for sixryears, its
Chairman for the past three. He graduated from High School during 19141,
entered the Army that fall and served with Ordnance about 3% years in the
Pacific'Theater.

There are 111 diiierent tribes coniederated into the Coniederated

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 759 768

Tribes of the Colville Reservation, for which the Colville Business Council
speak . There are 319 Nez Perce Indians enrolled among them. All
enrolled members over 21 years of age may vote at tribal meetings. None
of the Council members needs an interpreter.

At a Council meeting held April 27, 1960, on the reservation, l3 of
the 1b Council members were present. The compromise was approved by a
vote of 11 to 1, the Chairman permitted to vote only in event of a tie
and thus abstaining.

At a General Council held at Nespelem the same day, three interpreters
speaking Nez Perce, Colville and Moses languages, interpreted to the
Indians, as is customary at such council.meetings. A vote favoring the

compromise for 131 for and 19 against was taken. None of the voters

voting against*the compromise at either meeoing was a Nez Perce Indian.

, There is a faction or group on the Reservation representing the original

Colville Indians who have a claim pending before this Commission based
upon the government having placed Nez Perce Indians and Moses Band Indians
upon their reservation. These are the ones voting against the compromise
because they think it may weaken their position on their claim.

These meetings were attended by Mr. Gormley, the local counsel,
IMr. Keith, and the Superintendent, Mr. Miller.

FRANK'W; PENNEY of Iapwai, Idaho, is an enrolled member of the Nez
Perce tribe, 39 years of age. He graduated from High School in l939,
entered the Army Air Force in l§hO, was captured at Bataan, released

during 191:6, attended North Idaho College of Education and the University’

8 Inc, Cl. Comm. 759 759

of Idaho until elected to the Exocutirc Ccnnittee of the tribe for seven

veers. was Secretary from January 1, 1950 to may 15, 1950, 835 took

E

executive Committee minutes at its meeting April 22, 1960, and the minutes

0

f the special General Council held the next da . He thought the object
was for the comnlote explanation, understanding by the Executive Committee and the Tribe as a whole and teat each was accomplished.

NELLIE RIHA, a one—qucrtcr Lake Tribe Indian harried to a white man,
and residing at Kewa, Washington, is a high school graduate; and has been
on the'local School Board for the past 15 years ens has served as a member
of the Business Council of the Confederates Tribes for seven years, six
of them as S3C?GtC; also. Sh: attcnecd the anril 27, l953 meetings;

t of en? es, not on the

-—d"

there was no expulsion or coercion on the par
part of Mr» Killer, the Snporintcnosnt; or the ettorrey~ Keith or Gormley.
The minutes of the meeting have been rcao and approved by her and by
Superintendent Miller.

LEWIS B. HOLT, of Lapnai, testiiicé he is 51 years o_d; that his
parents were each enrolled men crs of the Fez Perce tiibeg that he had two
‘years High School at Hamish ani a fee months attendance at Kinman Business
University; that he ranched a year or so, then.eosked for twenty years
with the Forest Service in charge of Personnel Placement and Assignment
until aor1d'war II; that he was in c‘ nee oi internee and PH camps under
the U. S. Forest Service; began lobhying in 1952 ens at present is a farmer.
He has served about eight years on the E2: Po cs 771331 Lxecetive Cornvtteeg
is a member of the Board of ?ir::+=:s of *1’ “v:,rn*.e *"'fT?f?t* Triien

C
Cduncll which is a board set no F” ; :?"*:r of r;'t:: +55% :m*i:W ?5“W7a*iQW“1
I‘ - ‘ ‘ ‘I _--H“ —-I h- I . ‘H. c

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. ‘759 770

is President of the Idaho Inter-tribal Council which is composed of all the
different tribes in Idaho for correlation of theirproblems and work with
the state legislature and officials; is a member of the Department of
Public Assistance Council appointed by the Governor for the five northern
counties in Idaho for review of applications and payrolls. He served as

interpreter in the Nez Perce language at the meetings of the Nez Perce

Tribal Executive Committee on April 22 , and the general meeting on the

223rd. He knows practically ever member of that tribe by first name;

heard them discuss this legislation, that one day was spenteexplainiong
and discussing phases of it; he thinks it is a fair settlement and is
satisfied that the people are quite well pleased at the outcome.

JOE REDTh'UI~1DE."rl, a full-blood Nez: Perce whose parents were members of
the original St. Joseph's Band, testified he is 51 years old, was born at
Nespelem, attended high school one year, and is a heavy duty machinery
operation in construction nor}-:,. presently employed bv the Nespelem Indian
Bureau.‘ His wife, is e member of the Confederated Tribes of the Colville
Reservation and each of his nine children are enrolled members of the
tribe, although his wife has no Nez Perce Indian blood. He authorized the
use of his name as a petitioner in Docket 180 and 180-11, and was present
at the meetings in Nespelem on April 27th where he heard Mr. Keith and
HI‘. Gormley explain the claim and the proposed settlement of offsets. He ’
understands the settlement isnot completed, that the agreed offsets are
to be deducted from the value fixed by the interlocutory order, belie*es
the settlement is fair and thattnone of the attorne3=‘s or any member of

the Indian Bureau has attempted to influence him in his decision,

8 Ind. Cl: Conn. 759 771

HARR"S-E LOTT, a ful1~blood Ho: Parse indict, testified that he is
6? years of ago; that he attended school in Le eai and the Carlisle,
Pennsylvania, Indian College where he res a classmate of Jim lherpe;
that he formed until t e first world Her, when he served in the heavy
field artillei ; tried farming and then became Assistant Farmer at the
Indian Sanitarium at Iapeai for l2 or 13 years; thereafter he worked in
the limestone mines at Mission. He has served on the Nos Perce Tribal
Executive Committee for 17 or 18 years end was present at the meetings
discussing this settlement. He understands they are giving'up their right
of appeal in Docket l7SLA; understands the compromise egreenent; believes
the Nez Perce have had a fair day in court, e_proves the settlement, and
that none of the officials or attorneys present at the meeting attempted
to influence the Indians with respect to their vote on this compromise.

CHARLES E. wILLIn~s, at full-blood fez Peres Indian, ntestifed he is
55 years of age, an enrolled MCEJQ? of the Confcdereted Tribes of the
Colville Reservation; that he went up to the ninth grade in the Cushnen
Indian School. He is a radio repai men and a fireguerd, this being his

' 13th year with the Government, in Forest Service. He has served one term

on the Business Council of the Tribe and one tern on the local sohool

-board. He,_ a Mr. 0:-zhi, who is no’.-: deed, an I-Er. E:‘.e"‘5;'n'=;:z2der are the

petitioners named in.Docket 180. He was eosksua the day of the-general

nip‘-pg

cu‘

meeting, April 27th, and attended only part of the meetings He under==tam°?s that $119,000 e;~e "co be  a:;;3.r7':e :'.‘z'"o:»: -;:.:;::  -3;; 175'-=’* nd

' * . *' . '* 5 : - 3 9 .. . , thao lb cannot be anneoleg bgyhgfmew k~; +;;;,': ¢i --s 4* *?':7o4 *.
5 .. "’ * .~ 1- -. ¢.. - _.. -.. ,___ 5.7;; 5- -46

-.0 '-....,.

8 Ind. Cl. Gama. 759 “ 772

has heard the settlements discussed around the Colville Reservation and
that the people seem to understand it and to approve it.

b5. Contracts of employment of attorneys for petitioner in l75~A
together with approvals and extensions thereof by the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs acting for the Secretary of the Interior, are on file
with this Commission.

iThese show that Kenneth R. L. Simmons was the original attorney
for petitioner in this proceeding, that a portion of said contract was
assigned with the approval of the said Commissioner oi‘ Indian Affairs to
the law firm of'Wilkinson, Cragun, and Barker, who npon the death of attorney
Simmons assumed, under the terms of the contract of employment, the sole
representation of petitioner, and are now the attorneys for petitioner herein.

Also on file with the Commission are contracts of employment, approvals,
assignments, extensions of thereof, etc., which establish that Lyle Keith,
Patrick H. Winston and Cobb and weissbrodt (a law firm), have been and now
are, attorneys for petitioner in.Docket No. 180-A. The record also shows
that-originally James E. Curry of Washington, D. C., was one of the duly
appointed attorneys representing said petitioner, but that later his interest
in his contract of employment with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs was assigned to other contract attorneys for said petitioner.

That all of the above named attorneys, have approyed said stipulations
for Entryof Final Judgments in Docket Nos. 175-}! and 180-A.

L6. As shown by the testimony of Indian witnesses and statements of
counsel atiiuahearing in this matter. counsel for petitioner — The Nez

Perce Tribe of Indians - carefully explained to the mass meetings of the

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. ‘759 p 773

various divisions of the tribe, and also to the tribal governing entities
the proposed compromise settlement. Tribal members took part in the
discussions, and for the benefit of members who had difficulty in understanding the English language, the compromise settlcncnt was explained

c then in the Indian language.

Under these circumstances it appears, and we so find, that the
tribal members and officials understood the settlement and approved it
freely without being subjected to pressures of any kind.
h7._ Original Docket l?S containtag several causes of action was

filed by The Nez Perce Tribe of Indians or Charles E. Eilliams and Joseph
Redthunder as representatives of said tribe on July 30, l9,l, by Messrs.
Wilkinson, Cragun, and Barker, et als., as attorneys. Original Docket 180,
also containing several causes of action was filed by Charles E. Williams,
Joseph R dthunder and Harry Cehi as representatives of the Kez Perce Tribe
on Jul? 31, }°5l, by Messrs. Cbbb and'Heissbrodt as attorneys. On May 1,
1953, the Commission directed the "gold and trespass" claimstin Ebcket

180 be separately plead as Docket 180-A. On December h, 195?, the Commission directed Dockets 175 and 180 be consolidated so far as the treaties
of 1855 and 1863 were concerned; that the cause of action arising out of
the 1863 treaty plead in both dockets be separately plead as Docket

l7SéA3'that the cause of action based upon the 1893 treatv plead in

allegations in each docket be filed in an amended petition designated

"‘ ‘L 3-’?-Jo a~'!-*-:0‘-1 "~‘y--.-’.- -‘-". _ " .3 ._‘'t "v"‘ ..'- -'. . 1”.’ ’ .-...-....' " CV“. .1-.-‘ “.' ..-" ‘I
DOLACBC 5 ¢_-;_._‘,-_, ;.,._:_._-._U ._._-..':; C.“_'.‘_’*:'!_‘f'.‘..‘-g-_.__. 5’:_‘.l-."., _l—‘ 5: C43‘.-_ 5:"‘_' £_‘__‘.H.__-*1 C._}_:__:;_:S3e.r;.a

I--‘H

8 Ind. C1. Comm. 7.39 774

118. In 1956 a four-way agreement was entered into between the Nez
Perce Tribe of Indians, through selected members of the tribe, acting
for the Tribe, and certain selected members of the Ccnfederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation, acting for and on behalf of the Nez Perce
Indians who were ani are members of the Confederated Tribes, and the
attorneys for the Nez Perce Tribe, Wilkinson, Cragun and Barker and
Hawkins (formerly Wilkinson, Boyden, Cragun and Barker) and Lyle Keith
and Patrick H. Winston, and Cobband Weissbrodt, a law firm, attorneys
for the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation, which agreement anong other things (and so far as is pertinent to Dockets 175-11 and
180-A), provided that "saw judgments recovered on the claims for additional
compensation for lands conceded by the treaties of June 11, 1855, or June
9, 1863 (Docket Nos. 175 ‘and 180) or the claims for conversion of gold or
illegal use or trespass (Docket No. 180-A) shall inure to the benefit of
all Nez Perce Indians in Idaho, Washington, or wherever situated, and the
attorneys, parties thereto shall take such action as necessary to have
the Commission or courts to so order.” This agreement was duly approved.

As previously (found herein Dockets l75-A and 130-A are cl-aims taken
out of Docket Nos. 175 and 180 and the provisions in the said four-way
agreement which apply to Dockets 175 and 180 with respect to whom the
‘benefits of any recoveries shall inure also apply to Dockets 175-15. and
180.41. '

19. With respect to the merits of the compromi se settlement of

offsets Mr. Sullivan of the Lmds Division, Departrzzent of Justice, stated

8 Ind. C1. Conn. 759 I 775

the report from the General Accounting Office shoeed expenditures made
through the various agencies of which the Joseph Band or the Lapwai Band
Jere a part does not show the actual expenditures on behalf of the Joseph
or Not Perce Indians but on a population basis there could be charged
against the hez Perce Indians alone about $600,000.00. Quite a few of
the expenditures and some of the larger expenditures are for items
previously disallowed under the Indian Claims Commission Act as offsets.
Sane such expenditures are also for the care and sale of timber which
will be adj sted under the Special Act, and for that reason the Government is satisfied not to appeal in Docket 1759A:

On this same matter Mr. Gormlerg counsel fee petitioner, stated he
thought if the issue of offsets VS? litigated there is an excellent
chance they might be reduced somewhat under $lh0,000; that over a year of
trial, briefing and expense to the tribe rill be saved by compromise;
that an appropriation by Congress will include interest of about $lh,OOO a
month from the day it is appropriated for the tribe and considering the
nature of the offsets "it makes good sense.“

These statements sum up sound reasons for aporoval of the compromise
settlement nhich'we approve and adopt."

50. ‘The Commission finds that the Cenoronise Sett_enent is fair
and just to the petitioner and the defendant; that the Nee Perce Tribe

of Indians legally re_resents in this matter all of the Non Perce Indians

in Idaho, or hashingtons or thereto? siilgtedz that :;id Vet To Ce Indians
as des ribed are entitled to the E.:;£its 6? a £1 -1 i*€:V:nt *= ‘e

8 Ind. c1. com. 759 .' . r 776

entered herein; that final judgment should be entered in favor of

petitioner in the amount of $1,157,605.06 as against the defendant. '

s/ AR'l‘HU"R V. WATKINS
Associate Cozrmissionon

 

s/ WM. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

