5 Ind. 01.. com. 691 718

BEFORE THE IIJEDIAN CLAECS COI-EIISSIOEI

TEE CREEK NATION, )
Plaintiff, g

THE CREEK NATION EAST, %
tervenor, %

‘vs. L 3 Docket No. 21

T13 UNITED STATES, 3
Defendant. 3

Decided: November 19, 1958

Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell, Attorney for the Creek Ration,
Plaintiff

C. IeNoir Thompson, Claude Pepper and Charles

Bragman, Attorneys for the Cree?-: Ration East,
Intervenor

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney kneral Perry W... Morton,
Attorneys for the Defendant.
Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
The issue before us is the value as of August 9, l8l1;, of a -tract 05
land described in our Finding No. 58(a).. of which 7,612,800 acres lie in
southeastern Alabama. The Okefenokee Swamp covers £00,735 acres in the
southeast corner of the korgia land. On the valuation date the l:1:.<Ii
involved was bordered by Spanish Florida on the sonm1ann.WBYn9 Couxgg,

Georgia, on the east 3 the Creek Nation owned all adjacent land on 3""

north and on that day ceded to the United States a large tract bazie‘-‘.""

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 691 7l9

the subject land_and white settlements on the Alabama and Tombigbee
rivers in southwest Alabama. It also granted the defendant free
passage over its remaining land.

The petitioners and intervenors, who will hereafter be referred
to jointly as petitioners, contend that the tract on August 8, l8lh,
had an average value per acre of $2.50, or $22,455,542-C0. The defendant
makes use of round figures, and considering the Okefenokee Swamp without value as of l8lA, places a 2%¢ per acre value on 3,7000,000 acres
of pine land in the Coastal Terrace region of Georgia and 6¢ per acre
value upon the balance of the tract, for a total value of $385,000.00.

The evidence as detailed in our Findings of Fact discloses that
the tract is all tinbered land within the Coastal Plains region, with
the exception of a small acreage in Alabama; that its elevation nowhere
exceeds A00 feet and the topography is comparatively level. The soils
are sandy and sandy loans, the lower and more sandy Coastal Terrace being.mnch less fertile than the Upper and Middle Coastal lands in Alabama
and west of the Flint River in Georgia. From west to east the tract is
drained by the water systems of the Choctawatchee, Chattahoochee,
Ocklockneeg, Ocilla, Suwanne, St. Marys and Satilla river. All these
rivers flow south into the Gulf of Mexico except the St. Marys and
Satilla river which each flow east to the Atlantic Ocean.

The tract lies in the outer fringe of the Great Pine Belt. ‘while
it produces a variety of timber, pine predominates. The stand sometimes
ran as much as 30,000 board feet per acre, but the average timber stand

in Alabama in l8lh‘was 7:900 board feet per acre, 65% longleaf 0? F0110"

6 Ind. Cl.’ Comm. 691 720

pine and 3 SIS Inixed hardwoods, and the longleai‘ pine alone averaged
4,000 to 7,000 board feet per acre in Georgia. Swamps and stagnant
water pools throughout the tract contained considerable cypress which
was considered equal in value to yellow pine but was much more inacessible. It is estimated that the area contained 2,000,000 acres of hardwoods, 218,000 acres of cypress and 5,000,000 acres of pine. A wire or
pine grass and a saw-palmetto growth found particularly in the flatwoods
of the Coastal Terrace region, and the cane brakes growing in the river
bottomsin the northern sections, furnished food for hogs, cattle, sheep
and horses. The entire tract abounded with an assortment of wild life,
both animal, fish and fowl.

A few half-breeds or whites lived in the area under valuation in
1811+. There were concentrations of settlements in northern Alabama
along the Tennessee River and in southwestern Alabama between the
Tombigbee and Alabama rivers; ‘Jayne County, Georgia, adjoining the
tract on the east, and the area known as Wilkinson and Baldwin County,
between the Oconee and Ockmulgee rivers, approximately 3.8 miles north
of the tract were sparsely settled. Florida was occupied by hostile
Seminole Indians and by many of the rebellious Creeks who had fled
there, and these continued to harrass the whites. in the subject area
until 1835, long after the United States had acquired Florida. There
were no railroads; a wagon road ran east and west between Macon,

Georgia and a point near Montgomery, Mabama, north of the subjcct
area, and then turned southwest to I-Eobile, which was a town of 550
inhabitants when acquired of the Spanish in l8l3. An emis=‘~"-m i""""*:‘

from the biuscle Shoal of the Tennessee River ran south to tho 'i‘c::.:b:'.’1?‘

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 691 T _72l

Alabama settlements above Mobile, west of the tract. Several Indian
traces or trails, which were mere horsepaths, ran through the area, up
and down the Flint and Chattahoochee rivers, across the northeast corner of the tract and extended into settled Georgia both to the north
and east. One trail crossed the southern section of the tract in
Georgia, and a number of trails ran through central Alabama and Georgia
to the north. ‘Water transportation was by raft and flat boats propelled by manual labor. The Satilla River flowing into the Atlantic Ocean
‘was navigable within this area as far as'Haycross, Georgia; of those
rivers flowing into the Gulf of Mexico navigation on the Choctawatchee
extended to Newton, Alabama, throughout the entire tract on the
Chattahoochee, and as far as Bainbridge, Georgia, on the Flint. There
;

vere no known minerals in the area.

The climate is mild, thegrowing season exceptionally long. The
area now produces such.diversified crops as tobacco, cotton, corn,
vegetables, rice, and fruit, and a substantial amount of furs and
hides, the latter being obtained principally in the Okefenokee Swamp
area. large numbers of cattle, hogs, sheep and horses.aT9 331584»

The tract lies just south of the Great Cotton Belt.

The land under valuation was used by the Creek Indians and
squatters in l8lA principally for hunting and fishing purposes, although they had a few villages within.the area, principally along
the Flint and Chattahoochee rivers. Yellow or longleaf pine ahd
Georgia live oak was much in demand at that time for the construction

‘I

Of Ships. The record does not disclose that live oak in any 3ub3L3“9"*

6 Ind. Cl. Com. 691 722

amount was gI'0*.-In in this area, or that pine was being out there for
commercial purposes in 1811..

The date of valuation in this instance is by far the most remote
of any this Commission has been called upon to consider; the land is
far removed from any tract previously valued, and the parties have
met with difficulty in procuring appropriate evidences of value.
There are in evidence references to large-tract transfers in Florida,
occurring while that country belonged to Spain. Such factors as
national loyalties and preferences, national economics and local
policies bear upon land transactions in foreign countries and so affect the market values there that the information furnished can not
possibly qualify those transactions as comparable sales. with few
exceptions there were no transfers of large tracts in this region
within the limits of the United States around the valuation date.
These are referred to in our Finding of Fact No. 80. No attempt has
been made to compare the tracts with that under valuation except as
to acreage and date of transfer. Most were mere tenders; one transfer was for credit on a debt; another involved credit terms of 11;.
years, and occurred at a date when economic conditions were materially
better than in 1811.. The nature of these transactions and the scent
data given is insufficient to form a basis for determination of the
Question before us and resort must be had to other data which a h;v'_r:~::thetical purchaser and seller would have considered in evaluating
this land in 1811;. These several factors have been previously discussed by the Cozmission and the Court of Claims. Otoe and 1’-iis;;:.;;::*-'x,

6 Ind. 01. Comm. 693. 723

131 Ct. Cl. 593; Eocksack Tribe, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 596 and others.
They include as stated by the Court of Claims in the Otoe and
Missouria case, 131 Ct. Cl. 593, 633:
the natural resources of the land ceded, including its
climate, vegetation, including timber, game and wildlife,
mineral resources and whether they are of economic value
at the time of cession, or merely of potential value,
‘water power, its then or potential use, markets and transportation -- considering the ready markets at the time and
the potential market.

The parties are agreed that in 1814 the land under valuation was
most yaluable for subsistence farming supplemented by grazing of livestock. The climate is mild, the growing season.exceptionally long and
permits the maturing of two crops per year in some instances. Farmlands were easily cleared by girdling trees and planting among the deadened roots. The settler utilized the timber for houses, out-buildings
and fences, and much stock grazed at large.

Access to the area was not particularly difficult.from the east.
land lotteries in 1805 and 1809 had resulted in frontier settlements in
‘Wayne County, which adjoined the tract on the east, and in Baldwin and
Wilkinson.counties in.the branch of the Oconee and Okmulgee rivers,
some 18 miles to the north. While the Creek Nation held the intervening strip, consent to cross their country was granted in the treaty of
cession of August 9, l8lA, and:many Indian trails led from within the
tract to the settlements along the coast. The Satilla River was navigable as far as Waycross, inside the tract, and navigation came up the
St. Marys to within a few miles east of it. The nation was at peace

with Spain, the acquisition of Florida considered a possibility, and

722.

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6'91
access to this tract by means of rivers flowing through Florida was
reasonably predictable although fraught with Indian hazards. Settlements were located. in Northern Alabama in the rich valley of the
Tennessee River, ~:~:'j:~.-ere land was in great demand, and in the AlabamaTombigbee river junction which, country the Choctaws had ceded in 1802
and 1805 and which adjoined the Iviobile Province which the United States
had acquired in 1823.3. While some hundred miles removed from the present tract, the ar-aa between these latter settlements and the land under
valuation was also ceded in 1811; and thus opened for sett_es;.ent.

Petitioner's witnesses, James Stauffer, Alabama's State Forester,
and N. H. lviccomb, .divi.sion head of the Georgia Forestry Commission,
each testified from personal knowledge of the land within his state and
studies of pertinent date.’ Mr. Stauffer’s method of discounting present
day prices to arrive at an l8lb, stumpage value was rejected by the Court
of Claims in Warm. Sroing Tribe vs. United States 103 Ct. Cl. 741, 7&6.
The Commission believes 1-"Ir. McComb's conclusion is without sufficient
factual substa_n.t.iation for acceptance as an equitable evaluation of tim-'
ber as a component. element of fair market value for the land. It may not
be considered as avalue apart from the land. - Nooksack Tribe vs. United
States, supra, p. -.503... The data used by Mr. McComb may have applied to
stumpage or to logs at the mill. That contained in Petitioner's and
Inter-venor's Eschihit No. 79 is said by the author of that article-to be

Imde pendable .

ta presented by def‘endant‘s witness, Paul Starreit comprises 8»

é'.00'ily portion of athe factual evidence before the Commission. He roJ'333"-1

5 Ind. Cl. com. 691   725

all of it but the prices fixed by the state legislature in Georgia's
first lottery act of 1803 and rested his valuation solely upon those
statutory prices which haveno relation to the f air market value of
land. (Shoshone Indians vs. United States, 85 Ct. Cl. 331, 369, 374-9).
The rate at which tie Georgia land under valuation and other land nearby moved under the exceptionally low prices fixed by the state in an
attempt to attract landowners, is indicative of the fact that there was
little demand, not in 1811; but for a nuinber of years thereafter, particularly for that land in the Lower Coastal region.

A more realistic valuation would appear to be that price set by
Georgia‘s legislature in 1818 for fractional lots which were exempt
frari the lottery system. All such land in Early County, was priced at
$2 per acre as were water frontage lots in Ir'.»:in and Appling counties.
Dry land in Irwin and Applinv counties was priced at 50¢ per acre. It
must be born in mind, however , that economic conditions in 1818 were
vastly superior to those in 1811+, and would necessarily be reflected in
these prices.

We th@ that a prospective settler or purchaser in 1814 would have
acquainted hiznself with the Indianutrails leading into and through this
land, which suggested future roads. Considering the recent acquisition
of I~iobHe Province and friendly national relations with Spain, he would
have looked with favor upon the rivers flowig through this tract offering an apparently easy means of transportation to coastal ports. He

would have found the a_rea possessed a present value for hunting and fish- '

. \ 1 -V‘ -:¢--. 4- A  t
318 Purposes, both as a food source and for commercial usage, and 1.3-1

the presence of wild game was an attraction to the settler. He I-Iould

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 691 726

have considered, as the arties hereto agree, that the best use for the
land was subsistence farming and cattle grazing.

A well informed prospective purchaser or seller in l8lA would have
known the average stampage on this tract. He would have acquainted hime
self with the prices paid for naval stores, cypress and other lumber, and
the existing and potential demand for longleaf pine. He would have known
of the slow one-long-at-a-time method of moving timber to the mill, and
that similar timberrextended for miles in all directions without any evidence of its pending exhaustion.

A prospective well informed purchaser or seller in l8lh would also
have known.that 1% of the land offered in the 1805 and l80? lotteries in
Baldwin County in.202-acre lots for $12.25 per lot, were yet unpaid for;
and that 40% of the $12.25 lots in Wilkinson County were awaiting payment.
He would have also ascertained that 37.8% of the t90-acre lots offered in
those lotteries in'§a3ne County were not paid for. He would have known that
‘Wayne County and the southern portion.of'Wilkinson County were similar to
the eastern portion.of the present tract, and that those counties'were adjacent to settled Georgia. He would have considered the amount of other
land in Georgia which the United States was committed to free from Indian i
title, and which would become available under Georgia's lottery system.

He would also have known of the l6,9OQ,OO0 acres in Alabama being ceded
to the United States by the Creek Nation which could be expected to be

available for settlement under the federal land policies.

%

A prospective purchaser would have given thought to the number oz

qgn'\“% I

small subsi3tence—farm size sales necessary to absorb this laréc 3"-*”»°

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 691 727

and the length of time required for its disposition; he would have considered the population of adjoining Georgia, Tennessee and the Carolinas
from whence he might expect to draw such pzrchasers, the expense attendant upon preparing the land for sale and that of the sales, managerial.
and promotional programs required; of the acreages necessarily dedicated
to internal improvement and developrnent within a frontier country, of financing expenses and of taxes accruing throughout the period of disposition, of the risk attendant upon a long term venture of such magnitude
ard the element of a fair return for his money.

A review of the record convinces us that the land was worth much
more than defendant's valuation but we do not think the value contended
for by petitioners finds support in the record. The ,«source material of
data concerning several small tract sales of Georgia land within this
tract which occurred between individuals within the decade following the
valuation date fails to indicate whether these were of improved tracts,
but we think the presumption of  improvements exists. The average
consideration in Early County was $1. 56 per acre, that in Decatur County
was $1.30 and in Irwin County it was but 61 cents per acre. The Alabama
land was surveyed by 1821+, and falls within 63 separate townships. No
land sales occurred within 63 separate townships. No land sales occurred
within 23 of those townships for 6 years although this land was available
at the statutory minirzrum of $1.25 per acre. Eight townships had nolsales
for 26 years. While there appears to have been a number of squatters
within the area, they had no protective rights under the statutes. There

is evidence that "sca_'Lpers" often pressured such people into paying for

6 Ind. Cl. Corn. 693. . 728

the privilege of acgjiiring the land without competititive bidding, but
this also implies that squatter mproveznents such as cleared and cultivated land, buildirvs and fences contributed to its actual value.
These and other sales referred to in our findings are infinitesiual

in size when compared to the tract under valuation, and any suggestion
of value to be derived from them must be heavily-' discounted. Allowance must also be made for preferential locations, for increases in
value due to such settlements as had occurred, the construction and
development of roads, the use of the steamboat, the ac:_2_uisition of
Florida and subjugation of the Seminoles as well as the additional
cessions of land within Georgia by various Indian tribes which freed
the frontier from Indian hazards, improved interior transportation

and gave better access to markets of the world. We think little consideration can be given to the timber on this land. Its potential commercial value was limited by the vast amount of similar timber extending through the settled areas of the country as far north as Chesapeake
Bay a.nd westward to Lake Ponchartrain, as well as the crude lumbering
methods then in existence.

Considering all of the evidence before us, and giving consideration to the opinions expressed by the various witnesses, the present
and Potential value of the land and timber and"el 1 other elements S0?3~~i?'ti:.o‘f
to make up .5’ market value, we are of the opinion that on Augussvil ‘ii;
1811+, the land described in our Finding of Fact No. 58(3) 1'18-C1 3 
fair market value of $3,573,810.10 which we arrive at by assignilis 3

value of 20:; per acre or $80,147.00 to the #00.-.735 3°?“ e"°°3“5""33';”'“’;

6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 691 729

the Okefenokee Swam , 35¢ per acre or $l,295§000.00 to the
3,700,000 acres of pine land in the lower Coastal Plain and ¢5¢
P9? acre Or $2,198,663.10 to the remaining and more productive

h,885,9l8 acres comprising the tract under valuation.

(sf Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

/sf Iouis J. 0'Marr

Associate Commissioner

/s 1-rm. M. Holt

Associate Commissioner

