51Q~a

BEFORE THE I§D1AN CLLIKS CCIKISSION

THE consssisrevrsn TRIBES os ms wane )
sssmcs msnvsnore oz? ossoon, )
Petitioner, ;
V. g Docket No. 198
THE UNITED STATES, 
Detendant. '3

Decided: June 10, 1939

INTERLGCBT EY ORDER

"Upon Findings of Fact this day filed herein and which are hereby
made a part of this Order, the Commission concludes as a matter of law
that:

1. The Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon
is an organization entitled to prosecute this action before the Indian
Claims Commission as representative for and on behsif of the Wnsco tribe.
of Indians, and the wagampum Indian entities known as the Tcnino,'Wyem,
John Day Riser and Tygh.Indians.

2. That the saidHWasco, Tenino, Wysn, John Day River and Tygh Indians
each helf original Indian title to the separate tracts of land in Oregon
hereinafter described opposite their resysetive names, toswit:

a. Waseo Indians:

Commencing at the Cascades of the Coinzbia River and
running thence up said river to a paint two miles
, easterly of the tomnsite of Big easy, rezon; thence
_due south to Fifteen mile Creek; thente a '
. Mile Creek to a point halfway between its mouth and
the mouth of Five‘Mi1e Creek; thence senthxest by the
shortest route to the drainage divide between Five

Mile and Mill Creeks;thence southwest along said

divide to the eastern limits of Hood River drainage;
thence westward to the Range line between Ranges 9 and
10 East; thence north along said Range line to the
Township line between Townships 1 and 2 South; thence
west along the Township line between said Townships 1

and 2 south extended, to the summit of the Cascade Range;
thence northerly along the summit of said Range to the
place of beginning at the Cascades of the Columbia River.

Tenino Indians:

Commencing at a point on the Columbia River two miles
easterly of the townsite of Big Eddy, Oregon, and
running thence up the Columbia River to a point on

said river halfway between the present townsites of
Dillon, Oregon, and Celilo, Oregon; thence due south

to the watershed of Fifteen Mile Creek; thence east

and south along the drainage divide between Fifteen Mile
Creek and the Columbia and Deschutes Rivers to a point
due west of Grass Valley, Oregon; thence by direct line
to the western limits of Tygh Creek drainage; thence
west to the Range line between Ranges 9 and 10 east;
thence north along said Range line to a point opposite
the convergence of the drainage divides between Hood
River and Five Mile and Mill Creeks; thence east to
said last named drainage point; thence northeasterly
along the drainage divide between Mill and Five Mile
Creeks to a point due west of the townsite of Dufur,
Oregon; thence east to the townsite of Dufur, Oregon;
thence northerly in a direct line to a point on fifteen
Mile Creek which is midway between its mouth and the
mouth of Five Mile Creek; thence along Fifteen Mile Creek
to a point due south of a point on the Columbia River
which is two miles east of the townsite of Big Eddy,

Oregon; thence due north to the place of beginning on the
Columbia River.

Wyam Indians:

Commencing at a point on the Columbia River which is

midway between the present townsites of Dillon and Celilo,
Oregon, and running thence up said river to the present
townsite of Grant, Oregon, or if it be south of the Columbia
River. then to a point due north of Grant, Oregon; thence
southerly to the present townsite of DeMosa, Oregon; thence
southwest to the present townsite of Grass Valley, Oregon

619—h

619-c

thence west to the drainage divide between the watersheds

of the Deschntes River and Fitteeh Mile Creek; thence northerly along the watershed between Fifteen Mile Creek and the
Deschutes and Columbia Rivers to a point due south of a point
on the Columbia River which is midway between the townsites

of Dillon and Celilo, Oregon; thence due north to the Columbia
River at the place of beginning.

d. John Day River Indians:

« Commencing on the Columbia River at the townsite of Grant,
-" Oregon, or if it be south of the Columbia River, then to
a point due north of Grant, Oregon, and running thence
up said river to the mouth of Blalock Canyon; thence south
up said Canyon to its terminus and then by a straight line
to the townsite of Rock Creek; thence by a straight line
southerly to the month of Cove Creek; thence to the mouth
of Currant Creek; thence northwest to the headwaters of
Long Hollow Creek; thence west and northerly around Long '
‘Hollow Creek drainage and thence by a straight line northerly
to a point 6 miles due east of Grass Valley, Oregon; thence
northerly to Demoss, Oregon; thence northwest to Grant, Oregon,
or if that townsite be south of the Columbia River then to a
point on said river due north of Grant, Oregon, which is the
place of beginning.

e._ Tygh Indians:

Commencing at the point of intersection of Book Creek

and the 1st Standard Parallel south; thence to the
headwaters of Bakeoven Creek; thence to the Deschutes

River at North Junction, Oregon; thence up said river

to the mouth of Warm Springs River; thence .up said Warm
Springs River and the Mill-Creek branch thereof to Trout
‘Lake; thence by a direct line to Ollalie Butte; thence along
the summit of the Cascade Range to Mt. Wilson; thence by
direct line to the Western limits of Tygh Creek drainage;
thence along a straight line to a point where a line drawn
due west from.Grass Valley, Oregon, will intersect the
drainage divide between Fifteen Mile Creek and the Deschutes
River; thence to the present townsite of Oakbrook, Oregon; '
and thence southerly to the place of beginning.

3. That the Indian title to the five separate tracts above described
was acquired by the United States as of March 8, 1859, the date of confirmation of the treaty of Tune 25, 1855 (l2 Stat. 963},

6i9—d

IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED that the case will proceed to a determination
of the acreages of the several separate tracts (less the acreages thereof
which may be within the present boundaries of the warm Springs Indian
Reservation), and the value thereof as of March 8, 1859; the amount of
consideration paid therefor, and whether said consideration was unconscionable, and offsets, if any, to which the defendant may be entitled.

Dated at Washington, D. C., this 10th day of June, 1960.

s/ EDGAR E. wig
Chief Commissioner

   

s/ UM} M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

 

s/ ARTHUR V. WATKINS
Associate Commissioner

 

