BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CREEK'NATIQN,
Plaintiff,
Docket No. 21

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

VVVVVVVVV

Defendant.
Decided:

December 29, 1955

ADDITIONAL FINDINGS OF FACT

-uu—uu--up-j

 

The Commission having heretofore granted a rehearing in this
cause, makes the following additional findings of fact:

No. 58(a). By the so-called Jackson treaty of August 9, 181M,

7 Stat. 120, to which the Creek Nation objected and made formal protest,
there was ceded under protest and duress to defendant 8,986,653 acres

of land possessed and exclusively occupied by the Lower or Friendly Creek
Indians, which land was located in what are now the states of Georgia and

Alabama.with the following boundaries:

Beginning at a point in Alabama on the 31st parallel
where the township line between townships 23 and 2h East
of St. Stephens Meridian (Royce's Alabama Plat 1 and 01.
Ex. N) intersects said meridian, thence north along said
township line to a point where it intersects the treaty
line which extends northwesterly from the mouth of Summochico
Creek in Georgia, thence southeasterly from such intersecu
tion along such treaty line to the mouth of Summochico Creek,
thence east in Georgia on a line to a point where it intersects ths west boundary line of the Creek cession of June 16,
1802, 7 Stat. 68, thence southerly along said west boundary
line to a point where it intersects the south boundary line
of Georgia, thence west along such boundary line to the
Chattahoochie river, thence up said river to where it intersects the southern boundary of Alabama, thence west along the
southern boundary of Alabama to the point of beginning.

M 1

(b) That no compensation for said lands was paid by
defendant to the Creek Nation or the Lower Creeks and the plaintiff
herein is entitled to recover from defendant the value of such
8,986,653 acres of land as of August 9, 181M, for the benefit of the
descendants of the Creek Nation, including the intervenors, as it was
constituted on August 9, 1813.

Dated at Washington, D. C., this 29th day of December, 1955.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O'Narr
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

