p Stat, 1039; 25 U. 5. Sec. 70(a)).

BEFORE TEE INDIAN CLAIMS COHMISSI E

rne'jmu'orImsnooT mm or nmmrs
on relation of Napoleon Ross.
Chairman of the General Council,

Claimant.
7. Docket No. 98

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

1-..I\....ur\...r\../V-..I\..r\.u&..r\..rs.../\..J

Defendant.

Decided: Aug-u.st 25, 1955

rnmmc-s 53; new

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:i

l. The Muckieshoot Tribe, claimants herein,have been found by
this Commission to be an identifiable group of American Indians within
the meaning‘of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, l9h6 (60
As such they.are entitled to maintain

this cause of action. (See the findings of fact and opinion rendered

by this Commission in this same Docket Ho. 98 on may 13, 1953). The

following findings are supplementary to the above findings of May 13,

19532. In Claimants‘ Requested Finding No. 19 the area claimed is

described as follows:

Commencing at the southwest corner of Township Zl
Range 5 EWM; thence north through the western edge of
the town of Anhurn to the town of Pialachie; thence to
the northwest tip of Lake Cow; thence to the north tip
of Lake Sawyer; thence to the town of Kangley; thence to
the peak of Mt. Lindsay; thence to the peak of Goat Mountain;
thence to Stampede; thence along the crest of Cascade Mountains
to Naches Pass, to ChinookjPass to the peak of Mt. Eainier;

thence north to the headwaters of the West Fork of White River;
thence along the divide between tributaries to the white giver

and tributaries to the Puyallup River to a point one mile

south of the town of Buckley; thence to the place of beginning,
consisting of H9l,52O acres more or less.

3. The description of the area as given by claimants‘ witness,
Mr. Ballard, does not coincide with that set forth in claimants‘ requested Finding 19 (Cl. Ex. 25) but stops at Haches Pass and turns
west to follow the course of the Greenwater River to where it joins
White River and thence continues down White River more or less, to
the beginning,

M, At the time of white contact as indicated from the record, the
Indians who eventually became what is now known as the Muckleshoot Tribe
were living on and near the junction of the Green and White Rivers.

Governor Stevens mentions_several sub-groups of the Duwamish in
lssh, including the seal-keemisb at the head of White River and the

S

Skop-ah~mish on the upper Green River, and Stakahmish on the main White

River. Governor Stevens estimated the population at that time as follows:

Smelkamish, 50; Skopahmish, 50; and Stakamish, 30, making a total of 130.
Dr. George Gibbs mentions, among others. the Skopahmish, Sk‘tehlmish,

and St'Kamish as lying upon the lahes and branches of Dwamish River.

The Dwamish River was formed in part by the White and Green Eivers.

In Defendant's Exhibit 30, p. 1805, is Dr. Gibbs‘ estimate of Indian

tribes in the western district of Washington Territory in lssh and he

there lists the Smul—ka-nish, on head of White River, with a.population

of 8; the Skope~ah—mish, on head of Green River, population 50; and

the Se—ka~mish, on main White River, population 30, making a total of 88.

Schoolcraft noted several Dnwamish groups which included those on

the White and Green Eivers.

,5. The names of three bands on the Point Elliott Treaty were
Smalkrkahmish.gSkope-ahrmish, and St-ka-mish. These hands did not
Sign the treaty, however. (12 Stat. 927, 2 Kapp; 669).

There is indicated on Defendant*s Exhibit 18, a map drawn by or

at the order of Gov. Stevens in March 1857, three bands or groups

‘surrounding the Muckleshoot_Beservation. These are the St’Kamish,

Scope-ahmish, and the Smarlk—hamish. They are within the area claimed.

Myron Bells. a missionary. writing in 1887, mentions the up-river
Duwamish, including the Skopahmish, S1:'telmish, and St‘1:'a.hmish.

According to the Handbook of American Indians, Vol. 2, the
Sk’telmish were located on Dnwamish Lake and River which wonld appear
to make them lower river Indians.

6. The Indians who_were known as the Green River Indians and the
White River Indians. as geographical_designations, were also known by
various other names. The Green River bands or groups were called
Skopamish. Sko—pabsh, or Skopeamish, and the Niskap, Neccope, Eescope,

or Nooscope.

The White River bands or granps were called Smulkamish, S’Balahco,

Smalhékah-mish, Smulcoe, or Sohal-Ruck, Klikitats. Niskaps, and Skopamish.

In addition there were other spellings of the respective names of
these groups and their subordinate hands. t was testified to by
Mr. Ballard, claimants‘ witness, that after considering all the spellings

mentioned above, and possibly others, the names Skopamish and Smulkamish

represented all of them and that these two groups are both identifiable

3 66¢

11!. '.

as present day Mnckleshoots.

T. The use of the term Mucklsshoot first appeared as a name for
the Indians residing on the Muckleshoot reservation about 1868 when‘
Superintendent Mclennev stated as follow3:M

The Muckleshoots occupy the old military reservation
lying between'the White and Green Rivers, * * *.

Thereafter, in 1870. these Indians were first referred to as the

Muckleshoot Tribe.

8. The Mnckleshoot Reservation was not established as a result
of the Point Elliott Treaty (12 Stat. 927) or the Medicine Creek
Treaty (10 Stat. ll32), but as the result of a later meeting at Fox
Island between Governor Stevens and the principal men of the Nisqually,
Puyaiiup, and Snohomish tribes in August, 1856. On December 5, 1856.
dovernor Stevens recommended the establishment of a.new reservation
on Mnckleshoot Prairie. The President approved the recommendation on
January 20, 1857 (I Kapp. 919). On April 9. 187%, the reservation was
given definite metes and bonnds by Executive Order. It consisted of
3.532.72'acres.

9. Upon the establishment of the Muckleshoot Reservation on
January 20, 1857, certain of the Indians in the vicinity were removed
thereto. The contemporary report of"Agent Browne with relation to the
Indians placed on the reservation appears to be in error. He states:

...another post was established during the war at
Euckleshoot, a point in the interior, about 25 miles
from Steilacoom. At that station were collected some

300 of the most troublesome Indians, consisting of
Upper Puyallnps. the Eooscoopes, and Green River Indians.

,From all other evidence it seems that the Nooscoopes and the

Green River Indians were the same. Browne evidently meant White

River Indians. _

10. During the same year, Agent Gosnell stated as follows:

The Muckleshoot is also provided for in the treaty
of Medicine Creek, and is the proper locality for
the Tooahk or Upper Puyallnp, the S’Balaco or White
River, and the Nooscope or Green River Indians;
;being in all about three hundred souls.

In 1858, Gosnell further reported as follows:,

During a recent ton; to the Nisqually and Puyallup
reservations, I 1earned.with regret that the Snnlcoe
and Niskap or White River Indians, both of which bands
are parties to the treaty, and have been located at the
Muckleshoot, appear not to be well disposed toward the
whites. °
There: is also a difference in the designation of the White and Green
River Indians in this statement but the location appears regardless of

what the Ihdians are called.
11. During aboriginal times there appear to have been three

villages located in the claimed area along the Green and.White Rivers.
One was located on the Green River above Auburn, one near the junction
of the White and Green Rivers around Soos Creek, and one on the White
River near the southeast corner of_the Euckleshoot Reservation.

12. These villages, according to all of the evidence, were entirely

autonomous. The village was the highest political unit on the Pacific
Coast and there was no tribal organization comparable to that of the
more eastern Indians and as a result the village was the largestland—

'nsing*nnit.

36

r..0:.

13. “Throughout the whole of the Puget Sound area._including the

area claimed herein. the economy of the aboriginal occupants was
centered on the bays and rivers. It appears from the evidence that
subsistence was never a_real problem to these people as it was to some
of the more eastern Indians. It is also true that the people of this

area quickly adapted themselves to an agricultural economy. The
salmon and other water life formed the basic meat economy and berries
and.roots were used to supplement that diet. The relative ease of the

water economy as compared with hunting made the latter less important.

7; Another factor in the hunting economy was the ratio between the number

l;§ of Indians in the area and the abundance of game. It appears that it

was hardly ever necessary to go beyond the almost immediate area to
_obtain any game with the exception of the mountain goat. Such hunting
as was done occurred during the late fall after the iishing and.berry~'
‘ ing seasons were over and the animals had come down from the mountain
to the prairies for the winter, thereby making it'unnecessary to go
lip any great distance into the mountains.
lh. Such use as was made of the area away from the immediate

vicinity of the village was seasonal. The seasonal uses were confined

‘ as far as possible to the closest area. The villages themselves were

3 _:: located as close as possible to berry patches, root areas and other

.‘;food sources. Hunting excursions were infrequent and the lack of
pi,evidence of a.hnnting culture definitely points to that fact.
I 15. Mr. Ballard, claimants‘ witness, testified that the Indians
—of this area made seasonal trips to Huckleberry and Grass mountains

for berrying;purposes. and to other areas in the eastern part of the

'|'o[|3|
,_'1.i»" I"i :".f'.-_l

claimed area for hunting mountain sheep. There is no testimony that
such use was exclusive and in vies of the customary non-exclusive use
pattern of "lands away from the villages and the streams adjacent
thereto, there is no reason to doubt that other Indians did not use
the more distant areas to the east Just as frequently and intensively
as didthe Indians who are claimants herein.

16. The extreme western portion of the claimed area was where
_the three villages admitted by claimant and defendant to have existed
aboriginally were located. eds-indicated in Finding No. 12, there was
a village on the Green River above Auburn, one near the Junction of
the White and Green Rivers around Soos Creek, and one on the White
River near the southeast corner of Muckleshoot Reservation.

l7. The area of the three villages and the prairies between the
Green River and White River near their junctioniwotild havepreceived
very intensive use, while the upper reaches of the two rivers would
have been used only infrequently and in conjunction with other Indians.

18. The Indians of the Sound area had ne conception of land
boundaries as such. They do appear to have had a well defined sense
of “use area" with reference tothe fishing and berrying places and the
area in the immediate vicinity of their villages.

This feeling of exclusive “use area” did not extend beyond the

immediate area of the villager Permissive use was common even in the
village areas so long as the user was friendly or had some connection

with the village through kinship.

From the record it appears that Mr. Ballard, claimants‘ witness,

testified that the Upper vnite River Indians and the Green River Indians

1'.!...'.

3 655"“

shared the areas around their villages. He testified that their areas"

overlapped. 19. Hon-village areas were open to all who cared to use them.
This was a cultural characteristic of the Indians of the Sound area

that they would share the outlying areas without any concern for

exclusive use. They considered the area outside of their immediate

village area as being conmzon territory.

'20. There were no boundaries known or recogiized between these
three groups or bands of Indians. They used the areas contiguous to
their village areas in common with each other. I

21. It appears from the evidence submitted in this case that it

has not been established that the ancestors of the Indiansnow known

as the Liuckleshoot tribe exclusively used and occupied, during abori-j:=—;Zli;:p,_p‘%,

ginal times, the area claimed in their requested finding 19.

It does appear, however, that the ancestors of the claimants did
exclusively use and occupy a certain area within the confines of the
imediate village areas. This area is indicated by the testimony of
claimants‘ witness and the maps executed  him during the course of
his testimony and introduced‘ as claimants‘ exhibits 23 and 25. This
exclusive use and occupancy within the above-mentioned area is admitted by the defendant, who maintains, however, that such area is

undef inable .

22. From the evidence before this Commission it is possible to
define an area which can be said to have been exclusively used and

occupied by the ancestors of claimants. Such area is as follows:

..- . .. ‘_ _ _ "__ _ ._,,—-—n.--n.—.--Beginning at thesouthwest corner of the town of; 8

Auburn and running southeasterly along the White River
. to the place where Red Creek joins said White River;

thence in a northeasterly direction to the town of
Kangley; thence westerly to the town of Kent; thence
south to the point of beginning.

This includes the primary subsistence area of the Indians‘
respective settlements and the area over which they respectively and
collectively exercised such dominion as to warrant finding that it was
an exclusiveuse and occupancy and this Commission so finds that such
area was exclusively used-and occupied by the ancestors of claimants.

23. On August 114, 18148, Congress_passed_e.n act (9 Stat. 323)
creating the Territory of Oregon. e That Territory included that was
later to become the Territory of Washington. In the act creating
Oregon Te:-ritory,it was provided that nothing ‘therein should be construed to impair the rights of person or property of the Indians so
long as those rights remained unextinguished by treaties. Eollowing
that, Congress passed the Act of June 5, 1850 (9 Stat. 1437) authorizing the negotiation of treaties with the Indians of Oregon Territory
for the eztinguishment of their claim to lands lying west of the
Cascade Mountains and for other purposes. Congress then passed on
September 27, 3.850 the act known as the Oregon Donation Act (9 Stat.
1186) under which grants of land in Oregon Territory were made to
qualified people.

On March 2. 1853 (10 Stat. 172) Congress created the Territory of
Washington from part of Oregon and extended the applicable laws passed
after September 1, l8‘~‘r8, for the Territory of Oregon to the newly

created Territory of Washington. On July 17, 1853+, the provisions of

the Oregon Donation.Act were specifically extended to Washington Territory and certain changes made in the requirements of the act.‘
In.pursuance of the.Act of June 5, 1850. Governor steyens negotiated a treaty with some twenty—tW0 tribes and bands of Indians "and other
allied and subordinate tribes and bands of Indians occupying certain

lands situated in said Territory of Washington...“ This treaty, which

became known as the Point Elliott Treaty (12 Stat. 927) provided that

it should become effective_upon ratification by the President and
Senate of the United States. It was ratified by the Senate on March 8,
1859.and was proclaimed by the President on April 11, 1859.

The area ceded thereby is indicated as tract 3M7 on Royce's Map l
of the State of Washington. The lands which claimants allege belonged
to their ancestors lie in the extreme southern part of tract 33?.

As a result of the ratification of this treaty, the defendant has
treated these lands as public domain and.has dealt with them as it saw
fit since Harch 8, 1859.

Ehc Upon consideration of the legislative pattern as set by
Congress and the exercise of dominion over the lands ceded by the Point
Elliott Treaty, of which the area claimed herein is a part, this Commission finds that the aboriginal right of use and occupancy enjoyed by
the ancestors of claimants in the area described in Finding 22 was
appropriated by defendant without the payment of compensation and
claimants are entitled to recover for the value thereof as of March 8,
1859. Said recovery shall be subject to such offsets, if any, as defendant may be able to establish at a.snbsequent hearing on the question

of acreage and valuation.

25. Any rights which may have been acquired by the claimants or

their agcestors to any land included in the claimed area may be made

the subject of inquiry at the hearing mentioned above.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. 1:. Bolt
Associate Commissioner

 E

