C.‘\
U)
\_0
\ "1

BEE-‘O.;E  INDEf'=..?.'-'3 ClJ:.3f:1S CCE'f*’ZIS”l'OEE

Petitioners3
V. Docket 33h
Amended

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
was U1-EITED sen-crm or nzsazca, 3
)
)

Defendant.
Decided: June 19, 1958

Appearances:

Jack Joseph
A. Abraham Ziectnan
Louis L. Rnchmes

Attorneys for Petitioners

W. Braxton Miller, with whom
was Nix Assistant Attorney
General Perry Hzihorton,
.Attorneys for Defendant

or In: on Q1:  OCH-IISSIDN

   

0VMarr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The lands for which claim is made are part of a tract the defendant
ceded the Shawnee Nation or Tribe of Indians by the Treaty of November 7,
1825: 7 Stat. 28b, and was for'the benefit of the part of the tribe then
living in the State of Missouri and those members or branch of the tribe
who were then living in the State of Ohio and who might emigrate west of
the Mississippi River to the lands ceded to the £ation'by the Treaty of

Kevember 7, 1825.

Later, and on August 8, 1831, 7 Stat. 355, the Ohio part of the

the

H.‘

tribe ceded their Ohio lands and the defendant granted them part c
lan® it genre the tribe by the Treaty: oi‘ lvioveniber 7, l82§. Thereai‘ter,,

the two branches of the Shawnee Nation united on the lands ceded to than

by the l82S treat}: and themafter the Shawnee lands were held in cozrnon.

By the Treaty of may 10, 1851;, 10 Stat. lO5'3, the united tribe of
Shes»:-Inee Indians ceded to the United States all the lands acquired from
the United States by said treaties of November 7,. 1323, and August 8, 1831;
and by the Treaty of May 10, il8Sb,, the United States re-ceded to the
Shawnee 200,166 acres of their lands. More about this later. So there is
no question oi‘ title involved in this case and the soleissue to be now
decided is whether the consideration the defendant paid the Shawnee for
their lands in 1851: was unconscionable.

The amended petition in this case was filed by The Absentee Shawnee
Tribe of Oklahoma and Riley M. Hood on behalf of The Shawnee Nation, petitioner. The petition had been amended to sever certain claims not pertinent
to the issues here involved. In amending the petition, petitioner dropped
as named parties The Eastern Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma and certain named
individuals. While defendant does not controvert that the Shawnees are
an identifiable tribe of Indians which, through proper representatzives, is
entitled to prosecute this claim on behalf of those Indians having an
interest therein, defendant did object to petitioner dropping the Eastern;

U
In--' ;-_ ......
 4.. 
\rw"

Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma and all but one of the personal representat

I»-'

since such exclusion was not authorized. by the Commission (Def. Br., pp. LL

and 2). Petitioner agrees that this claim is brought on behalf of The

K»
‘O
(_}\

'5 397

be-entee Shatqnees and on behaii‘ of sdch other descendant

U)

01‘ SL1 CCBSSOTS

O)
U}
2:3
1::
*1
U
{D
(D
:5
cf‘
H.
gr!‘
F--'
(T!
I}.

of the Shawnee "ribs or Nation (as it existed in l 534) a
to participate in any recovery herein... (See Pete Prop. Fdg. Ho. 1). '.‘'*‘et*'‘ tioner, The Absentee Shawnee Tribe, is an organized group recognized by

the Secretary of the Interior (Pet. E. N . 286), and as such has the capacity to maintain this claim for and on behalf of such descendants of the
she-.. ee Tribe, conceded to be an identifiable tribe by defendant, who may
be entitled to participate in any recovery herein. The contentions made
by defendant would seen to raise some question as to the right of the absentee Shawnees to participate in any recovery as to the S”ha'.-mee Reservation

but their rights were expressly recognized in the Treaty of May 10, 18514

«-...-.-.--._

CLO Stat. 1053). While the el3'_m'inat3T.on of‘ the Fast-ern 31"’.-9.?-Tf3‘?*? Tribe of

y Olislahoma as a party petitioner was made by petitioner without sanction oi‘

 Commission, the rights, if any, of the members of that group to‘ participate in any recovery respecting the claim now presented as descendants

of Shawnee Indians having an interest in The Shawnee Tract ceded in 185b,
are Pmtected by petitioner‘ s agreement that this action is brought on behalf of themselves and in behalf of such other descendants or successors of
the Shawnee Tribe or Nation (as it existed in 18511) as may be entitled to
Participate in ~'="-1'13?’ recovery herein.

The lands involved in this case are located in what is now the State
of Kansas. The area includes all of present-day Johnson County and greater
or lesser parts of Douglas, Shawnee, Osage, Miami, Fran.1<_.in, infabaunsee,

.-. The Shaenee Tract was an-prc::in"tel" 25'

miles wide from north to south and 120 miles  cast to west. The Kansas

UNIV
.‘ _

River fonued the northern boundary line for a distance of about 60 miles
from east to west. The State of Missouri adjoined the lands on the east.
The great Santa Fe Trail ran through most of the Tract and a branch of the
California Road passed through part of these lands.

The Siaunee Tract consisted of l,60h,9S6 acres all of which were techn
nically ceded to the United States by the Treaty oi'Eay l0, l8Sh. Under
the provisions of the treaty, the United States re-ceded 200,166 acres to
the Shawnee Indians who were to make selections within a 30emile limit
west from the boundary of the State ofTMissouri. It is agreed by the
parties that the acreage to be evaluated consists of l,h0h,790 acres.

The parties agree that there existed between.the approximately eastern
two-thirds of the tract ard.about the'western one-third certain geographical, topological and historical considerations which make it necessary'to
consider the two portions separately. 'While the defendant's appraiser
estimated the western portion to contain roughly 500,000 acres, the Commission.has concluded that petitioner‘s figure of h72,6S2 acres in the
western portion is closer to the total that should be thus included therein. The eastern two-thirds of'the Shawnee Tract consisted of 932,138 acres.

Petitioner bases its "evaluation of the Shawnee Tract on the actual
market for lands in two comparable tracts, the Delaware trust tract to the
north and the Peoria trust tract to the south of the Shawnee lander“
sales of these two tracts and their relationship to the valuation of The
Shawnee Tract will be discussed hereinafter. Defendant did not consider

the dispositioh of the Delaware and Peoria trust lands “because oz

ferences in location, time and intervening factors rendering the result:

at only unknown by unforeseeahle as of 185k.“ Defendant states that
the most direct facts in the valuation of the Shawnee lands were the
record and patterns of sales of comparable and adjacent lands in
Kissouri up to the date of taking. The sales referred to by defendant
were sales of public lands by the United States.

Thus we have a difference in'views as to the market data to be used
in valuing the Shawnee Tract. while much of the lands immediately adjoining the Shawnee Tract in the State of Hissouri had been settled for
years there is no evidence as to free or private sales of unimproved
lands in that area. ‘Petitioner has built a China wall around the Delaware

and Peoria sales in l8S6 and 1857 and contends that they are controlling

|n&¢-J‘ n AIf0T ihe 40:4 evaluation of the Shawnee Tract ofiering no evidene as to

"what the sales data may have been in l85h or prior thereto in nearby
lands. Defendant on the other hand erects just such a barrier to the
consideration of anything that happened subsequent to the valuation date
and as to sales in'l8Sh or prior thereto limits its market data to Government disposals o£‘land especially in the adjacent State of Missouri. ‘While
the sales contended for by the parties are factors to be considered in
valuation of The Shawnee Tract, none of them are in.themselves controlling.
It is necessary first to consider the weight to be given to opinion

evidence in these valuation cases'before the Commission because of the
positions taken by the parties to this action. Defendant‘s counsel states
on page 18 of his brief:

The petitioners in this case flatly present the question

as to whether appraisals should be made by real estate experts
Or by lawyers and judges or commissioners, appointed solely on

..¢-.v__-t:.st_.. 2-reign  ..-;.=j_eZLy' evident-.e in a na..practice
suit, would undertake an acpendecrtomy. The distinction is
less o"oviou.s here, "out ignoring it may well prove as financially dis-asterous in the one case as it would certiatinly be
physically in the other.

the b of le'“°='=.'L :_:»‘r:~':'?:'-._ty, ‘3-Te law;-zyer-, or judge, because
C J‘

and further in defendant‘s brief it is stated‘;-;

Conversely where, as in the case of defendant's witnesses
here the opinion of an expert is based on sound factors and
is sustained by ail of the relevant evidence, that opinion
should be accorded "the force of fact," (citing cases).

The defendant‘s position would seem to be that the Commission is to
be bound by the opinion of the expert in any case where such opinion

In The hiami Tribe of

might be uncontradicted. Such is not the law.-.

Oklahoma at al., v. The United States, Lt Ind. Cl. Com. 31:6, 1:01, Chief

 

Cornmi SS5 OTEET‘ W‘? +31‘. 1.1j_-:_'_\'t.¢_= .35   91.33 3

The purpose of submitting the reports and testimony of

real estate appraisers is to aid the Comission in making

this determination. The determination itself, however, is

to be made by the Commission on the facts established by the
evidence. An appraisal by an expert is not more than his
Opinion evidence is received when the person is a
qualified expert in his field, however "opinion evidence is

not evidence of a fact." The weight to be given to opinion
evidence depends upon the qualifications of the witness in the
field in which he testifies and whether he takes all relevant
factors into account and the correctness of the facts, upon
which the opinion evidence is based; and whether the assumptions
made by the witness are proper and supported by facts.‘ The
appraisal can only be properly evaluated by giving consideration
to the c_ualifications of the witness and in the light of the
true facts upon which basedo

C

while, as stated above, the determination itself is that of the Commissien,

the opinions of experts must be considered and given such weight as in

O

View of all the circumstances, reasonably attaches to them. See 20 am.

Jur. Sections 1206, l207 and 1208.

6140

rx 

‘Ia!

‘ .__r;i'”-Lr'I'! un

The above contentions made by defendant stem, it would appear,
from the fact that petitioner did not offer the testimony or opinion
of an appraiser. While the testimony, reports and opinions of appraisers
have proven of great value in the cases determined by this Commission,
it does not follow that the lack- of such testimony on behalf of a petitioner tribe should preclude a determination on value for a claimant
if evidence sufficient to prove unconscionable consideration is intro»
duced by the party in the case.

The parties agree that the fair market value approach is the method
to be used in valuation of the Shawnee Tract. They disagree, however, as
to the market data to be used in using this method of appraisal as previously noted above. Petitioner relies on the standards for ascertaining
value set forth by this Commission in Osage Nation v. United States,

3 Ind. 01. Comm. 331, cited with approval in Otoe and Missouria Tribe v.

United States, 131 C. Clsa 593, cert. den. 350 U. S. 8bB. In the _(_J_s_.3g_e
case, supra, the Conmission made findings of fact with respect to the
various factors usually considered in valuation cases such as settlement,
transportation, topography, and sales and appraisals of Indian lands in
Kansas. In determining the value in the _C_>§_a_gg case the Goxrmission gave
great weight to the appraisal of an adjoining tract comparable in size,
location, time and character. It should be stressed, however, that in
the _(l§a_g_p_ case other factors were weighed such as the fact that the same
economic and population conditions prevailed as to the two tracts. In
addition, there was much evidence with respect to sales both prior to and

subsequent to the Osage cession to assist the Commission in reaching its
determination.

6 1:01

Petitioner urges that the appraisals and sales of the Delaware
Trust Lands and Peoria Trust Lands are controlling in the instant case
since a statistically valid comparison can be made f the Shawnee lands
and the sales price of the Peoria and Delaware lands, “which were sold
on a relatively freermarhet, % % %.“

The final appraisal of the Peoria lands showed an average value of
$1666 per acre for 208,585 acres of such trust lands. These lands sold
in a very short period in 1857 at an average price per acre of $1.67 per
acreo The final appraisal oi'the eastern Delaware lands showed an average
value of $1.79 for 217,515 acres appraised while the western Delaware
trust lands consisting of 3h3,326 acres were appraised at an average value
of $1.65 per acre, The Delaware Trust lands sold for about $1.88 per acres
The fact that the average sales price per acre of the Delaware and Peoria
Trust lands was only slightly higher than the average appraised value is
not indicative of'whatrthey'would have'brought on the open:market in:many
instances.

Most oifthe trust lands were claimed by settlers and speculators prior to appraisal and sale, associations were formed by settlers

6 boa 

to protect their claims, and.bona fide settlers were allowed to purchase ..

at the appraised value. Ihany of the “bone fide settlers" were but specu»

lators who obtained their=lands at the appraised value. Petitioner contends there are four points of'conparability between the three tracts «location, character, time of cession, and size, .As to location, the three
‘were favorably located with the Delaware and Shawnee having the advantage
of being accessible to water transportation, «As to size, the tracts were

“Qt 33 COmParahle since the Peoria rust lands consisted of 208,000 acres

5

Handbook for 1857-8 (Pet. Ex. 155) which stated:

an... the Delaware Trust lands amounted to about SOEOCJG acres while the

Shawnee Tract contained l,b,Oh,79O acres. In the character of land the
two tracts were comparable with the eastern Shawnee lands. As to time,
the comparability is questionable. Although the treaties with the Peoria,
Delaware and Shawnee Irxiians were all negotiated in May ISSLL, the appraisals and sales of the Peoria and Delaware Trust lands occurred in 1856

and 1857. 8 If conditions had remained any“where near nomal then time as a

factor might be comparable. Although there was a strong demand for opening Kansas to settlement in 18514, it is not believed that the great rush

to obtain these Kansas lands could have been foreseen in 18514. An excerpt

from The Topeka (Kansas) Tribune is quoted in The Kansas and Nebraska

We had anticipated a
verylarge emigration, but the realization is beyond all our preconceived

ideas.“ t must be remembered that in 1851: there were no settlements in

Kansas at the time of the cessions but that by 1856 and 185'? when the
appraisals and sales of the Delaware and Peoria lands took place practically all the trust lands had been claimed by settlers or speculators.

So conditions had changed in the time interval and most assuredly would

affect value. This does not mean that because of the change in conditicns

the appraisals and sales of the Delaware and Peoria trust lands are not

entitled to great weight because not altogether corwarable in time. It

only means that adjustment must be made in weighing these sales to COD1;_C‘=i_T.:Zf‘i--'-*sate for what could not havebeen foreseen.

As noted above, the Conrmission believes the tracts are not 

in size. In contending that- these tracts were of the same size petitioner

6110

"5

would ob1‘;.aj_n s.nc-1'; comparability because the quarter sections 01'' less
sold within the thme tracts were of comparable size. The CO1?-P8?3bi1itY

bet:-zeen tracts in a determination of value, however, is otherwise. .LI1

The Pottawatomie Tribe of Indians. et a'¥.., V. The United States, 3 Indo

   

_Cl. Comm. 110, at page 60 this Commission stated:
It is well established that a sale of a large tract of

land as a unit brings far less than when sold. in small tracts.

A prospective purchaser in 1868 would have to take into consideration the risk involved as to the future economic condition of the country and whether there would be a continuing

demand for the land in the area. He would 8150 Consider‘ the

length of time it would take to dispose of all the land and

the costs of sale, so that in the end he would realize a profit.

In determining the issue of value in cases before this Comrrdssion, due
consideration is given to all ‘facts which would, or could have been known,
to a willing buyer and willing seller at or about the time of the purchase. While in these cases the willing buyer and willing seller are
hypothetical persons it is necessary to consider those factors which
would have been uppermost in the minds of such hypothetical persons, includingthe sise of the tract, the highest and best use or uses for which
it was suitable, demand, prospects and risk.

In petitioner‘s brief it is stated petitioner feels the United States
should have appraised the Shawnee Tract by classifying the lands and
separately evaluating tracts of a quarter section or less. This seems to
tie in with petitioner’s further contention that the United States owed
the Indians a duty to sell the lands for them or enable the Indians themselves to sell the lands to the best of their advantage. with respect

to these contentions it is only necessary to point out that the United

States did offer to sell the lands of the Shazrznee Tract for the Indians

6L0

‘c:-at this offer was rejected by the Indians during negotiation of the

treaty for the reason asrstated by one of their delegates as follows:
They reject this last propositions They would rather let
the land go at once , and know what they get for it. The whites
would flock in--some of the land might not be sold at all. That
plan they let drop. Asks about the first proposition.
In any event, what the Shawnee tribe is entitled to is the difference between the consideration paid, if unconscionable, and the fair market value
of the Shawnee Tract as a whole at the date of acquisition by the United
tates. They are not entitled to a recovery based on what the lands of
the tract may have brought if sold in small units of a quarter section or

less for their benefit.

Only a brief discussion is necessary with respect to the defendant‘s
witnesses. Doctor 'a’i_':‘.liam G. Murray, a qualified appraiser, appeared as
an expert witness for defendant and also prepared a written report containirg much valuable information (Def. k. 1). Mr. Richard B. Hall, a qualified appraiser, testified for defendant but did not submit a report. There
is very little actual disagreement with many of the factors considered by

Doctor Murray and petitioner, such as character of the land, transportation,

climate, water, the importance of timber, and location of the land. The

sales considered by defendant‘s experts were solely those made by the 

ment. While these are important, as pointed out by Doctor Murray, to indie»

cate a pattern of settlenent and to show the type of land desired by the

4.4setoler, thus showing the importance of water, timber and location, they 
not as indicative as the subsequent sales of the Peoria and Delaware trust
lands in a relatively free market are in determining value in this case.

'l‘he sales of the trust lands were not considered by defendant's 

,_I

/

___._E.l'—_$;L
 '-::'r'-.

‘T'V
U

ecause oi‘ the difference  tine and intervening i‘a.ctors.e Doctor Z~Eu.rra
felt that the trust lands were sold in a boon time. as far as comparable
sales are concerned, the only sales considered by dci‘endant’s appraisers
upon which their opinion of value could be pegged were Government salesa
Sales of public lands are controlled sales and thus may not be used alone
to establish fair market value.
By Article 3 of the Treaty of May 10, 18514, 10 Stat. l0S3, by which
the Shawnee Indians ceded their lands to defendant, the United States
agreed to pay $829,000 in cash for the cession in the following manner:

$110,000 to be invested by the United States, at a rate of interest not

less than five per centum per annum; seven hundred thousand dollars to be

  SEVEN 901127 'inc:+.::>"l'Imnn+.v: nnmmnnrtincr '3 18:} :37-yr? §.‘.8Q_f‘10(‘i zgriri-'{-!_-.-§.r_-tun’!
4- "--- —-——- .-—.--H-.-—-----— ------ --- ---.~__, 1-- —' .. - .p;'1-" — ""r""-"-1- a—a

. ., _ .. .. 4.. -. -u-—— --q. -- o - q-so.-‘gr

~“o'.'Llowing the termination of that period. Petitioner contends that the

0 united States should not be allowed to charge against the Shawnees the full

3,3-829,000.00 but rather the consideration paid should be valued at its
present worth as of the date of the treaty of cession, or $635,265.66:

This method of attempting to reduce the actual consideration paid under the

provisions of a treaty was rejected by this Commission in The Crow Tribe V.‘

The United states, 6 Ind. 01. cent. 98, 12h, 125', as an attempt to obtain

 

interest where none was provided for or could be allowed. In the negotiation of the Shavmee treaty of 1851;, here involved, it should be pointed out,

the Question of the number of payments under the treaty was a matter of

bargaining between the parties with the United States finally agreeing to

the number insisted npon b' the Indiana

6 LL05;

*2

The Comrr:issi-on, taking into con. ide-.ation the many factors relative
to the value of the Shawnee Tract in 1551: as set forth herein and in more
detail in the findings of fact; the fact that the purchase scald be of a
large tract including the less valuable lands in the western portion; the
history of settlement and sales of the tract as a whole; the pattern of
settlement in adjoining lands in Missouri, and the appraisals and sales
of the 1'-‘eoria and Delaware tracts making due allowance for differences in
size and conditions existing in l8'Sl=, which could not mve been reasonably’
foreseen at that time, concludes that as of August 2, l8Sh, the day on
which the treaty became effective and title passed to defendant, the fair

market value of the Shawnee Tract, consisting of l,h0h,790 acres, was

-‘:1-arr rs 4'45-tan -vac-s-pair

an--4-D -— q'- "uII-cu\-—- 0'69-I-¢..g'ap

rt 9 “H-3 trnrd

1. \.n-pg-egg‘-Uh-‘ink

355- 1&1? 711 no

(\+_91 earn -1
war--— q-p 5--4 ads: -I ¥-‘J r"-II--unIn: 'I-'

ct
value on the more valuable eastern portion of the Shawnee Tract, consist111% Of 932,138 acres, of $l,63l,2hl.00, or at the rate of $1.75 per acre,
and a fair market value on the {(72,652 acres in the western third of the

tract Of 3307, 223.00, or at the rate of sixty-five cents per acre. The

consideration of $829,000.00 paid for the Shawnee Tract was unconscionable.

Counsel for petitioner close their brief with this amazing statement:

For the purpose of this case, petitioners are assuming
that the Shawnees received the consideration which is provided for them in the treaty of 1851;, leaving the "question

as to whether they actually received it to the petition for
an accounting.

T0 give effect to the statement we would be required to give an opinion

£"'}...
.1...-LWQ

f\'V"r ‘V1 - -° '
\.a;.4. an abstract p1“Cpos1“.:,3_o:: 0

A real controversy exists which is whether the consideration the

6 1:07

m
1.

titioner received for its lands was nneonscionahlee 0 decide thi5
issue it is necessary to determine the consideration the defendant Paid
for the lands and their value at the tine the Indians‘ title passed to
defendant. ‘we have decided the value of the landi There was no proof
offered as to the consideration paid, nor was such proof needed: becauge
the petitioner has alleged that the consideration paid was $829,000-003
which the defendant has admitted in its answer. Obviously: “H1955 the
consideration for the cession was proved by admissions in the P19351385
the petitioner has not made out a case. 'W€ thiHK the 3dmi55i°n3 in-the
pleadings, mentioned above, show that petitioner received the consideration.stated in the treaty. ‘we will, accordingly: make 3 final awaré
a-_-; H

. __ l_ _ ‘R an o‘“‘____ -1__‘ 9 -e-: .
cesca upon one consideration snoen by the loadlusb: $555 5°C“ °115e35

~: may hereafter be allowed. Such final award will, we believe, remove

the question of the amount of the consideration paid for the 185k cession

from the petition for an accounting mentioned by Petiti°ner in its brief‘

Louis J . O'1*1arr .
Associate Commissioner

we concur:

Edgar Ea'Hitt

Chief Commissioner

wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

