. . . BEFORE THE IKDEAN CIAIHS COEKISSION

THE CREEK KATIOE, )
Plaintif: g

vs. 3 Docket No. 292
TV? UHITED STA”33 OF ANERICA, ii
Defendant. %

Decided: Feb. l8, l959
Appearances:

Mr. Paul H. Niebell
Attorney for Plaintiff

Er. Keith Browne, with when
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General, Perry'H. Korton,
Attorneys for Defendant

Witt, Cinef Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The plaintiff in its original petition asserts that it was the
owner of trust and other funds, which said trust and other funds were
held in trust by the defendant and paid and administered for the use
and benefit of plaintiff, and that it was provided by the treaties
between.plaintiff and defendant that said trust and other funds were
to be managed and invested and otherwise disposed of by defendant
for the benefit of plaintiff, said treaties being specifically referred to in later allegations of said petition.

However, in the several claims thereafter in the petition
‘specifically set out, no one of said claims in the opinion of this

Commission, is shown to involve trust funds.

The first claim is for $87,309.75 and is described in detail
in Sec. IV of plaintiff's petition and in Requested Finding No. A
of plaintiff‘s requested findings of fact. Both descriptions of
said claim state that same arose under Article II of the Treaty of
June 16, l802 (7 Stat. 68). In the petition it is alleged that
defendant‘s total obligation under said treaty amounted to $320,000.00
and that defendant disbursed $232,690.25 only on said treaty obligation and therefore the amount of $87,309.75 is due and owing to plain 

tiff from defendant for defendant’s failure to fulfill said treaty

obligation. In the Requested Vinding No. A plaintiff requests a

 

finding that the total obligations of the United States under said
Article II of said treaty amount to $317,000.00 on which the United
States had only disbursed and accounted to the plaintiff for $25n,690.25

and that defendant is now due and owina to the Creek Ration a balance

 

of $62,309.75, for which the defendant has failed to account.

Both descriptions of said claim are for indebtedness claimed to
have been created on the part of the defendant to the plaintiff by
the provisions of the Treaty of June lo, 1802, and not forimoneys
it had received from or for the plaintiff, the management of which
the defendant became trustee.

The next claim for which suit is brought is set out ir
Of plaintiff‘s petition. This claim is based on the provis1nr©a w
Article III of the Treaty of Nouember lb, l805 between_the

.1  .' 1 '7‘ 7,1‘ C“
ggz‘, u.n:_ \—‘ 7|.‘ ‘- ' I__r

*

Nation and the United States (7 Stat. 96). The olaintiff a

that said Article III created a total oblization on the part

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. ll7 129

United States to defendant in the amount of $196,000.00 on which the
defendant disbursed $l69,&52.25 only on said treaty obligation, and

therefore the amount of 326,5h7.75 is due and owing to olaintiff for

 

defendant’s failure to fulfill said treat‘ obligation.

   

This claim is again described in plaintiff’s Requested Finding
No. 5 in which it is stated that the total obligation under said
treaty was $206,000.00 and total disbursements shown by General accounting Office to be only $169,452.75, although Congress has appropriated
the full amount due. And the balance now due and owing by the defendant
on said treaty obligation is in the amount of $36,5A7.75.

The next claim is described in Sec. VI of plaintiff‘s petition
as arising under provisions of the Treaty of Karen 25, l832 between
the United States and the Creek Nation (7 Stat. 366) which total
obligation under said treaty is alleged to be $60,000.00 on which
it is alleged the defendant disbursed $A9,938.99 only on said treaty
obligation and therefore the amount of $10,061.01 is now due and owing.
This claim is again described in plaintiff‘s Finding No. 6 wherein
the total obligation under said treaty is stated to be $60,000.00,
the total disbursement of the defendant on said obligation as having
been only $A9,938.99, leaving a balance now due and owing from the

United States to the Creek dation in the amount of $10,061.01 .

 

The next claim for which suit is brought is descri ed in Sec. '11

of plaintiff’s petition as arising out of treaty between the United

tates and the Creek Nation on February la, l833 (7 Stat. A17). It i3

‘V

alleged that the total obligation of the United States to the plain+ ‘*\{‘|
W

{V-tiff under the provisions of said treaty was $ll9,2L0.00, on which

n-... -u.—.-._ .-an-—..-..

7 End. Cl. Com. 117 130

defendant d_j_5bu_1'-sed only -.'3'72’_~,,29O.Z+5, and the defendant is I10‘.-I due and

 

owing to the plajntiffQhL,9h9.55 .

 

In petitioner‘s Finding No. 7 the total of said obligation
under the above treaty is stated to have been $105,690.00, on which
the defendant paid and disbursed to the Creek Nation in fulfillment
thereof only the amount of $80,98l.A5 and that there is a balance
now due and owing by the defendant to the plaintiff under said treaty
obligation the amount of $2h,708.A5.

In plaintiff‘s reply brief (pp.32, 33,)it is alleged that an
error had been made in giving the defendant credit for $&,69o.00
to which it was not entitled and that the total disbursement to which
the defendant was entitled to credit was oily $76,285.a5 and that
plaintiff‘s claim on said item is the amount of $29,L0h.55.

In Sec. VIII of the plaintiff‘s petition a provision of the
Treaty of August 7, I856 (ll Stat. 699) is alleged as creating an
obligation on the part of defendant to pal annually an item.of
$10,000.00 as interest to plaintiff; that said interest became due
and owing for the years l857-61 inclusive in the total amount of
$50,000.00 on which obligation the defendant disbursed only $21,000,

although Congress appropriated the total of $50,000.00, and

 

fore the amount of $29,000.00 is due and owing to plaintiff ‘bow
defendant because of defendant's failure to fulfill said treaty

9elieaEi2aT

This liability is also described in plaintiff‘s Requestbf 7Y¢de
ing No. 8 in practically the same language as described in the

original petition.

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 117 131
The final prayer of the plaintiff in its original petition
reads as follows:
”EHE E?OnE, plaintiff prays:
1. That plaintiff be awarded judgment against defendant for thetotal amounts of said unfulfilled treaty obligations, together with interest at five per centtnz per annum
on said amounts to date.”

In plaintiff‘s last Requested Finding No. 9 in recapitulation

the plaintiff asks for this finding:
"Therefore, there is due and owing to the Creek Kation

from the United States the following unpaid balance under

the above treaty obligations of the United States."
Then follows an itemized statement of the several amounts previously asked for as due and owing aggregatin with the added amounts

0’
<3
_ 1 __ 1.1- .,_'§___ 1____°_n _'.. 1.1. J.-J. "I ,.. .. -1. ,_n “a--1/r-1 4'»:-s") F‘/'
' 3 u;.1<..2 1’U§.;_L.,y L.).L‘.:.C5.L 4.1.1 U11‘: bULv<.:.J. c‘...J11U1.L..L.u UJ. '.a..l.\J(,_/c.__).\..-‘K.Jo

In plaintiff's Request for Findings of Fact E0. 2 the treaty
between the Creek Eation and the United States of August 7, l79O
(7 Stat. 35) is quoted the provisions whereby the Creek Ration acLmowletps itself to be under the protection of the United States
and no other sovereign, etc. and it is requested that thisiareaty
provision be found to have created thereafter a fiduciary relationship betueen the Creek Kation and the United States as that of
guardian and Indian ward. Thereafter in plaintiff's brief (p. ll}
in support of the above requested finding, the plaintiff alleges

\

that the claim (meaning all of the claims in the present suig is

Q

for an accounting bro‘rht against the United States, “its guardian.”

-5-Statement is then made (Brief, 9. 2) that the claims nresented

are "claims under treaty provisions as the General Acceurtin

clearly shows were not fulfilled by the U

K2)
l\J

which balances are shown therein to be due and swing from the United

 

 

States to the Creek Nation.“ Both parties make many and varying contentions-as to the items of charge and credit involved, but we think
the disposition of the case, without going into many of the contentions and controversies as to items, is determined by where the burden

 

of oroof lies -- that is whether the burden is on the part of the

 

plaintiff to prove a failure to discharge the obligations undertaken
by the defendant, or whether the burden is on the defendant to prove
that it discharged these obligations and is liable to the plaintiff
upon its failure to do so. This question is determinable by whether
the defendant stands in relation to the plaintiff as guardian or as
trustee of funds belonging to the plaintiff, or whether the relationship is that of debtor and creditor.
As supporting its contention that the relationship is that of

guardian and ward, the plaintiff relies on the language of the Treaty
Of 1790 which is quoted in findings of fact and also in the decisions

of the Supreme Court in the Seminole case (316 U.S. 28 , 295-297) and

that of the Sioux 'I‘ri‘oe v. United States (.105 0. Cls. 725-802}. The

 

language of the Supreme Court case, upon which the plaintiff relies,
is language in keeping with that of many other decisions of the
Supreme Court and other courts to the effect that there is

the Government in its dealings with the Indian Tribes of a more eia¢L=

ing nature than with two entities that might be called on a par

each other; but there is nothing in the decision that indicates a

2 Change in the burden of proof in such matters as are involved

J

present law suit. The decision of the 3uprene Court cited was
rendered on lav ll, l9L2 . Some of the funds involved in that
case grew out of treaties and obligations of debt created thereby.
Others were trust funds.

The len uage quoted by the p 3 nt ff from that decision was
rith regard to a claim based on alleged liability for a trust fund,
provided by Article VIII of a Treaty of l8S6 (ll 3tat. 599), which
fund was to be invested and nanaged for the plairtiff by the
Government. at a later date (Nov. 5, l9L5) the Supreme Court hell
by refusing 3rit of Certiorari that a mere indebtedness of the
Government to an Indian Tribe was not a trust fund.

We refer to the case of the Chickasaw Endians against the
United States (in which, by the way, Kr. Paul K. ?;ebell, who is
counsel in this case, was counsel therein) reported in lO3 C.Cls.
1-57, as to which the Supreme Court on November 5, l9h5 denied

T‘

csrtiorari as to the judgment on the merits. his case involves,
among other clains, plain and simple treaty obl gations of the
United States to the plaintiff Indians, as to which the plaintiff

claimed nonpayment and non-fulfillzent. As in the case at bar the

(O

evidence upon which the plaintiff relied for the nonfulfillx—nt of
the obligations, and its right to recover therefor, was a fa*lure
of the d f ndant to prove comoliance and fulfillment. In many
instances there was a showing of merchandise due and owinc by the
defendant to the plaintiff, and by the defendant, merely a men Y

r&naoL.of p rchase for the plaintiff, but no showin: of actual

   

‘Q
I“ 1
"1
.0
C)
F’
C)
0
{:1
C
1....)
}--.»J'

“J

13L

4'raliverv to the olairtiff. There being no oroof on the ?8Tt of the

   

V

plaintiff th't it did not get the ?OCdS an. value. The plaintiff

   

therein contended, as in the case at bar, that the'burden was on the

defendant to prove delivery to o-aintiff, or payment to plaintiff. A

statemert of the Court as to same is applicable to mahy'of the situations in the case at ar; "far the years l??S, l7§9, and l8QO goods

of the annuity values were forwarded from the Ear Department Storehouse in Philadelphia for the Chickasaw Ration. It must be presumed

that thev were received in due course. {underscorin sujplied) ;O

D’
¢::  Q

require defendant to prove affirmatively that the goods were received
(the proof it tiis late date would have to be docu:entaryJ would

place an impossible burden where it does not rightfully belong. The

burden is uoon the oloietiff to crove its case. Thile the i~ris—

U

   

dictionel act waives the lapse of time, it does not thereby shift
the burden.of proof to the defendant, nor does the jurisdictioral
act by its terms excuse the absence of proof by the plaintiff.”
Other claims in the Chickasaw case were for deposits of
Chickasaw zcney to other tribes, The Court says: "there is la k of

proof that the deposits were erroneousl3'aade. The mere fact of de!

Eosit to other than a Chickasaw fund, without more, dO€S.DOt ;htitle

v

Plaintiff to recover * r *” "No judgrent of recovery can 3; Riggs H;

the showing made.” (o. A2)

{-3. . 5 _: . . . . H A I“ ‘ ‘  r __
lnere were some items 0: claim alloued in the ChlCk¢a;w t¢.a
items in which the burden of oroof was not involved. Offsets wer«

allowed, however, which wiced out the entire amount of the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. ll? "i 135

Petition for Certiorari was filed with the Supreme Court on the

whole case. It was allowed only as to the offsets. "he find, upon
examining the petition for certiorari that it was stated that the

basic question presented was "whether the regular equitable principles
governing an accounting between the guardian and ward are to be appled
to a case in which the Chickasaw Nation demands an accounting from

the United States of moneys due it under treaties and agreements.”
Also, "whether the Indian ward'has the burden of proving the items it.
excepts to in the guardian’s account,” The refusal of the Supreme
Court to allow certiorari on the natters hereinabove specifically called
to its attention is evidence that it approved the holdings of the Court
of Claims in reference to such matters; and this, of course, leaves

the law as applied to the "burden of proof" where it was found by the
Court of Claims to be —— that was on the plaintiff.‘ This is therefore
the law as to the burden of proof applicable to the claims in the in»
stant case.

As the plaintiff, in support of its viewpoint as to the burden.
of proof also cites the case of Sioux V. United States (lO5 C. Cls.
725) wherein the court states that "The defendant is the trustee; it
kept and has all the records and evidence and it has the burden of
making the proper accounting," “p. 802), attention will be called to
the fact that in that case the matter involved was the proceeds in
the possession of defendant of land sold by the defendant,'which
money, of course, was a trust fund and the handling of same is governed by the rules applying to trustee andgguardian. Such is not the

U)

7 Ind. Cl. Cox. ll? l 6

situation in the present case, but only involves the relationship
of relationship of ordinary debtor and creditor.

The plaintiff relies soley on the language of the Treaty of
l79O (under which no claim asserted is based) as the basis for its
claim that the relationship of guardian and ward existed between it
and the defendant. One of the latest pronouncements with reference
to the relationship between the Indian tribes and the United States

is that of Gila River Pima - Karicooa Indian Comnunit V. United

 

States (Ct. Cls., 140 F. Supp. 766, 780)

Whether or not the legal relationship of guardian
and ward exists between a particular Indian tribe and the

-L74

United States depends, we snark. upon the express provisions of the particular treaty, agreenent, executive
Order, or statute under which the claim presented arises.
It is true that the word "fiduciary" and the expression
"guardian—ward relationship” have been used by the courts

to describe generally the nature of the relationship
existing between the Indians and the Government. however,
in the absence of some language in a treaty, agreement or
statute spelling out such a relationship, the courts seen to
have meant merely that thez*elationship between the Indians
and the Government is "similar to" or "resembles" such a
legal relationship and that the doubtful language in the
treaty or statute rnder consideration should be interpreted
in favor of the weak and dependent Indians. (Citing Creek
Nation v. United States, 3l8 U.S. 629,6A2)

Ne also call attention to a discussion of the Court of Claims

«.3
as to the relationship of guardian and ward as between Indian Tribes
and the Government anoearing in the decision of that Court in the

case of Sioux Tribe vs. United States, IA6 F. Suoo. 299 (1956); ala,

ap&
 

discussion of this question by this Commission in its opinion in the

Omaha Tribe. et al vs. United States, 6 Ind. Cls. Com. 68,73, 7A.

7 Ind. Cl Com. ll? 137

The plaintiff makes mention in its reply brief of the Chickasaw
case (lC3 C.Cls. l) and insists that the decision therein has no
application to the present case, and in any event the holding of the
Court 01 Claius in the Sioux case, lOS C. Cls. 725, overrules the
holdings in the Chickasaw case. The decision in the Sioux case,.if
it were different from that in the Chickasaw case, could not overrule
the same because the Sioux case is a Court of Claims opinion only,
while the holdings in the Chickasaw case were approved by the Supreme
Court by its refusal to grant a writ of certiorari. However, the holding in the Sioux case is not on facts of the kind involved in the
Chickasaw case, because claim in the Sioux case was based on the handling of funds received by the United States as the proceeds of the sale
by it of lands belonging to the Sioux Tribe thereby said funds becaxe
trust funds and the principle of law applying to the handling of same
by trustee or guardian applied.

The plaintiff makes the statement in its rep_y brief (p. 51)
that if it "had filed suit under the Creek Treaties of l79O and l7?6,
and under the Secret Article of the l79O treaty, we would have haa a
somewhat similar case to that of the Chickasaus.“ ‘He cannot follow
such reasoning. The instant case seems to be on “all fours” with the
claims we rely on in the Chickasaw case.

The Kenoainee case, reported at lO2 C. Cls. 555, involved procee-of sale of plaintiff’s property, and th t reported il8 C. Cls. 326

m

ir

involved offsets asserted by it, and are not applicable to the case 2»

bar.

° v‘\

as to the nonetary liability, i: any, cr=ated by the obligation

"I

o: the Governnent to furnish black-snit , wheelwright and equipment,
as to which specifi money obligations are not specified, the defendant contends that such obligations do not create a fixed monetary
liability; and that to recover for a failure on the {art of the
defendant to comply with the treaty stipulations would require proof
on the part of the plaintiff as to the pecuniary losses suffered by
reason of the alleged failure. As to whether or not this contention
is correct, or as to whether the basis for the sums claimed by the
plaintiff as m ney liability for the alleged failure on the part of
the defendant is correct, it is not necessary for us to determine
under our holding that plaintiff has not proven the alleged failures
of the defendant to fulfill its obligations as it is its duty to do
before any recovery can be had.

Defendant contends that the claims are res judicata by reason
of jurisdictional acts and cases cited. The defendant also claims
that by provisions of the Treaty of $“gust 7, l856 plaintiff released

Enemy of the claizs urged in this case. This Commission is inclined to

the opinion that the defense of res judicata is not well taken but wi

:_
*\

reference to the effect of the release ?rovisions'of the Tree 1 of

a
-In

on the merits, it is not necessary for it to decide as to the

judicata or as to the effect of release provisions of the Tr ;””

tiveness as to all claims based on the treaties of l305 and ‘7””

it is inclined to agree with defendant; however, in View of its d¢C3$f3“m

7 Ind. Cl. Com. ll? 139

says in its reply brief (p. 56), "As a legal matter this release would
bar the claims under the Treaties of l&O5 and l832 as defendant COR?
tends.” Certainly the claims of this suit are based on'treaties, not
on moral obligations and are definitely and unquestionably legal
claims and are being so urged and urged only as legal claims.
In keeping with this opinion and findings of fact filed herein,

this case will be dismissed.

s Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

sf Iouis J. 0‘Harr

Associate Commissioner

s inn. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

