7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815
BEFOFE re: Ixmna CL’-‘.II~ES co:»::nss_T_c1~.z
THE PITT RIVER INDIAHS
or CALIPORKIA,
Petitioners,

v. Docket No. 3h?

UNITED states or AMERICA,

‘h../\....f‘|-...l\..a'\..J‘\-..M'\__/'N..J'\__/‘~n.-/

Defendant.
Decided: July 29, 1959
PFINDINGS OF FACT

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact:

l. This is an action to recover of the defendant the sum of
$22,hO0,000.00 as the value at $5.00 per acre of a tract containing
approximately 7,000 square miles which it is alleged the Pitt River
Indians held.under original.Indian title and which the defendant
took without payment of any'compensation therefor. Said tract lies
in.northeastern California between the Sierra Nevada Mountains on the
West and the crest of the'Warner Mountain Range on the east, the
‘watersheds of Feather River on the south.and the Klamath River and
Klamath.Lake drainage on the north.

2. The petition.was timely.filed on behalf of The Pitt River
Indians of California as a single identifiable tribe'by eight members
of petitioner organization on August ll, 1951. Prosecution of said
action in the name of the organization was duly authorized by its
members and officials (Ike Leaf, Trans. p. b5-68). ttorneys were

thereafter retained and following approval of their contract as

u — --—-an--4-1-——-.-—.—-—.—__..._...

81

required by the Act creating this Commission, a First and Supplemental
Petition was filed with this Comrrzission on July 2, l9S6, wherein it is

all eged that the petitioner is composed of the living descendants of

members of a tribe, band and/ or other ident£iable group of Indians who

since the advent of the white man have been designated The Pitt River
Indians. At the close of petitioner‘s case in chief, permission was
sought to amend said petition and over defendant's objections, after
both parties had rested, and on July 31, 3.957, permission to amend the
petition was granted. As so amended, the petition alleges the petitioner
is also known as The Pit River Indians of California and as The Pit River
Indians; that it is composed entirely of descendants of members of eleven
bands or tribes which are designated "claimant tribes" and that it brings
this action in its om behalf and/ or as representative of the eleven
bands or tribes and/ or as representative of the Achomawi and Atsugewi
groups of Pitt River Indians. I I ‘ I it it I I 4
3. The words "Achomat~zi" and "Atsuge-:-Ii" are derivatives of names

the Pitt” miner Indians applied to residents of two separate sections of
the claimed region, whichnames have been used by scientists since 188?
to identify the two similar dialects of the Shastan language  are I ‘
5P01Cen by and are unique to the Pitt River Indians. lllanthropologists

and others refer to the Achomawi speaking Indians as "Achomani" and to
th°3; Speaking Atsuge‘-3-Ii as “Atsuge:-Ii" or "Atsuge" and it is 
1‘*‘—’-'5Pect these names are used hereinafter except when they are expressly
3991?-ed to the Small groups or bands ‘oea3;'ing those same names.

_. .._14- The nine northernmost groupings or bands of, the Pitt River

Ind.-'_’.:3—"13 51-‘voke Achomawi, the two southern groups or bands spoke

__ __ ____._,.,__,,:.,._..........__.._.. ..... -_. _.—_-u..¢——..:._..._..._.816

v has existephpf

tsugewi and learned Achomawi, thus establishmg cozrmznication bet':;:een
them. Geographical or place names, derivative of the Indian names, have
been assigned to each band or group of both linguistic divisions. The
Achoma‘:-xi groups are known as Astariwawi, Atfamsini, I-Iamnaw:-Ii, Hevriseda:-ri ,Ilm.aI-ri Itsatawi. "Kosalekta:-Ii Madesi *'nd Achomawi. The Atsu ewi ..ouns
: : 2 3 S 8*’ ..
are called Atsuge and Aporige. In official correspondence and records
the defendant’ s a ents and re resentatives have almost consistentl re8 P ‘.5’
ferred to these Indians as a collective unit by the name of Pitt River
Indians. Such names as Hat Greek or Dixie Valley bands of Pitt River

Indians also appear.

1:.‘ Edence:
Pet.‘ Evgs. E-3, p.hO; E-8, “Pioneer History" - Fairchild.

5.p_..._JT1p1ere are Pitt River Indians}-rho are not members of petitioner
organization but there are among its present membership descendants of
members each _of_ the eleven separate groups or hands into which the
Pitt  were divided at the_ti.me of white contact. The organization

 Ma nupznbpper of years and is managed by an elected council

vp.- ._. .__‘_._ ...‘.p-“a_'_

..-an

it and a  
Defendant has never treated with the _Pitt River Indians as. a unit
1101‘  the several separate groups or hands. Around 1859 a number of
1 these Indians, includhzg Shavehead I and  followers from Hat Creek Valley
in Atsnge country went on the Round Valley. Indian Reservation in California
and were for years indiscriminately lmown as Pitt River Indians. Military

correspondence of the same period disclose the remaining Indians within

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 815' 818

the claimed area were also called Pitt River Indians. Some recognition
of linguistic differences was made during the l890‘s after Powers’ and
Powell's publications called attention to the two dialects, when ohl
Pitt River Indians and 132 Apnarakis (Atsugewi) "associated with them?
were permitted to select allotments as a result of which 565 allotments
were granted to Pitt River Indians (Achomawi) and 110 to Atsugewi. ther
tracts have since been set aside for use by Pitt River Indians without
regard to linguistic or band differences, and the Department of Interior
dealt with then as an.unorganized tribe on July 2, 1936, when it negotiated a "Trust Agreement for Relief and Rehabilitation Grant to Unorganized
Tribe," which agreement was approved in revised form.by the Acting Com»

missioner of Indian Affairs on November 3,. 1939.

 

Evidence:
Pet. Exs. 0-1 to 0-10; 13-3, p. 10, E-8, “Pioneer History" by Fairer-.iJ.d;
F-7 to F-163 referring to Pitt River Indians on Round Valley'Reservation3
Def. Ex; 79, Letter of Asst. Commr. of Indian.Affairs to Pitt River Indians
on Jan. 3, 1917, re prior allotments; Def. Ex. 78, Letter April lh, l9l3,
re allotments made to Pitt River*Indians and to Apwaraki “associated with
them." Pet. Ens. N-73 B-9, p. 7, Macgregor report; Def. E35. 3, 8, 15;
Trans. p. 103, Stewart. I I c" I ; ..; LI c. 2; v v Q I
6. ;The area to which petitioner asserts original Indianftitle and that
such claim is presented on behalf of the descendants. of the members of the
eleven different bands or groupings of Indians which the'nhi‘e man found. within the drainage of the Pit River was apparent from.the record and was
known to the defendant prior to the reception of evidence in this case. The
defendant has been.under no handicap throughout this litigation.in identifying

either the parties in interest or the real estate to which claim.of original

Indian.title is made.

015
‘cur

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 ‘ 819

Evidence:

See Amended and Supplemental Petition, p. S. A

Trans. 13. 16, Opening Statement by Mr. Phelps: "it -3% -11- this case is
brought on behalf 0.1. the whole tribe, and secondarily on beh.aE of
each of the aboriginal bands or groups which together form the
greater unit, the Pit River tribe %- -3- -e.“

7. It is estimated that in 18u8 the Pitt River Indians numbered
1,500 and that there arepnou 1,000 persons presently enrolled or entitled to enrollment in petitioner organization as descendants of members of said aboriginal bands or groups of Pitt River Indians.

 

Evidence: ._ .
Voegelin, Trans. p. 919, 651;-6; Ste:-zart, Trans. p. 2093 Def. Ex. 9,
p. 3083 opening Statement of Mr. Phelps, Trans. p. 17. 8.‘ The claimed area is geographically'isolated, high and cold; its  

topography is rough, forbidding and difficult to traverse. The 

P ,found:.therc‘ in thecgnineteenth centurycwere a stream people, maintaining V

....-{y-iw—- _
' " av L. ' homesualonig the streams and laltes and traveling "from food source

g 130 £005-Source in the summertime. They were foot Indians using bowsand

S i    8-,I'TC%>I,fS, wearing animalskins, and having winter dwellnn‘ gs of crude low. bark: andpole ‘ structures erected over shallow excavations. They were not

greats, hunters ,..vegetal products bulking larger than meat or fish in their

diet, and starvation was not unlmoz-. . They did not practice agriculture

other than by regularly burning the underbrush and weeds in chaparral and P

forested’ areas to increase productivity. They hunted elk, deer and bear
on the slopes of Mt. Shasta and the Warner range; groundhogs in the lava
bedsand antelope, sage-hens, rabbits, grasshoppers and crickets in the

Sagebrush and desert areas; waterfowl and eggs in the swamps. Berries,

 

7 End. Cl. Co:-"..:. 815 820 .

acoms, nuts and fruit were gathered on the mountain slopes; clover, tule
rushes and epos roots in the marshes. They preferred the yen wood growing
in limited areas along the Pit river for bows and made arrowheads oi‘ stone
or volcanic glass called obsidian, which they procured at Little Glass and
Glass Mountain beside I-iedicine Lal«:e,_ at Sugar Hill near Goose Lake and
elsewhere near the Pit I'j:.__}F€I’. Canoes and reed rafts were used. on Hat Creek, Fall. River, and for limited stretches on the Pit. Supernatural
power was believed to be obtained by visits to ‘.‘power" places such as Medicine Lake, Eagle Lake, Lassens Pealc, Mt. Shasta, Sugar Hill and McDonald
Peak. They had the same culture and exogamy created close ties of.‘ friendship.
mess Indians were hostile and little contact other than of a defensive

or reta.'Liatory nature was had with them for several decades. The first

attempt to learn something of them was made by Indian Agent E. A. tevenson

 1857. He reported to the Commissioner of Indianéifairs on September 30,  S

1857, that they spoke a new language, but it was not untillscientists were H
in touch with them years later that it was learned they spoke ‘I:-rot separate
Shastan dialects, both distinct from the tongues ozfneighboring lndians.
Stephen Powers first reported this in 1876 aa esteem; ‘i‘i:~s”t annual V
1‘9P0I't Of ‘the Bureau oi‘ American Ethnology ten years  the names
Achomawi and atsugewi were applied to those dialects. Most of the available

data.’ concerning the l'i..fe, culture and religion of these early pieople results

--nu...

J'f1‘°T=? 20th century research among them and their neighbors, 

'1

 ;—.
.::.vJ.<.3.ence :

Pet. Ex. B-E, Garth‘s "Emphasis on Industriousness Among the Atsugewi";

tewart, Trans, p. 335-343 and 179: “She geography itself forced them

a “Esther and separated them from their neighbors outside of their area."
in
-. 

‘I\‘- .‘
._ 1,.

I’
I

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 815 _ 821.

-1

Pet. Easc. 2.-2, ‘Fall River Valley" by E. R. bIeas11a;:1; Voegelm, rans.
p. 903-19, and 596-7; A. L. Kroeber, Pet. as. 13-10, *9. 308; Pet. ms.
B-93 D-lo; N-3(3).  

9. Each of the eleven separate groups or hands occupied, utilized and
controlled the use of certain areas. thers were permitted to share any
available excess food supply. Their restriction to these excess foods was
recognized, and the hosts were paid by gifts, by leaving a part of the
harvest or by invitation to share an abundant food within the other’s sector.

Group exploitation of the land was organized and directed by leaders selected.

forhthat purpose. There was no over-all political unity, and no over-all

 or leader, either among the Pitt River Indians as a whole or among the
Atsuger-Ii or Aohomawi divisions. The several groupmgs which have been
variously referred to as bands, tribelets, and vil_'Lages,. were autonomous
one headman or leader might serve two or more separate villages p
 close by. In some instances positions of leadership were

 poccasionally enmity existed between some of these groups ‘or

 “bands,”   ryisited back and forth  p the customary practice

: . ' "I ' .u ..u.'..->" au....ns...-' -3 n _

  for two or more bands or groups- to unite fordefensive action. ‘I-Iartand 3

-    .2‘: ,.
-u_=--...--..1E.--..- q._ ..._5..e.n.--.5‘ -1;‘ 2defensiye; actions were governed by a majority vote taken at a council of

leaders of the bands or groups united in that endeavor. (Trans. 13. LL61).

T Some corrmerce e§.sted between the groups, articles such as tule, arrowheads

and yea wood being traded.
These groups or hands, each containing one or more wdllaces, were

Primarily the land- owning , land-us ing units .

 
Evidence :

 Ex. NOS.  B-l?’ Po 

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 815 - 822

Trans. p. l7l, Omer C. Stewart: "Actually we I-<:no'r.-I from our facts since
that the Atsugewi a'.L2':~.ost universally learned achomawi and did communicate in Achomawi. together. -?i~X-1<- Q. So that in that sense the
Achomawi branch of it is common to both in the sense that they have
learned it, the southern group have learned it? A. The 1'7.-Io southern
groups of the Pit River Indians learned the speech of _the nine northern
groups. -‘.-:-X-X-." '

Trans. p. 186, Stewart: "‘I'here are reports that Indians as far away as
the mtreme western edge of the territory did travel to the eastern
edge to participate in the deer drive %-X-}’.- and they took their products
over and left them in exchange for the meats and hides which they
carried back with then.“

Trans. p. 192 , Stewart: "Q. The page number was page 78 of (Pet. Ebc.
No. B-15) -- commencement of the first paragraph and read Q. -'>‘<%% The
Achumawi and Atsugewi. may be considered as forming one single tribe
as far as culture is concerned. -x- -11- You would agree with that? A. That
is right." i s t

>€

TI'8-I13- P- 201-2, Ste?-i’aI'i'»= '.‘*'X-‘é there was a fairly accepted pattern of
local exogamy for marriage purposes, so that frequently an individual
from one band married someone from the next band, that there were thus
ties of lcinship back and forth. -’.’<-1’~'."

Pet. Ex. No. B--9, p. 2, I-iacgregor: “lntertmarriage was undoubtedly the
strongest bond between the different bands.”  i ' ‘ l '

Pet. Ex. No.“ B-16, p. 785 Deangnlo: "There are probably timesiflas
many Achumawi as there are Atsugewi. An estimate is very difficult
because they intermarry ad libitum." i‘  ' " i

dpTTan§.-p.l290-1, tewart: “Ci. Not-t,*Dr.i tewart, did any other bandor
tribelet claim as a matter of right the right to use the larzi of f any
otger band or tribelet or groups other than itsown? t A. No, not as
a and. "

TT"-‘~‘-"-3- P- 575, Voegelin: ”%i->$—X- if the settlements were close together.
that two or three settlements might have a headiran instead of "just A
aheadrrzan for each one of the dispersed settlements e-:sa- and at other
times when some danger thr it-ened several settlements that the headman
‘from these various contiguous settlements would then come tog ether
and decide -- this was spoken of in connection with war — that they
"-'OUl:1 decide whether or not to go to war; and they would meet in a
Scncral meeting.“ h'--f13- P- 201; “bewartz '1-:2-3:-:2 the yew tree grew along tg Pit River at '
the. extreme western end of the Pit Fiver territory and," was fairly
13-W-ted 5-*1 €’~‘I~'.’f»C-3I1’0- ti€"34- But yew wood was used by the India.ns"along the
south fork of the Pit River and the Indians who htnted and lived

-;-.:around agle Lake, in the e.';~:treme westem section.“ .

-0

in
-5
‘Q
I

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 815 ' 823

IO. .5‘-.ntnropometic cephalic and nasal measurements of the Pitt River

Indians are distinct from such measurements of all surrounding Indian

tribes except the Tana Indians on the southwest.

 

Evidence:
Pet. Ens. D-l;'D-2; Trans. p. 205'.

ll. Southwest of the Pitt River Indians were the lane Indians, to the
west were the Wintu or Wintun Indians and to the northwest were Okwanuchu
and Shasta Indians, all merabers of the Shastan J_'i'.npguistic group. North of
the Pitt River Indians were the Modoc and Klamath tribes, speaking Lutuamiamg
to the east were the Shoshonean speaking Northern Paiute, and to the south
were hie I-iaidu Indians belonging to the Penutian nngeeee group. The Pitt

River Indians were usually on friendly terms with the ‘Sana, , Shasta

end‘ eaiuee; they interrarriedllwithllthe Maidu Occasionally- ’enm;ey existed

between these people  one or more ofwthe Pitt River bands or groups as

well as? between the  River bands or groups. _ Ihe Klamath and I-Iodoc were

L enemiesyof the Pitt hirer people, habitually making annualdspring

  sllifre-ptalcin raids eeeseee ' them   enetratin  into, Atsu ewie territo-   . No

I retaliatory? action seems to have been taken but the Pitt. River  did

seekpppdefensive ‘assistance from, the Paiutes.
_  (8) The Klamath and Modoc Tribes and em Iahoosltin Band of Snake

I1'1p<3:18;’1Sl have filed Docket No. IOO withthis Commission wheremmtheyl assert

‘a claim oftoriginal title to a strip along the north end of the area

claimed by petitioner, their alleged southern boundary e.'a:te11d:1ng from

Mt. Shasta northeastward, passing about two miles s>u.th of ‘1"E.edici.ne Lak e

:45.
..-‘E

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815' 82).;

and striking Goose Lake at its southernmost point. That part of the
claimed area lying north of this line was included in the cession
executed by those ribes and that band on October lh, 186b, (16 Stat.
707). (Royoe.Area h62, Calif. 1 Map, Vol. 18, B.A.E.). In Docket No.
215 on file with this Commission the Yana Indians claim original title
to the southwest section of the claimed area,-being all that land lying
west of Hat Creek and south of the Pit River.i

These dockets. presenting conflicting claims to that of petitioner.
are pending trial.before the Commission.

12. The.first record of positive white passage through the claimed

area was made in 1832 by John Work who led a trapping party south along

the east shore of Goose Lake and down the North Fork of the Pit River.

he was followed by Pierson Reading's trapping party" in l$3h. Neither
Work nor Reading mention in their rather detailed daily journals . seeing
Indians or signs of Indian occupancy in the country between Altur-as, C
California, and Goose Lake. with the discovery ofngolld  California

in 18143 and the consequential development of public interest  roads.

and in a railroad route to the coast, trails came into p existence and

in number of government expeditions and surveys were conducted within

this region during the next decade. However, all known journals and
“Ports by persons within the country‘ between Alturas and Goose ;L_al<e
90?“. 1823 through 1873 fail to identify the Indians seen there or whose

PI‘*1:=once was indicated.

1 ‘-:

13- The extreme hostility of the Indians and the rugged and barren
t°P0E3I‘-3P1’13‘ of this country channeled early traffic along four main trails.

'2  rs

.'O:CI
,.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 83.5 825

The Old South Road between Nevada and Oregon, marked in l8L;6, crossed
the northeast corner, passing south of Goose Lake and north of Clear
and Tule Lakes. Lassens Trail was marked in 181:9 along the east side
of Goose Lake, down the hiddle Fork of the Pit River and ‘along the Pit

0

to and across Horse Creek. It continued south passing east of lessens

Peak and turned south:-zest slightly south of Lassens Peak to Lassens

ranch at the ‘mouth of Deer Creek on the Sacramento River. The h9er
Trail branched from Lassens Trail on the Pit river and ran north into
Oregon, passing east of Tule Lake. Noble.‘s Pass Road was marked in

1850 across the southern side, running northwest to Susan River ard west
along that river, then north on the Lassen Trail to apoint north of
Lassens Pea}: where it turned west. Host of the winter settlement sites

of the Pitt River Indians were along the Pit River near the Lassens Trail.

 

Evidence:
1_3e.f.,Ex. No. 663 Pet.'Exs. Nos. P-3, P-h.

111. ' There  four sources ofiinformationi concerning early Indian
occupancy of this area i other than goirernmenttltreprlesentativesh ortscientists.

(a')' In ‘e_ menuecript roareeh the ram-Orr Lznérery, Universitjr tor ‘
California, which it is thoughtone Calvin  a one-time soldier stationed
at Fort Crook who later married a ‘Pitt River Indian woman and settled in
F831 River basin, dictated while incarcerated about 1873 at Lookout, California, it is said that the Paiute Indians occupy the northern third of

35-3 H0?» Springs Valley and that their country "extends north up around and

b<33'0I1C1% C-oose Lake -%-%<-%,’' and that the I~Eodoc country begins a few miles

I ‘__;“I,JI. "5' '

7 Ind, Cl. Corn. 815 - ‘p I i 826

north of the Big Valley, about 15 miles from Lookout, which would place
the 'tt River-Iiodoc boundary some 15 miles south of the claimed boundary.

(b) In his "Life Among the Modocs,“ “Ca]_ii‘ornia Diem,“ and "I-iemories
and Rims," one Joaquin Miller related incidents occurring around 1355-1857
while he resided with a band or tribe oi‘ Indiansiliving on the slopes of
Mt. Shasta, the headwaters of Hccloud River and Squaw Creek Valley. These
Indians spoke a dialect differing from that of the  ltiver Indians 
were independent of them. i _ H‘ i '

(c) J . Goldsborough Brufi‘ recorded in his journa_l of an gold-hunting
trip through this country about 1855 that he met Pah-Iiltahl (Paiute) Indians
at Eagle and Honey Lakes, the latter being about 2S niles southeast of the

claimed area. The parties hereto concede that the main valley of Willow

 

Creek, which rises about 2 miles southeast of Eagle Lake and flows into
Honey Lake,_ is Paiute country. L

I (d) The fourth and most recent source is Edward S. Curtis who spent
some time with the /E.anA1ath, i'tt I-fiver and other Calii'ornia and Oregon

Indians. "'rIritix1g in 1915, he said Medicine Lake was thought to be a "power"

I a place and was visited by Pitt River Indians, Shasta Indians from the northwest”

Wintu Indians of the upper Sacramento River and by Ivlodoc and Klamath tribes to
the north; These Indians also visited the Glass Mountains on each side of
Medicine Lake and the Winta acknowledged the Medicine-Glass Mountain area as
Moaojo country. Curtis said the Hewissaitu (Hewisedawi) group or .‘oo.na of Pitt
River Indians occupied the Pit River valley from about ten mileswest of
alturas toabout 20 miles north of turas; The Northernlimits so assigned

I 3 to. Eitt River country fallsislightly north of the south end of Goose Lake and

&

''.?.'‘.'?''

. ..._‘

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 813' 827

north of witness Voegel:L1’s line which is based on research among the

Modocs.

Evidence:
Pet. k. B-l0, p. 2353 Voegelin, Trans. 630-9, 888-9; Def. Ex. 37, P. 27,
‘iriiljiaznsong Def. Ex. 1:8, p. 3-1;, Hall's "Anonymous Manuscript”; Def. ‘Era.
25, "Gold Rush‘? by Bruff.

IS. Frequent references to military action and scouting parties within
the claimed area occur in the military records. On several occasions Indians
were followed into or found within the rough lava country north of Fort Crook.
Ihe gact sites where Indians were met with and whether their presence resulted
from habitual use of the country by them or was the result of military maneuvers is not clear. Lieutenant E. G. Beck:-zith, who was assigned the task of
locating a railroad route through the claimed ‘area, mentioned seeing Pah-Utahs
or Paiute Indians digging for roots in the southeast corner of Big Valley in
which the town of Bieber is located._ He then commented in his journal of l8S}_;:

This part of the Sacramezlto has been heretofore termed Pitt
im‘.ver3. and these Indians and the bands lower down it are called

in California, Pitt River Indians, although they claim to be FahUtahs._  ' I I . C I

"  Witneyssg ;Ste‘-:-rarj_t discounted Beckwith’ts identification“ because he said the

  xiagrleg Pgiutep is pronounced phonetically similar  that of a Pitt River’ Indian

village inngthis vicinity. Beckwith also mentioned seeing Indians or following

Indian trails along Hat Creelt (Canoe Creek) ,  and Fall Rivers and other
tributaries of the Pit.

. ' I-Iostilities sometimes existed between the Pitt River Indians P_"3.d__ the
easterly Paiute Indians, but official records reflect that they were usually

friendly. The Paiutes were hired to help defend the Pitt Rivers from Modoc

slave raids ;_ the Paiute Chief, Tefinnerzucca, visited in Pitt River countm;

7 Indo Clo C0171:  ' 

Pitt Fiver Indians were obse.'-::'ved fishing at ?3«'rarnid La.‘-Ce east of the Warner
range. Colonel Wright listed 300 Paiute Indians at Goose Lake in l8S3;
Agent Joel Palmer of Oregon said the I-1o-he-ti:-ras or Paiutes lived south and
east of t e Modoc. Paiute Indians from Honey Lake were reported warning
settlers to leave 'vIil_'Lcw Creek valley southeast of Eagle Lake and Paiutes
from Smoke Creek in Nevada killed a settler on that creek in the l8SO‘s.
Ifaiutes were said to be with the Modoc and Pitt. River Indians during the
Battle of the Infernal Caverns which occurred near the present town of
Bayleys in 1867, that being the final effort of the Pitt River Indians to
prevent white settlement  this area.

16;  The first ‘contact the Indian Department had with the Pitt River

Indians probably occurred during 1851. Conmissionersvwho had been appointed

--......-3'

 tO- adjust Indian difficulties in California sent a man into this region to

contact the Indians. The official journal discloses that he H‘.-J'a.S unable to
find interpreters to tallc with then, and earn not‘ eanen I~Ii‘5.'1 then. Nevertheless, among the 13 treaties negotiated by those Conznissmners there are C 

two treaties signed in all by nine named groups or bands I~IhiCh'hp1lI'p'OI"TJ to cede

the claimed area. (see Royce neae V291; and 395,1  Map, vol. 18;. e.A.a.) 

1“Tone? of  treaties were sub‘sequentlyigratified* _and“ thegnine groups ‘or bands
purportedly ceding this area are not equated faith“  presently known band or
group of Indians. “ C I 
"I-In response to instmctions to learn all he could abodt these Indians and
the prospect of placing than on reservations; agent Stevenson entered‘ this 4
°°”n.tTY in 1357. His lengthy report reads in part: it i a _ . ._ . There are at least two thousand whol speak the same
E ‘language and are part and parcel of the same tribe. On

,;_E‘1:at Creek which empties into Pit River about ten miles
iron the fort (Fort Crook) there are about five hundred.

7‘ Ind. Cl. Corn. 815' 8"?

On Fall River and the other branches that runs through
the Valley'below the canyon this side of Big Valley about
four hundred. In the Big Valley something about eight
hundred and in another valley to the east called Grasshopper Valley about t -ee hun red, making in all about
two thousand.

Grasshopper Valley lies between the ltiadeline Plains and Eagle Lake;

a scout through this region in 1868 by Lieutenant Colonel Baker‘ found no

Indians in that vicinity.

Evidence:

Plf. Ex. No. N’-3(3) Stevenson's letter.

Trans. p. 686, Madeline Plains discussed.

Trans. p. 6140, ‘i'Iright‘s 1863 Indian l_istir1g3 Def. k. 16,
Trans. p. 639, Bru_'£‘:E"s report; Def. Ecs. 25; lh, p.-55-.56.

Trans. 'p. 61.13, ‘.*Iinnemucca visited "w‘.3.‘th Pitt River Indians and aband
of. Pitt. River Indians fished at Pyramid Lake in Nevada during 1860.
Def. ER. 72, Lt. ‘.~Ieatherlow's report of murder by Smoke Creek Indians.
-Trans. p. 893 and Def. Etc. 15, p. 25'-6, Feilner reports Paiutes are to

assist Pitt River Indians and that they help butcher cattle in West
Valley. I

Trans. p. "613, Chapman reports Honey Lake Paiutes threaten settlers in is
  ‘Willow Valley. .  — , p .o y I
Crook"; 1867, Def.’ Exs. 55'. p. 68-93 1:2; op‘. l5'3-S; L»,o,3eo1o-rith. Plf. Exs.
   ,~ p. .r 2 3 13-15, p- kl; Battle of Infernal Caverns _}:j.th jvlodoc , “Pitt p
River and Paiute Indians, Trans.’ p. 6714. ‘i    ' is ‘d I  o

 ; ,l'?. ._Dr. ‘Omar C. Ste;-:art,y,Professor of Anthropology atthe University of

  Gtlertder  ant 1?r-  ‘%?aeelers.y "7F’..e$°?5-P’. Pr°-f-'¢$S?rs °f tHi§?°rY at.‘-" the

  .ttp_AUniYersity of Indiana and Director of p the pereatp pp Lalcesm-CpJhio  Research
Project being conducted there, testified as expert iwitnesseshfor petitioner
and defendant, respectively. Both are ...ighly qualified anthropologists.
13355 p3;’0eI-fart has conducted an element culture survey among the Northern
Paiutes and a food-source study among the Pitt River Indians. Dr. Voegelin

has conducted a limited study among the Pitt River Indians and has done

research among the Hodoc Indians. Each has collected and studied data

a.''‘‘'-- .

7 Ind. Cl. com. 819 ~ . 83o_

concerning these and neighboring Indians. Much of this data and numerous
plats and maps illustrative of it as interpreted by these witnesses are in
etidence. Dr. Stewart supervised the work of placing upon a map all Indian
"village sites within the claimed area, relying upon archeologioal evidence,
reports and Indian in.formants, but not, however, giving the dates of occupancy. Dr. Voegelin prepared a list of all references to Indians or signs
of Indians within this area appearing in data originating bet:-ren 1823 and
1873 where such locations may be ascertained and the Indians identified
 reasonable accuracy. Based upon their respective studies Dr.- Stewart
testified it was agreed by the Achomaui Indian and his Paiute informants that
the summit of the Warner range was the division line between their‘ country,
but he had difficulty in placing a boundary about and south of the Madeline
Plains. He thought Pitt River Indians used, occupied and held original
title to the entire claimed area and he assigned each of the eleven named
groups or bands a ‘definite section which he said they controlled. Dr.
Voegelin “limited the areas of use and occupancy  tracts along the Pit

and Fall Rivers, Hat and Barney Creeks, a marshy area about Fort Crook I

which stood about 7 sea above the month or Fall V creehii-on Jlulyil l, 1857,

to ‘April 20, 1869, an area near Bear Mountain m the ilara flow-I: between Bartle

and E-Ihite Horse, California, and to Goose Valley between the Pit River and
Bumey Creek. Stewart‘ s village sites appear on Petitioner's Ebchibit No.

. ‘at: ‘F ‘T 1 v ‘
P-33 his band or group areas are outli_ned on Petitioner's Exhibit A-lA.

Voege3jn's locations and areas of occupancy are described and appear in

1' L1-. .‘

Defendant's Exhibits 6?, 68 and 68A.

c-.-_-u

Endence: . _
5;St.e_e also, Trans. p. 73-96, S22-23, tewart; and p. 6118, Voegelin.

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 83l

18. A number of anthropologists and other scientists have done field
work among the Pitt River Indians and their neighbors. Only C. Hart Harri .
in his 1925 publication “Classification and Distribution of the Pit B‘iver

Indians," rred 3. Kniffen in his .1928 publication "Achomawi Geography,"

and the Witness Omer 0. Stewart have designated boundaries between the

I eleven autonomous Pitt River groupings. Thomas R. Garth in his 195 3

_”Atsuge'.-ri Ethnography" has separately bounded the Aporige and Atsuge.

A. L. Kroeber in his l92S-1929 "Handbook of the Indians of California”

separated the‘ Achomawi and Atsuge:-Ii territories. Merriam’ s work repre~ sents 20 years of. research among California Indians as a whole, and refleets field work among the Pitt Rivers. Knieffen did field work during

L and 1939 among Pitt River Indians whose ages ranged from 35 to 90-93’

years. i dtewart relied upon his documentary studies and field work among
 together '1-.‘_l'i'bh information from one Achomawi. g He has in general
adopted ;Knif.'£‘enf_ps'gi.Iu1er boundaries, extending the lines as necessary to reach

his-nniccfncept of theouter  of Pitt River country. Kroeber did wo1°h

      12 years -mh Indians in camiomia :_:;:  .3e"iteIfal linguistic maps purport to bound Pitt River country. J. W.

9; .: 44‘. 

I 1891 map was reissued in revised form to conform to  B.9M1i3i_xon’s

 publication which is based upon field work among northern Maidu and

Atsugeni Indians. John R. S:-ranton's 1952 map was prepared to illustrate his
"Indian Iribes of North America." Julian H. teward's map appeared in 1937, I
Harold C. Diver‘s in‘ l953 and Voegelin‘s in l9hl. Linguistic" maps ai;-r”e
usually drawn to a small scale and with insufficient attention to topographic
detail to be of material assistance in arriving at small area boundaries such

as concern us in the present instance.

 

7__ End. Cl. Com. 815 _ . . 832

The Hatsugewi-.échomawi. Division Line

19. The territory claimed to have belonged to the Atsugewi extends
from Lassens Peak on the west to an area about Eagle Lake on the east and
takes in part of the Pitt River drainage to the north. Garth's concept
of Atsugewi country in this region, according to his atsugewi informants,
includes an area west of Lassens Pw,  the west boundary line going
almost due north across numerous streams which flow into the Sacramento
River, and is in conflict with the conclusions of all other students of
 area. He said the Yana owned Montgomery Creek and that Pitt River
 Yana Indians jointly exploited the nearby land. Kniffen gave both .
liontgomery and Hatchet Creek drainage to the lane. Merriam‘ s acceptance
oi‘ Hon Lgomery Cree}: as a Iana-Pitt River boundary is sharply criticized
in the l93h "Notes on the Chzlture of the Yana," which is an article begun
by Dr. Edward Sapir and completed after his death by  Spierwfrom
Sapir’s notes of field work among the lane. _The Yana claimed the drainage

of the Sacramento River and Montgomery Creek, and Spier concluded that the

I boundary probably laid between Montgomery and Hatchet Creeks,  the area

- between Hatchet Creek and Pit River to the north a no-man‘ s land.

There is no evidence that Atsdget-Ii used any land west of the Pit and
Sacramento drainage divide or on Montgomery Creek. According to 'Garth‘s
i.nf:>'%ts they controlled the country from Lassens Peak to‘ within one
mile; of the present town of Carbon, California, then east to Bald I-Iountain",
and on to Black Mountain. It is evident they hunted on the northern slopes
of: i,_asse:1s Pea}; but they are not shown to have gone beyond; it. ;Their

villages, which Kniffen describes as "clusters of winter houses ," were

‘ I’
-'_u-._...;c..

7 Ind. cl, Corn. 815’ i 833

I and Lost Creeks. A line extended from the headwaters of E-Iontglomery Creek to‘:-rithin one mile south of Carbon, passes
slightly north‘:-yard of the most 1-Iestem _h..tsuge settleuent on Phlrney Creek
and leaves to the north the immediate valley of the Pit River where the

Achomal-Ii are knot-In to have had village sites.

The westernmost Aporige village was on Beaver creek. Another on

' Horse creek controlled an area about 12 miles in width extending south

to the Bogard Butte, adjoining Atsuge land on the west, with the Atsuge-F‘
Aporige line extending south to Snag I..a_ke,_ according to Garth. Merriam

is in general agreement with Garth's {Ltsuge-Aporige line running east of

the hea waters of Montgomery creek, his line extending with more exactitude P
2:,-l/.1; miles north of the Burns}; postoffice, and striking the "lava mountains"

on the south 12 miles east of.‘ Lassens Peak, which is the approzieimate lo ; cation of. Snag Lake.-P

 

Evidence: S

'1 Garth, Pet. Ebc. B-3, p. 130, where Atsuge holdings are said to extend

from the western rim of Bumey Valley to the tableland east of Hat
_ Creek, south to Snag Lake, including the north half‘ of Lassens Peak,
and north to about a mile below:-I Cassel, California. Also (p. ll6'  ll?) the-'I.umug'ista village is said to controlthe land from‘ Tamarack
Peak to and including the west half.‘ of Blacks mountain; Atspagini
'_ village ‘ is i said to have controlled the-land along Rising River from
a mile south of Carbon to Bald I-Iountain; the ‘.~Iu.mici village (K.ni_i‘i‘en * s
Neya site) is located 1/2 mile north of Burnley. P
331311’, Pet. Ex. C-12, 33. 2140-21:3: “-::-x-::- we may surmise ‘that the area of
Hatchet creek and northward to Pit River was a no-@ ‘ s land -X-X-X-.
M0-nt80meI'y Creek -4%-Xe‘? 3-‘ our evidence seems to have been clearly regarded by the Northern Yana as their home.", ,

Kniffen, Def. Ex. 8, p. 303: "T‘ne'_5«* (the Atsuge) occupied the southwestern portion of the territory; the vaHe:r of Hat Creek, Di‘:-d.e
Valley, and the region about Eagle l-al-ce. The no Atsugez-ti. groups
'-'«“*‘«t were on friendly terms, though the boundaries between them were
strictly respected."

 

7 ‘Ind. Cl. Com. 815' ' 83).;

I-‘ierriam, Pet. Ex. B-'7, p. 36 and attached map. The boundary is said
to start at the southwest comer of Goose Valley, run to Lookout
Mountam, then east between Bald Mountain and a hill immediately
north, than southeast to the east side of Grass Valley, southwest
through Poison Lake to the lava mountains l2 miles east of Lassens
Peak. The Atsuge’s western boundary is fixed along the SacramentoPit river divide.

20. The area around Eagle Lake was described by Dr. Voegelin as a
transition area wherein conflicting claims of the Maidu, Pitt River and
Paiute Indians and ownership or usage rights had not crystalized before
the white man's influence intervened. About ten miles east of Eagle Lake
is Horse Lake. The Fredonyer Mountains run north and south between them.
Within two miles of each lake branches of Willow Creek rise and flow into
Honey Lake, some 25 miles southeast of Eagle Lake. Honey Lake also receives the flow of Susan kiyerswhich rises about 15' miles east of Lassens
Peak. Pine Creek, which flows into Eagle Lake, heads immediately north
of  within a few miles of the head of Susan River. Northeast of Eagle
Lake and about 20 miles away is I~1cDonald Peak, with the desert area known
as the Madeline Plains immediately west of it. Southeast of the Plains

andwabout hfouri miles north of Eagle Lake is a barren alkali g flat known as

g Grasshopper Valley. The claimed boundary line, which is Stewart's line,

runs from McDonald Peak south, crosses ’w’i_'!.low Creek about midway between
Eagle and Honey Lakes and then runs west along the north rim of Susan
31%;: drainage.

 There is little first-person documentary evidence of Indian occu- P oi‘ this region. Paiute Indians lived around Honey Lake and with
others from Smoke Creek to the north, laid claim to Willot-I_< Creek valley.

Both Pi t River and Paiute ‘Indians raided in tin vicinity of Honey Lake

? Ind. Cl. Com. 315 835

about 1860. Bruff found Paiutes at is
almost deserted Pitt River Village stood in Grassiopper Valley in looo
but no survivors were known to exist. He did not visit this site but is
supported in its existence by Kniffen who depicted a large settlement
near'snat appears to be the north side of t.e Valley, probably relying
upon Stevenson's report in 1857 of a large lndian sett_ement there.
However, Lieutenant E. G» Becknitl made several scouts through this region
in l85h Without encountering Indians about Butte Creek, Pine Creek, nagle
or Horse Lakes or Grasshopper Valley.

(a) After spending three summers doing field work with the Laidu
Indians during 1902-S, iron was convinced they owned the small lakes,
lcinder-cone and lava-flow country east of Lassens Peak, and the Susan

- 1

River Valley; that.their hunting parties continually'visited Pine Creew

\.

diand Eagle lake out did not venture beyond‘Willon Creek east of the lake.
gs tnought the ?redonyer'Eountains was the eastern limit of Haidu country;
T }Merriam.considered the main peak of these mountains, Fredonyer Hountain, .n
qlan identifying boundary object, but as between Paiute and aporige rather

‘“ “than the Paiute and.Haidu. lDr.lKroeber, whose writings indicate he_had

ii‘* Pitt River informants, described this region as offering difficulty to a

carteographer but he thought that the Atsugeui “probably” used it and all

C_the country'south_to Feather River drainage for huntino and gathering
Purposes. At one time he placed the Paiute-iporige boundary east of
Eorse Lake, at another time he located it West of that lake and again
his line bisected Horse Like. Kroeber is now in accord with witness

Stewart, according to his testimony'before tlis Commission in l9§

 

0-:

7 Inc. cl

Cl. Com.

In ezxrplanation of his boundaries, Dr. Kroeber said in his “E-Zandcoo}:

oi‘ .G::ierica_n Indians":

‘<€€->f- The back couI1try' was visited and owned, but not settled.

solid color on the maps accordingly gives a one-sided irapression of the relation oi‘ znany California tribes to their
‘ itat. 7

This is particularly true 03'.‘ the .=1;cho:na:»ri,l all of whose
territory is high and comparatively barren as soon as the
stre-a...s are left behind, *.-rhile a large part of it, particularly to the north oi‘ Pit River, is pure waste lava.

For this reason the ‘boundaries of achor.1e.t-Ii land are of
little sign.:':.i‘icence compared with an understanding of the
*'"-“Fro”.-.-' tracts actually dwelt in.

a--ch'''--¢.

.51 full third of the State (of California) is thorough
desert, substantially desert, high mountains, bare lava
flot-I, or dense timber. In all these environzuents the
population _;::1s of the slenderest. Gena’ ally such regions
were not even inhabited except in oasislike spots; and

that the traps in the present and other volumes shot-I continuous territories rather than these significant oases

is not because the areas have been thought to be inhabited,
but because ignorance of precise conditions of habitation
has rendered other delineation impracticable for most of
the State. ?.‘veryth.":'.:1g east of the Sierra, its entire upper
portion , most of the northeastern angle of the State,
belong to these thinly populated regions,

In as as

.y_;..v. .

 described the Ioiadeline Plains as a ”great, treeless, dry

bolson," a “sort of no-man's land, only the rzoister margin being visited

v'VO

in summer for the gather_ni -'3 of roots." 12'."-.5 boundary

east’-3':‘ro.:.:; L-'.ZcDonald Peak to Snowstorm I-iountain which is east of Horse M “e
a..-d then across Zfillotvr Creek about z:u'.d:~:ay bet:-Ieen ‘Eagle and Eioney '.~'..a2«<.es.

-_:(b) '£‘.::‘1'.sting data does not permit the fixing of occupancy dates

for ' the tillage site

VP 0

muffen located at the mouth of Pine Creek on Eagle

9-Iv.

‘~71

Lake, on ,._......ow Cree}: at the perimeter of the clairaed area or for the

836

line is platted south7 Ind. Cl. Com. 83.5 83?

Garth-E‘Lni_ffen site north of Grasshopper alley other than that the latter
was occupied about l888, but no survivors existed in l9S3. The Pine Creek
settlement was abandoned at “an early date ,” and while Garth’s i_n_i‘ormants

in l953 recalled the ’vEillon' Cree}: settlement, it may well have been established long after the alleged time of taking complained of. Colonel

Baker found no Indians in this area on a scout through it in 3.868. The
nearest Maidu villages appear to have been around Susanviue on the Susan

River some lS miles south of Eagle Lake.

 

Evidence:

Voegelin, Trans. 13. 638-6149; ‘Map, Pet. 34:. P-9A; Garth, Pet. E.."~C. B-3,
p. 176-7; Kniffen, Def. Ebz. 8 and attached nap; Beclr:-.«rith‘s reports,
Def. Ex. ho, p. 145, 149, S8 and Def. ‘ :. 58; Ditcon, Def. E:-cs. S0, S1;
Merriam, Pet. Ebc. B-7, p. 36-38, and attached map; Kroeber, Def. Ebt. 9,
p. 305, et seq., Sp. 11,90; Pet. Ex. 23.13-1955-l, Kroeber map; Hacgregor,
Pet. Ex. B-9, ‘D. 6; Stewart, Pet. E-C. P-?.

Q

21. Petitioner has included ‘S-I'i‘['.hi.-'1 the claimed area the slopes of
Mt. Shasta which are drained by the I-Iccloud and Sacramento rivers and the
headwaters  those rivers. Dr. Stewart ac1<:r1oz—rledged' that this section
was occupied by "speech relatives" of the Pitt Rivers. The pdei‘endant

contends the‘ were a separate “entity and their presence there is incon- '

sia.;a-;  petitioner's ¢1a;:mi”or aboriginal title to‘ this ‘region. The
’Te'*«;Z;t.dence ‘establishes conclusively that these people were lmoé-In‘ as Okwanuchu 3
that they occupied the upper reaches of 8 the Sacramento and 8McClou‘d Pivers
and Squaw Cree}: 8valJ.ey3 that they hunted on the adjacent slopes of Mt.
Shasta. 8 Joaquin Miller lived with than between l8SS' and l8S7 and wrote of

them in his "2-femories and Bime," "Ca._:L7 'fO@8- D5-E‘:-173,7," and “LEe among the

Inodoc.“ Their existence was reco;-gnized by Powers, Dmon, Kroeber, Stanton,

-31
f4
,3
n.
I
""3
rd
0
('3
o
523
O
rn
f...J
um
co
to
C)

Merriam, a.d by Core Eu3ois in her report during 1953 of research among

the'¥intu group. lhey were a separate and independent people according
to DuBois as late as l8?2, when the Modoc are reported to have extinguished them.

22. According to Kniffen's informants many of the separate divisions of the Achnmawi hunted westward "to Mt. Shasta," obtained obsidian at the Glass Mountains and visited Medicine Lake. For this reason
he did not extend his inner boundary lines in this region out to the outer
line depicting the Pitt River northern limits. Stewart extended Kniffenis
lines to the perimeter of the claimed area. Documentary evidence of Pitt
River Indians encountered in this region does not identify*their group or
band affiliation. Dixon's informants said the Achomawi were “pretty
closely restricted to the valley of the Pit river," but that they'hunted
west as far as "the head of the Hccloud and.Ht. Shasta, north to Medicine
Lake." Kroeber thought it was "linely" they hunted west to Et. Shasta but
said their northern territorial limits were “particularly Vague and immaterial." According to Nerriam's informants the Pitt Rivers owned the

country east of a line running north on the divide between Bertie, Calif°?ni3» and Bear Ekmntain up to a point 16 miles north-northeast of Bartle

.On a line extending hetween.Mt. Shasta and Goose Lake opposite the mouth

0

Fandango Valley; Their limits followed along this line, up Fandango

$311”? to the crest of the'Warne§s and south.along the crest. They

"3. 3"-\ ' 5 . . . o .
~~‘~-ad to fight the Modocs near-Medicine Lake. Conflict in that area is

O
a..

(‘I "“ "3 "' 7 ‘vs .. 9 . 0 ~ 1 «'”‘°*f’ ~URP0.ted by Gatchet‘s report that tne "Shast1,.dodoc and Trinity

"\C

*¥‘sF_iUd1ans” battled for possession of an obsidian quarry north of Mt.

7 Ind. Cl. Con.3l" 839

I

Shasta and the fact that the Jintu, who also visited the lake, understood
it was in hodoc territory; It lies within the Klaroth and Hodoo tribes

and Yahooskin Snake cession of l86h, and Kniffen thought the only point

in the Pitt Rivers claiming so far north ”be"ond the limits of utilization”
was their use of Glass Mountain obsidian. Much of the country he bounded
as Pitt River land he said.was "never reached because it ere afforded
nothing they could use." Dixon also referred to “the southern edge of

the lava flows” as their northern limits. .Merriam reported the eastern

autonomous Achomawi hunted westward.to.Ht. Shasta, thus passhig ‘north of

the village sites of their more western neighbors.

(a) Control of the Goose Lake region is also much disputed. The
five Achomawi village sites reported near it bear no occupancy date and
their existence.in this outlying and exposed region prior to the nhite
man7SwarTiVal is suspect because of the Hodoc raiding parties which
passed nearby on their way to procure slaves.g Travelers in this region.
’oe‘cweenl8S3 and 1873 failed to identify the Indians north of Alturas.
Calvin Hall placed the Hodoc—Pitt Biver‘boundary'lS miles north of‘Loohout'
and Said the Paiutes occupied the northern third of BiggValley and alll
5903? Lake country3_ Curtis-gave the Pitt Rivers a northern limit 20 miles
north of.Alturas. Paiute interest in the region is confirmed by'Qatchet‘s
1890 report that Goose Lake was the prinoipalfresort of Snake and.Pitti
Rivers and'by Isabel Kelly who, after research among the_Northern Paiute
in Oredon said.that the Paiute hunted west of the'Harner range although
they Claimed no land there. She described the Sugar Hill eastcufthe south

end of Goose leke,°as ”indisputahly'Achomawi.“ Kroeber‘s division of the

. - -n-----a—-_..-.__-.. ..— -—--- "'-u-tu-"

74:.
:2»

 

't.....e.7’ End. Cl. Coat. 815' 83.3,

1'

Goose lake ‘oetneen 3‘-Eodoc, Paiute and Pitt River Indians is admittedly a
"co:aprozrise" line. The 1'-Eodoc claimed the count.r:,rl to about five miles

south of the laZ»<:e according to witness Voegelin and her l9hl line shown

on Petitioner’s Etdiibit P--'? is based on research among then.

(b) The Warner Range. Djbcon confined the Pitt River Indians to

 

the drainages of the Pit and its tributaries; 'i~Eerriam considered the
division line’ between Pitt River and Paiute country followed the crest
of the 'E.~Ia_rner range to Buckhorn Mountain near Mosquito Greek. Kniffen
wrote:
To the east lies the Warner range, certainly not a

great barrier, but a climatic and cultural line and a

convenient boundary. It is an area of little importance

‘from th 1:d.e=.s'point of subsistence and ;3robably was not

regularly visited.

Witness Stewart adopted Merria.ra‘s ezmressed view.-Isl.

tchere are undated village sites reported west of Bald I¥Iounta_in at
the north end of the Warner range and south of Alturas. Another site is
on the South Fork of the Pit River east of West Valley and another on
Cedar Creek ’S~1’hiCh‘f1OWS into the South Fork from the south. Yet another
is north of I*IcDonald Peak where the Pit River Indians 1fisited'du_ring

“Pm-'€I‘" “quests.
Eiumerous linguists and other scientists have drawn or described
other Pitt River boundaries, particularly along the Warner range.’ It

ztust be borne in mind that all such boundaries are fixed with a. broad

‘iic-.' of territorial division and do not t.=_’«:e into consideration those
1 an 1 ' as __  _ . . ,
c......r..m,..» of exclusive use, occupancy and control which it is required

7'Ind. l. Com. 8lS' 834,1

ence: .
."bert Gatchet, Def. Ex. 26, p.'l, lixg
Dixon, Def. Exs. 7, S0, S1 and plat; Pet. Ex. B-12;
Kroeber, Pet. Exs. B-l, A-3K, ALK-l9§S—l; Def. Ex. 9, p. 305,
r’-:

31?; Trans, p. ;l9—S2l;
herriam, Pet. ex. B-7 and Def. Ex. 52;
Knif_en, Def. Ex. 8, p. 301-318, Pet. Ix. B~2;
Isabel Kelly. Ethnology of Surprise Valley Paiutes, Pet. Ex..A—l8,

C-3; Trans. p. 672, 379;
   EX. P"’7o

 

23. (a) Itsatawi. A group of about 150 people living in C-oose iralley
and lower Burney creek valley in the bend of the Pit ‘river were called
Itsatawi by Krrlffen but considered a part of a group called To-nah-li_n-1-ohe-_-moi
by Merriam. I-z'ithj_n less than a mile northward were Iiadesi villages and Ilmazezi
village sites were but little farther northeast. itsuge bounded them on the
south. Itsatawi fished for salmon in the Pit, hunted toward Kt. Shasta and
obtained obsidian at Glass Eéountain near Medicine Lake. They were particularly _fri endly 1~zith the Hadesi‘, intermarrying with then and exhcphangin g hunting ,
5-'i3hi.1}8'5’~n.d Other privileges. pi |- I a  ,. L  

(b)# Eéadesi. Pitt River Indians li'~::3_*1g around the big bend of the

 

River occupied the southwest corner of the Achoma:-:i territory. They T.-‘.'f?.‘r.‘~'.'-1?.

called ‘iladesip by Knl 1' if en and Itiodesse by E-ierriamp who suggested the -I possihlepsi

existence of two southern subébands called A-me~che and B—poogde. Spier
has since identifiedrall these people as Hadesi. Each village site was
Gwned by'an individual who permitted communal hunts under his leadership.
. The Madesi obtained salmon in the Pit, hunted toward Mt. Shasta and on the
‘Waters of Kosh and.Eelson creeks. They'visited Glass Hountain. Elma

Okwanuchu and hintu.ad'oined them on the west’ the Yana Itsatawi and.
_ ) :

Atsuge on the south.

.: "
*¢':;~u=,;m

(c) T7 aml. East of the I-Eadesi and primarily occupying Clayton

J""'*‘:>

 

Valle"? were the Ilma:-si. 1-ierriazn. do‘-.1‘ot.'E‘ully extended their country north
to Bear Mountain, and divided it bet:-:e;en Ilmaz-Ii and To:r.ahlinche1noi , but

if distinction once existed between these people they have not otherwise
been recognized. Knii‘.t‘e.n made no attempt to fin: northern territorial
limits. Merriam said their country was reported to reach Bear Mountain.
The Ilma':»:i hunted toward  . Shasta, deer being plentiful in the northern
part of the claimed ter..itory assigned to them. - They obtained salnon from

the Pit River and visited the Iiedicine Lake country.

Cd) Achomae-ii. The .’%.choma*.ri proper inhabited the country east of the

 

Ilmawi. T eir village sites were along the Pit and Fall Fiv ers and the

eastern side of the lava flow which protrudes into their country from the

 

north. They also hunted to‘;-rard Mt. Shasta and visited Glass I~'Iou.ntair1 and

Iiedicine L&e, and fished for salmon in the Pit.

 

‘(e) At:-ramsini. East of the Achomawi. were the At:-Iamsini I-Jhose village
sites were principally in the desert area called Big Valley north of ‘Bieber,
California. a They hunted deer on the mesa north of the Pit, approached Ifit.
Shasta on elk hunts, and obtained obsidian at the Glass Mountain. T

(3) Astariwaui. Northeast of the Atwansini were the Astariwawi.

 

:I:1iffen found they did not exceed 200 in number, occupying three villages
3.-cog the Pit R_'LV€I' and one about eight miles west of Alturas. They
v;.:~.1t«.,-d C-lass Iviountain and Sugar Hill for obsidian and shared hunting and

i5H“,‘ ‘*0 ’ . , ‘ on-«.orLng sites belonging to otner groups, although deer and small game

t"""~53“¢g;I33.ve_nti_-"ul in the mesa north of their villages. Fishing was important

130 ‘horn.

7 Ind. Cl. C039 C15 erg

(g) I.e:-;'iscds.:-:i. '.€‘he Hc:~:':Lseda*.-r3'., estimated ‘oy Kniffen at l7S souls,
occupied the country northeast of  .!%.stari'-.~ra=.-ri. They hunted on the
slopes of the Warner range and several of the undated ivillage sites
assigned to them are about Goose lake. They considered Sugar  a
sacred spot , and I-Eerriazn. reports battles with the Paiutes occurred in
adjacent Fandango valley. Their principal rancheria was some si_'>c or

eight miles north of Alturas, Ca7_ii‘ornia.

(h) Kosalektawi. The Kosalel-:ta*.-Ii were centered about tire junction.

 

ofthe North and South Forks of the Pit River, where fishing was particularly good. ' Fishing pr’vileges were exchanged wi oh others for right to

gather food in. other areas.

. (i) Hamman . The Harnzaa:-Ii were centered about the South Fork of the

 

Pit River. They and the Kosalekt ‘Hi and Hezrisedaz-Ii each used the foothills
ofgthe Warner range. Their main settlements were about the present town

of likely and in tin flat-‘oottomed swampy fault va£eys ofp ess and West.

«grcora DuBois located an.undated ?illage.site a short distance north of

McDonald Peak.

-1-‘. c

snaamegi
}1erriam,‘rPet. . B-_-'? 3 Iiuiffen, Def‘. Ex. 83

 

21:. Etxcept for the area near Muck Valley which lies north of the
Pit and opposite the mouth of Horse Creek, the A.tsuge:~7i'. were excluded
from the Pit Fiver. Kniffen, I-Eerria:1 a.n:3. Ste‘;-rart are in fair accord as

to the division line between its ge'.=.*i and Achomawi people and between

the two Atsugex-ai groups or bands. Kroeber i'ound California Indians

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815 ' 8M1

customarily used outstanding peaks :3 or boundary markers. Both Merriam
and  found Lassens Peal»: marked the southwest corner oi‘ Atsuge
country, included Grasshopper Valley in Aporige territory and found
Hayden Fill marked the Aporige-Atwamsini boundary.

(a) The Atsuge occupied the entire drainage of Lost , Hat and

Barney creeks except for a few miles near the mouths of the latter two.

‘ They passed through Ilmawi country to obtain obsidian at Glass Mountain.

(b) The Aporige or Dwe Valley people had villages over a widely
spread area. Fishing was of minor-importance to them. They carried on

an extensive interchange of commodities with their neighbors. D They were

the eastern division of the Atsugewi.

 

 

Evidence: i .
Stewart's village site plat, Pet. Ex. P-3. 
Kniffen, Def. 311:. 8, and accompanying plat. pi  
' Merriam, Pet. Ex. B-7, p. 38: “-It-:'.-It beginning at Hayden Hill, follows
a southeasterly course along the low divide between Dry Valley and
Grasshopper Valley and continues in the same general direction to

the Fredonyer Mountains between Eagle Lake and Horse Lake -I'«-Ht.”
Kroeber, Def. Ex. 9, p. 306: "It was customary for greater peaks to
be regarded by Cali.fornian peoples as the starting point if their
D several boundaries." r. . -  r '
25. From a consideration of all the evidence, including the cultural
status of the Pitt River Indians and the topography of their country, and
applying a common sense approach to the determination of boundaries for
thoséa areas wherein the eleven autonomous bands or groups dwelt and held "

the§_land under such exclusive use occunenc and control as to create
_ 3 - 37'

original title thereto, and having recourse both to natural objects and

modern survey lines for the purpose of more accurately bounding .the areas

referred to; the Cc:z:n:?.ss;c-n finds

eleven autonomous groups or ‘oa.-ds

respective group,

' 3'1 title are descrfc

* the point of beginning.

'1

&

.1. —.._" .1.
o0-':.*..*-o2

at the summit of Lassens Peak and

-..g the g:i'vide be 2-Ieen the drainage of
the Sacramento and Pit Rivers to the easternmost point on
the headwaters of I»Eontgomer3r Creek; thence northeast to
a point 3.;-l/1; miles north of Barney, Cial;Zi'ornia; thence
to a point l mile south oi’ Carbon, California; thence southeast to Bald 'i=1'ountain and to Black Mountain; thence southwest to Snag Lake, and then straight to Lassens Peak, the
point of beginning.

(1) Atsage. Beginning
thence north:-rest alotw

(2) Aporige. Beginning at the summit of Bald mountain and
running thence northeast across the Pit River to Hug Hill,
then east‘:-Iard north of Muck Valley in the bend of the Pit
River to and across said river; thence around the drainage

oi‘ Horse Creek to Hajgrden Hill; thence southeast to the southwest corner of Section 3 , Tov.-.-‘nship 31.; North, Range l2 East;
thence south along the section line between Sections 9 and l0,"
extended, to the to‘-:-rnship line between To:-rnships 33 and 31;; P.
then nest on said tc::«.=‘nship line to its intersection ‘=.-.-‘ith the
range line bet‘:-seen Ranges l0 and ll; ' then southwest to Snag a
lake and north along the east boundary of Atsuge country to

(3) Itsatat-3i. Beginning on the Atsuge boundary line at the 3

i eastern lmit of Montgomery creek dramagei and running thence
3 northward. over Bunch C-rass I-iountain to the P Pit river; thence
3 up said river to a point nest of Barney Spring I‘-fountain; thence

east and across said mountain to the drainage divide between
Hat and Burney creeks; thence southward over Brush I'€.ountain
to a point on the Atsuge north boundary’ _ine S miles west of
Fall River; thence along the Atsuge boundary line west and
south to the point oi‘ begb ing.

()4) Madesi. Beginning at the corner of Atsuge and Itsatawi
territories on the headwaters of Montgornery creek and running
thence north and west along said drainage and the divide between Montgomery and Hatchet creeks to and across the Pit '
river to the divide "oet*:~:reen the Pit river and Squa:-I creek;
thence north=.~:ard along said last di"~ri.de to Grizzly peak;
tnence northeast to Bartle, Ca.._ii"ornia; thence southeast‘; to
Curtis lake at the head of Kosh creek; thence in a straight
line to Barney Spring I-.’£o tain south of the Pit river; thence
along the northern itsuge boundary line to the point of beginning.

 

"=6. as set out below following the name of eac

ix-‘er .'Zndians under original

1

fl

8

\ 4-?

esoective tracts held by said

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 81''

—-I -' . ' rho. . one-3- . '3‘ "IL Ah -5‘ ,3 ‘ ‘
(S) llzna‘.-:1. 'r.3e~'.:.r_-.-:ang (:10 the northeast corner 0.1. 4-.-.ane '=
  W .

s..
country at Bart" , Ca._ii‘c-n.3.a, and zunning thence southeast
by :-Jay oi‘ direc' lines i‘
Bald Iiountain a ' 3
thence 1-zestward "lo _g the .-’5«.tso.ge boundary to the southeast
corner oi‘ Itsatarri country; thence along the b undaries oi‘
Itsata‘:-Ii and Iiadesi countries, west and north, to the place
of beginning.

*'''l

on soldier to Saddle 1‘-Eountains to
"7

r
. L- I‘ n'£|‘?'!§ . 5 —.
runc tier. 0.’. atsuge and Aporige count: ,

(6) Achoznaui. Beginning at Bartle, California, and rurLu‘_ng
thence northeast to a point l6 rniles north-northeast oi‘
Bartle on a line drawn bet:-teen Mt. Shasta and the west shore
oi‘ Goose lake opposite the mouth of Fandango creek; thence
east on a line drawn from said 16-mile point to a point 15
miles north oi‘ the tot-In oi‘ Lookout located in Township 39
Iforth, Range 6 East, to I-3h€l"e a line running south from
Class 2-Eountain (east oi‘ 1'-‘Eedicine lake) over Round Mountain
bisects said line; thence southeast to Taylor 2*-iountain in a
divide between 1-Ihite Horse Valley and Egg laZ'e; and thence
to and along the summit oi‘ Big Valley I-‘Iountains; and south
from the southern extreme i‘ said Mountains to the north
boundary oi‘ Aporige country at a point 2 miles east of the
Pit river northwest of 1-Zuck Val_'Ley3 thence I-zest along the
northern Aporige boundary to '3". ma:-Ii country and northward
along the eastern boundary of Ilna:-ri country to the point
oi‘ beginning.

 

-7 (7) At:-:an1.sini.‘Com1enci.ng at the northeast corner oi‘ Achomaui
territory on a. line extended between a point 16 miles northnortheast oi‘ Bartle, California, and a point l5 rriles north
of Lookout, Caliibrnia, located in To:-mship ho iiorth, Range 6
East, Lassen County, California, and continuing on said line
to said 15-mile point; thence southeast to the mouth oi‘ Pothole
Gully on the Pit river; thence east to Shaeff er 1*-iountain and by
direct lines to Grouse I~Iountai_n, Mazanita Lookout, and a point
designated Fleming's Sheep Camp on Petitioner's‘ Echibit No.
P-9-a; then south around Spooner reservoir and southwest to

Hayden Hill; thence along Aporige and Achomaui. boundaries west
and north to the point of beginning.

(3) Astariwatri. Commencing at the northeast corner oi‘ At:-Iainsini
country lg‘ miles north oi‘ Lookout, Cal:T.i‘ornia; thence""along a
ftraight line to the intersection of the west shore oi‘ "C-oose
..:uce and the 9th Standard Parallel north to a point where said

-.  6'3 ' -ya {'1 L A “‘ '
.....n... lI'1tGl.S€CJGo the range line between Ranges 9 and 10 North,

riodoc County, California; thence to the southwest corner oi‘
Tot-713§"i:3 113 North, Range ll East, in said County; thence east
3 miles; thence south to the Pit river and d rm said river to

 the east boundary of Township 141 North, Range 10 East; thence

 south:-zest to Shaeff er aiountain; then along the Atuansini boundary
north and west to the point oi‘ beginnirxg.

9 -“

I1

7 Ind. ll. cm. 875 8h?

 

9) Kenisedaei. Connencing at th northeast corner of astariwani
o

s‘-'3
"ntry and running thence northeest along a line between a point
il~s north of Lookout, Californi , and the intersection of

t

9. L»:....

shore of Goose lake with the 9th Standard Parallel North,
to sa'd point of intersection on the west shore of Goose lake;
thence alone said parallel to the east shore of Goose lake; thence
southeast to 3ald.Hountain in the'Narner range; thence west to the
site of Surprise Station; then to the Astarieawi boundary 3 miles
east of the southwest corner of Township h3 North, Range ll East,

Lassen County; thence nest and north along the Astarinani boundary‘
to the point of beginning.

or-——¢

(10) Kosalektaei. The Kosalektani were bounded by the Astarieawi

on the west, and the Hesisedawi on the north. Their eastern
boundary ran from.Bald Mountain south to Cedar-Mountain and'Harren
Peak and the south boundary extended west from warren Peak to the ‘a
South.Fork of the Pit river four miles above the mouth of Fitzhugh

creek; thence along a direct line over Opahnah Butte to the southeast boundary of Astariwawi country.

 

 

(ll) Hammani. The H-tmasi'were boundred on the west by the Atuamsini,
on the northwest by the Astarirawi and on the north by the Kosalektawi.
The east and southeast boundary extended from'Warren Peak south by“
straight lines to Eagle Peak, South Emerson lake, the western base of

J Emerson Peak, Buck hountain near hosquito creek and then southwest over
McDonald Peak and to the southeast corner of Section 3, Township 3h
North, Range l2 East, Lassen County, California.

26. Physical possession of the several tracts held by the Pitt River

"3

Indians was taken fron.said Indians by'a gradual process. Disruption of

their usage mayjbe said to have commenced'aith the arrival of the white

Iharis Concentrated military action against them hegehsnthg the “establish-9
ment of Fort‘ ct:-eok in the central "portion of then» ‘coehtxjr is 1857, but

their resistance to subjugation'by the whites did not cease until the

Battle of the Infernal Caverns near the present town of Bayleys, CalifOmia. on September 26-28, 1867, in which battle the Pit River, Modoc,

and Paiute Indians sustained such severe losses that further effort to

Prevent control of their country by the‘whites was impossible.

The entire area here involved lies trithin the territory accguired
of -ieiico in the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo during l8h8. The State
of Cal_ii‘ornia was admitted to the Union on September 9, 1850 (9 Stat.
1452). On iiarch 3, l8Sl, Congress passed the Private Land Claims Act
(9 Stat. 631) requiring registration of all land claims within a twoyear period thereafter. On I-{arch 3, 1853, Congress passedan ”Act to
Provide for the survey of the Public Lands of California and the
Granting oi Pre-emption Rights to Settlers“ (10 Stat. 2L.b,). It has
been previously held that by this latter Act the defendant took such_
action toward the vesting in others of the fee title to Indian land
within California as was possible only by it becoming a part of the

public domain and by extinguishment of Indian title. That date is,

 

therefore , the date upon which Indian title to the land here involved

may be said to have been taken by defendant. Iiohave Tribe V. United

Ii.Statéé, 7 Ind. Clms. comm.2i9,lDkt. 295, and washo Indians v. United

 

States, 7 Ind. Clms. Com. 265, 280, Dkt. 288.

 

 
rxidence: i

Peta EC. E-1, pt  E""'2, po 91,  E-15, pt 38‘hla
27. From the entire record and the Findings of Fact hereinabove
not forth, the Commission finds teat the Pitt River. Indians as an
5~*3’?.I1ti_fiable group of American Indians within the meaning of the

I

:::i5_.:m Claims Commission Act; that the petitioner is qualified to

ii

$‘*I"=~‘¢'£'-“It and the Commission has jurisdiction to determine this reore01 - 3- L ’ o . ‘ - .
.r:.1o.1o.1.ve action, tnat each of tne eleven separate tracts described

‘-1.

7 Ind. CI.. Com. 815 8‘?

in Finding E0. 25 hereinabove were hel under aboriginal Indian title
by one of the eleven separate autonomous bands or groups into which
the Pitt River Indians were divided, as set out in said Finding No. 25,

and that on March 3, 1853, the defendant acquired Indian title from

each of said crouns or bands without a*;ent of comoensation therefor.
O - J.

The defendant's motion for dismissal of the amended First and
Supplemental Petition will be overruled and the parties will proceed‘
to the presentation of evidence respecting the acreage and value as

of March 3, 1853, of each of the eleven tracts described in our Finding

NO. 23; ., ' _. Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Wm; Pic 
Associate Commissionertr

 

