7 Ind. Cl. Com. l

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE QUINAIEIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, on its
own behalf; QUINAIEET TRIBE OF INDIANS
on behalf of the QUEETS TRIBE OR BAND
OF INDIANS; QUEETS TRIBE OR BAND OF

INDIANS, on relation of and represented
by Harry Shale , '

V.

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

Petitioners, ) Docket No. 242

)

3

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA, )
)

)

Defendant.

Decided: December 1, 1958
Appearances:

Kenneth R. L. Simmons, Glen A.
'Wilkinson, Donald G. Gormley,

John M.TMurray3 Attorneys for

Petitioners.

Donald 3. Farshall,'with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry W} Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF'THE CONEISSION

"Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Petitioners herein, The Quinaielt Tribe of Indians, on its own
behalf, and on behalf of the Queets Tribe or Band of Indians, the
latter also on relation of and represented by Harry Shale, timely
filed this suit pursuant to the Indian Claims Commission Act of
August 13, l§#6 (60 Stat. 1049), 25 U.S.C. par 70). Petitioners
seek additional compensation for lands ceded by the Quinaielt and

Queets Indians under the terms of the Treaty with Quinault, etc.,

1855, (12 Stat. 971; E Kappler 719). Petitioners allege that

17

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

Quinaielt and Queets Indians held aboriginal possession, use, and
occupancy of said lands and charge that defendant obtained same by

such treaty cession for a grossly inadequate and unconscionable consideration. In the alternative, petitioners charge defendant with
unfair and dishonorable dealings in obtaining this cession of such

lands. Petitioners allege said lands contained approximately 814,080

acres .

This Commission at the beginning of the trial of this case
approved stipulations as presented by counsel for petitioner and

defendant, and established the following order of procedure:

1. This case, Docket l55, shall be tried and heard
jointly with Docket 242, the Qainaielt Indian Tribe, et
al., vs. The United States. All evidence adduced in
either of such cases shall be available in the other.

2. Defendant‘s original answers shall be considered
answers to 2&1 amended petitions as may be filed in either
of said cases.

3. The issues for determination in this stage of
these proceedings shall be lisnited to the questions of
(1) capacity and rights of petitioner's to maintain this
action under the Indian Claizns Cormission act (60 Stat.
1049) and, (2) what aboriginal areas, if any, did petitioners‘ ancestors exclusively use and occupy. CT:r., pp.

3-6) p The defendant admits that a "so-called Quinaielt Tribe and other
tribes and bands entered into a treaty, known as the Quinaielt Treaty,

with the United States, on July 1, 1855 or January 25, 1856 (12 Stat.

971, II Kappler 719)." (Def. Ans., par. 9). sometimes called the

'6

"Treaty of Olympia. "

I8

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

Although it was not until l855 when Territorial Governor Isaac
I. Stevens entered into treaty negotiations at a council held between
the United States and those tribes and bands living along the Pacific
coast between Gray‘s Harbor and Cape Flattery, that it was then and
there learned that some Indians residing there were different from
their Salishan speaking neighbors. However, the Quinaielt Indians
were recognized by Governor Stevens from the beginning of treaty
negotiations. There was a distinct dialectical difference in the
speech of two young observers from the other Indianspresent. Governor
Stevens directed further investigations be made and learned that these
previously unknowns were Chimakuan speaking Indians residing nostly at
the mouths of the Kwilleyute and Hoh Rivers. (Our Fdgs. 1 and 3,
Docket I55, Quileute Indians)

The natural barrier of their coast line without land—locked harbors substantially prevented any further extended white contact with
them until long after their treaty cession. As late as the twentieth
century there were only well defined trails and the open coast was

harrassed by frequent storms making travel difficult. This area is

one of the largest unspoiled areas of natural scenery in the United

States. (Pet. Etc. 124, p. 12)
The.recognition of the petitioner tribe as an identifiable
group of American Indians is established by the Government records

introduced in evidence in this case. Furthermore, the Quinai lt

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l

and Queets Indians were recognized by the defendant in the Treaty
with the Quinaielt, etc., 1855, sometimes called the Treaty of Olympia
(cit. id.), in the title, preamble, and among the Indian signatory
parties of the Quinaielts, Queets, Hohs, and Quileutes.

Same record of the census of their membership has been reported
by the Government‘s Indian agents and tribal officers from treaty
times to recent decades. The Interior and Insular.Affairs Committee
of the House of Representatives (82d Congress) authorized and directed

a study of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. On page 91, the Quinaielt

"3

are described in the report of this investigation, as follows:

Quinault Reservation

27. Appraisal of Competence
General

A. All of the Quinault Indians are competent to manage their
affairs independently of the Bureau; 370 live on the reservation and 1,500 off the reservation in white communities and
have timber allotments on the reservation.

"B. A.majority of the Indians have already been absorbed into
‘white communities. The few hundred.still living on the
reservation earn their livelihood with very little assistance from the Bureau in the form of services.

Individual

A. A number are self-employed as fisherman. Two or three tan.
and operate small restaurants. Most are fisherman and wxge
earners working in logging camps on and off the reservaiang
in sawmills and on farms off the reservation. Some ex»

tract loggers.
It is also noted that a considerable number of Indians other ;Ena;
the descendants of the aboriginal Quinaielt Tribe were placed on this

Te3eTV%tiOn. The Quinaielt Reservation is entirely situated upon mart

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

of their ancestral lands. (Def. Ex. lO2 and Pet. Ex, 73) Governor

Stevens experienced less difficulty in obtaining the assent of the
Quinaielts to the proposed treaty cession, primarily, according to
James G. Swan, because the Quinaielts understood that they would not

be removed from their lands, but could remain on certain of their

lands to be designated as a reservation for the Indian groups set out
in the treaty.
Defendant's plea of res judicata is not well taken for the

reasons we expressed in the companion case to this case, namely,
Docket No. 155, Quileute, et al., wherein we overruled the same plea,
urged also by defendant in this case, and cited numerous opinions of
a like result where defendant urged the Duwamish judgment (No. F-275,
79 C. Cls. 530) in bar of petitioners‘ claims.

By order entered February l2, l953 we permitted petitioners to

amend their petition, which amendment included amendment of their
boundary description. Such boundary description contained in paragraph 6 of their petition, as amended, reads:

"That upon and prior to July 1, l855 and March 8, l859,
from time immemorial, petitioner owned and occupied a
portion of the lands and territory contained within th
present continental borders of the United States as described in Article 1 of said treaty of l855——said portion
being described, according to geographical landmarks as
then known as follows, to wit:

‘Commencing at a point on the Pacific Coast, at

the southwest corner of the lands owned or occupied, in aboriginal times, by the Quileute Tribe

of Indians, namely, at the mouth of the creek later
named Steamboat Creek and running easterly with

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

and along said creek to its source; thence easterly
along the ridge dividing the watersheds of the Queets
and Hoh Rivers, to the point where said dividing
ridge intersects the crest of the coast range of
mountains; thence southerly with said crest of the
said range of mountains to the point where they
intersect the dividing ridge between the Chehalis

and Quinault Rivers; thence westerly with said ridge
to the Pacific Coast; thence northerly along said
coast to the place of beginning.'"

The foregoing amendment of boundary description by petitioners was
‘urged, and allowed by this Commission, to permit them to separate and.

distinguish their lands claimed from those claimed by Quileutes, et

al., in Docket No. 155. The original petition had.included the whole

of the lands described in the 1855 treaty'cession.executed not alone by

the Quinaielt but also including Quileute Indian parties, et al.

J

On December 23, l955, we permitted petitioners to file their second
amended petition, including amendment of their aboriginal boundary claims

to include the Copalis River areas on the south. (See.Amended Petition

filed Dec. 23, 1955, par. 7), describing their aboriginal boundaries,

as follows, to wit:

Commencing on the Pacific Coast at the mouth of
Steamboat Creek; thence easterly along the crest

of the watershed of the Hoh River to Mount Octopus;
thence easterly along the crest of the watershed between the Hoh River_and Clearwater River; thence
easterly along the crest of the watershed between

the South Fork of Hoh River and Queets River to the
crest of Mount Olympus; thence easterlj to Bear Pass;
thence southeasterly along the crest of the watershed
of the Olympic Mountains to Mount Anderson; thence
southwesterly along the crest of the watershed'between
Quinaielt River and Skokomish River; thence along the
crest of the watershed of the Quinaielt River and the
Humptulips River; thence southwesterly'along the crest
of the watershed between Chepalis or Copalis River

22

7 Ind Cl. Com. l

and Humptulips River to a point on north Bay approximately 3 miles west of the mouth of the Humptulips

River; thence westerly and southerly along the coast
of North Bay to Point Brown; thence northerly along

the Pacific Coast to the place of beginning.

These petitioners maintain they were defenseless, dependent,
ignorant American Indians at the time of the treaty cession of their
lands, July 1, l855. Petitioners further assert they were uninformed,
‘without knowledge of the nature and legal effect of such treaty or of
the market values of their lands and relied at all times upon the
fairness and honesty of the United States and its agents with implicit
confidence. Under such alleged circumstances the‘, together with the
Quileute Tribe of Indians, ceded their lands to defendant for the unconscionable talesnm of $25,000.

FAlternatively, petitioners allege such cession of their lands
was procured by duress in that defendant's treaty representative and
agents lead them to believe they had no alternative but to sign such
treaty for the consideration therein expressed.

There is no evidence of any treaty language or Act of Congress
‘which expressly creates a fiduciary relationship between defendant and
petitioners. ‘We conclude, therefore, that such legal relationship
of guardian and ward, or other duties and obligations of a fiduciary
nature as a trustee were not created between the defendant and these
Indian parties, and has never existed.

In the opinion of Gila River Pina Maricooa Indian Communitv vs. ‘

United States, 1&0 Fed. Supp. 776, the applicable principle here was

clearly stated.

23

7 Ind. Cl. Co». l

Whether or not the legal relationship of guardian and
ward exists between a particular Indian Tribe and the
United States depends, we think, upon the express provisions of the particular treaty, agreement, executive
order, or statute under which the claim presented arises.

The same principle was again asserted by the Court of Claims in
The Sioux Tribe of Indians, et al. v. United States, l46 Fed. Supp.
229. The same principle was controlling on the fiduciary question in
the opinion of this Commission in Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, et al. V.
United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Com. 68.

we further note in passing upon petitioners’ alleged grounds of
recovery that'whatever may have transpired in the minds of the respective signers to the treaty cession, no evidence of acts or other con:
duct amounting to duress is shown from the journal and other accounts
of the negotiations. However, the petitioners‘ allegations of right
of recovery on the basis of unfair treatment and/or unconscionable
consideration may or may not be established by reason of substantial
dispariti, if any, between the $25,000 consideration and the market
value of the land when ceded to defendant.

There is no doubt this record establishes that the Quinaielt and
Queets Indians spoke a common language distinct from their neighbors,
that they constituted a land—using unit of American Indians subsisting upon fish, roots and berries alone the environs of the Quinault
and Queets River in pre-treaty times.

The principal fact issues arise from the aboriginal boundary

evidence in this cause. Petitioners‘ west boundary was the Pacific

24

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

Coast. Their north boundary was general_y defined by the territory
occupied by the Hoh River Indians and is readily capable of determination.

However, determination of three portions of the entire area
claimed by petitioners to have been exclusively used and occupied by
them in aboriginal times is difficult. The south boundary, where
petitioners claim areas which overlap those claimed by the Chehalis
in Docket 237, also the area boundary on the east near the Olympic
Mountains is difficult of determination, as is the heavily forested
areas upland and between the river valleys of the Queets, Quinault,
and Clearwater Rivers. There is no question but that the Quinaielt
and Queets Indians lived, fished, hunted and gathered roots and
berries in these rivers and the valleys which bear their names. Their
winter lodges, like those of their neighbors on the north, were concentrated at the mouths of their respective salmon;bearing rivers
from whence came the bulk of their subsistence.

The controverted overlap area claimed by petitioners, and by their
Chehalis neighbors to the south in Docket 237, constitutes that area or
tract of land generally circumscribed by the north boundary of the
Copalis River watershed on the north and by the north boundary of the
watershed of the Humptulips River on the south, and being a parcel of
land extending from a broad width of six or eight miles at the Pacific
Coast, then rapidly diminishing to a narrow width and'stretching some
forty miles or so inland and northeastward to a sort of apex at the
headwaters of the Humptulips River, as same are more particularly

described in the respective petitions in Dockets Nos. 237 and 2&2.

 

7 1.7161. Cl. Com. 1

In discussing this problem petitioners candidly state such conflict arises because of the Chehalis claim “that the Copalis Indians

are a band or subdivision of the Chehalis Tribe.” Ede agree with this

definition of the problem as related by petitioners at page #9 of their
brief. In other words, for the purpose of deciding the central question of the aboriginal boundaries of petitioners that is before us,
that such issue must turn on the tribal or other identity of the aborigines who are shown to have used and occupied the land here in question.

Assuming, without deciding, that all of such disputed area or
tract of land was used and occupied by Copalis Indians exclusive of
Humptulips, Wynoochees, Hoqium and/or Chehalis Indians in pre—treaty
times, the further finding that such Copalis Indians were some part of
the Quinaielt Tribe must be made before petitioners can establish Indian
title to same. (See Finding 12)

In support of this proposition, inferentially posed by petitioners
On page 49 of petitioners‘ brief; that Copalis Indians were part of
their Quinaielt Tribe, petitioners cite, first, Gibbs‘ report that the

Quinaielt area was located "coast from.Gray's Harbor northward."

we
note the caption of such quotation was taken from a table of tribes

and bands which Gibbs entitled "Estimate of Indian Tribes in the w§§i§f:

 

District of Washington Territrrv — January, 185%" and also undei*

GibbS‘writes specifically "estimate" opposite “Quin—aik &C." Fur ”%“EWL.

this date is a year earlier han Gibbs‘ visit with the treaty party to
the area in question. The “estimate of Gibbs is both general irzcirmma

acter and vague as to "-8" description of tribes and bands.

insufficient to document their aboriginal south (or any) boundarfh

26’

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1

Secondly, petitioners quote Swan that "certain deserted villages
in the Copalis area arose from attacks on the Copalis by the Chehalis."
This does not establish the Copalis as part of the Quinaielt tribe, nor
does the account of Swan meeting two sub-chiefs of the Quinaielt in the
Copalis area establish a tribal relationship or exclusive use and occupancy of this disputed area by Quinaielt Indians.

Undoubtedly, there was great similarity both in culture and language
of the Copalis and Quinaielt. Such likeness existed between the Copalis
and the Chehalis and many other fish—eating Salishan speaking tribes and
bands of In ians west of the Cascades, such as the Humptulips, Satsops,
and those of the Hynoochee and Hoquim Rivers, yet such evidence does
not establish sufficient ties of blood, subsistence, and social unity
to identify all of these as one tribe of Quinaielt Indians. In our
Finding 6 we have set out the views exchanged between Dr. George Gibbs
and James G. Sean where a contrary View was expressed, listing the
Copalis as a separate group from the Quinaielt Indians. In deference
to such respected authorities who had personal Contact with the Indians
of the Northwest Pacific Coast, we have excluded the area of the Copalis
River watershed from the aboriginal boundaries of the Quinaielt in Findu
ing I3.

Aside from the considerations offered by the early and modern
ethnologists on the identity of Copalis Indians, the land description

contained in the treaty with the Quinaielt, etc., l855 (cit. id.)'While

somewhat ambiguous and general in its boundary calls, does not support

27

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l

petitioners‘ contention that the Copalis River'watershed be included
in Quinaielt territory, viz: “with the dividing range between the
Chehalis and Quin—ialt Rivers” does not expressly delineate the con.
fines of the intermediate Copalis River watershed as north or south of
such "dividing range." But should we resolve this boundary question
upon a construction of the treaty language we would be constrained to
decide that the peaks north of the eastawest flowing Copalis River, which
are three or four hundred feet higher than those south of this river
would place the Copalis River valley as outside Quinaielt territory.

Based upon our careful consideration of petitioners’ contentions
and evidence introduced to support their claims to the Copalis River
watershed including the treaty evidence, the evidence of the subsistence,
use and occupancy areas of Quinaielt Indians, and the evidence of identity
of the aboriginal inhabitants of the Copalis River area, both documentary
and by expert testimony, is insufficient to establish petitioners’ claim
to the Copalis River watershed area.

Petitioners also include in their claim of lands exclusively used
and occupied by Quinaielt and Queets Indians a sizeable portion of the
Olympic Mountains within their east boundaries. !$e have noted in the
S‘Klallam, Skokomish, and the companion Quileute cases that this portion
of the Olympic range was used by all the tribes and bands of Indians ""

hunt deer, elk, and bear. Ethnologist Erna Gunther and petitioners’

‘93‘7PeI't. DI‘. Ronald Olson, have noted that this area was a free range 

353’ who \-Ioxild use it. (Finding 1.3)

28

7 In-do Clo COIT1. l

The third area controversy concerns the upland and "non—village
areas." Defendant urges that petitioners occupied and used only
their village—site areas; that all Indians of this region had, at
most, a very loose sense of property ownership and no concept of
land boundaries whatever outside their respective villages.

In this connection defendant contends that the ease of fishing
kept them from engaging in the arduous pursuit of game; that the root
and berry gathering areas were free to all who would use them and the
forests of this area were among the most dense in the world, traversed
only by a limited use of game trails. (Dft. Req. Fdg. l9) It is a
fact that the major portion of their livelihood and Sustenance Was
drawn from the sea and the rivers. But they also depended upon roots
and berries from the prairies and supplemented this diet with elk,
deer and bear killed or driven from the upland areas into the prairies
and river valleys. These were the primary purposes for which Indians
of this region used land in aboriginal times. This constitutes use
and occupancy in the sense of “Indian title.“

Defendant contends that these nonavillage areas were‘freeause
areas" to all Indians and that such use and occupancy was not exclusive
as to Quinaielt and Queets Indians since they had no concept of land
ownership t is sufficient to observe that the Government men experiu
enced considerable difficulty and delay in removing Indians of adjacent

areas and like culture from their ancestral river valleys onto Indian

reservations.

;29

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

In our Finding 13 we have defined the natural boundaries econ.
passing the several use areas of the Quileute and Hoh Indians, including not only their winter villages but also the rivers, valleys, and
prairies used and occupied by them.

Thus, we find and conclude from the record as a whole and upon
the Findings of Fact herein made that the Quinaielt Tribe of Indians,
including their subdivision the Queets Indians, petitioners herein,
weretaboriginally‘a.tribe of American Indians that had been recognized and treated in treaty cession and otherwise as a tribal entity
(Finding 1); that exnlusive use and occupancy from time immemorial
of a specific and definable area of land by them has been proven
(Finding 13); that petitioners are the successors in interest of the
original occupants and users_of said land (Finding 3) and entitled to
maintain this action; that all the controversial issues now being
considered are resolved in favor of petitioners, except as to area
claimed.

The treaty ceding petitioners‘ lands to the defendant was ratified by the United States Senate on March 8, 1859. Such ratification
date constitutes the date of taking by defendant and therefore the

date on which the value of the acreage involved is to be determined.

Further hearings will be held for the determination of the aura»

n____.)

age involved and the value of said land at the time of the taking and

the rights retained in said land by petitioners or their ancestors.

'&

s/ Edgar E. Witt

 

Chief Commissioner

We concur:

8/ Louis J. O‘3-iarr

 

Associate Commissioner

8 :«‘-VIII. LE; 

...._ . I In 1 g g
""—""j-I—-I—«-...4-I-1-.-. 5....-..,-q_... g-‘V.-...,'-..,., _._._ _I _ _ . ,.-... .

 

