1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 30‘!

, BEFORE THE INDIA? CLAIMS COMHISSION

was csocmw NATION, )
Petitioner, %
vs. ) Docket Ho. 16 it
UNITED smias or AIERICA. 3
‘ Defendant. g
was csrcmsm rumozr. )\ 1
Petitioner, é . .
vs. ; Docket No. 23 '
UNITED STATES or AIELRICA, ; _
Defendant. ) i I L]

Grady Lewis, attorney for petitioner,
Choctaw Eation, in Docket No. 16

William A. Cornish and Paul M. Fiebell,
attorneys for the Chickasaw Nation
in Docket No. 23.

\

Ralph A. Barney and Julius Hartin,
with Whom was Mr.‘Assistant,gttorney
General. A. Devitt Vanech, Attorneys

for defendant. ,
JUL 1 41950

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION V‘
O‘Marr, Commissioner, de1ivered.the opinion of the Commission:

These two cases were filed separately. The first was the Choctaw

Hation, which was given the designation of Docket No. 16, and the second

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 305

case was the Chickasaw Fation, which was given the designation of
Docket No. 23. The defendant,‘United States, filed an answer in each
case, and after issues were joined and on motion of the defendant. to
which both the petitioners consented, the Commission ordered the two
cases consolidated for the purpose of trial. Evidence was offered, aopli
cable to both claims, without any attempt to separate it as to the sepa~ rate claims because it applies to both, except in minor details which
will be referred to later in this opinion. We shall, therefore, consider

the evidence as though the two cases had been joined in a single peti-.

tion.

The Choctaw first occupied the territory which includes the lands
here involved. This nation of Indians acquired by cession of the United
States a vast territory extending between the Red River on the south and
the Arkansas River and its tributary, the Canadian River, on the north,
between a line considerably east of what is now the west boundary of the
State of Arkansas. and the head waters of the Canadian and Red rivers,
which are far west of the one-hundredth degree west longitude. The

cession was made by the treaty of October 18, 1820 (7 Stat. 210) between

the Choctaw Hation and the United States. (Finding No. 1).

On September 27. 1330 (7 Stat. 333) the same parties concluded a
treaty which limited the west boundary of the Choctaw cession to the onehundredth degree west longitude. The reason for this change in the
western boundary of the Choctaw cession seems to have been because the

United States and Spain had concluded a treaty in 1919, but which was

not ratified until February 19. 1921 (8 Stat. 252). which fixed the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 it ‘ A 305
'3‘: C

western boundary of the United States. in the area covered.by the
Choctaw cession. at said 100th degree of west longitude and it is

_ 7 8
probable that the officials of the United States and the Indians. at

the time of the 1820 cession, were not familiar with the boundaries
fixed in the treaty with Spain. or were not sure of the location of

the sources of the Red and Canadian rivers with respect to said 100th

- meridian. but whatever the reason for redefining the west boundary of

the cession may have been is unimportant because the land involved in
this controversy lies immediately east of the 100th meridian and to the
/
98th meridian. But what is important is that by said treaty of 1830
the United States was required to convey in fee simple to the Choctaw
Nation the tract, which includes the Leased District involved in this
controversy. described as follows:
"beginning near Fort Smith where the Arkansas boundary
' crosses the Arkansas river, running thence to the Canadian
fork: if in the limits of the United States, or to those
limits: thence due south to Red River, and down Red River
to the west boundary of the Territory of.Arkansas; thence
north along that line to the beginning." (Finding 3).

Pursuant to the provisions of Article I of said treaty the United
States issued its patent conveying the above-described tract in fee
simple to the Choctaw Fation. The patent was dated and issued March 23,
1812. (Finding no. 3). _

.The Choctaw Eation was the sole owner of the area described in the

l830 treaty. and the patent above referred to. until January 17. 1837.

when the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations united and by an agreement bei tween those two nations (11 Stat. 573) the Choctaw, for a consideration

of $530.000*paid.by the Chickasaw Ration, granted.the latter nation an

l lnd. Cl. Comm. 291 _u_ ‘ C 307

interest in the Choctaw lands to be held in common by the two nations.
While the rights of the two nations in their common property were
further defined by an agreement between them, dated November H. 185“
(iostat. 1116). it was not until the treaty of June 22. 1855 (11 Stat.
611), in which the United States and said Indian tribes were parties,
that the respective interests of the two Indian nations or tribes were
definitely settled as to their lands lying between the 98th and 100th
degrees of west longitude, known as the “Leased.District." After said
treaty of 1855, it was recognized.by all the parties thereto that the
Choctaw owned a three-fourths interest and the Chickasaw a one-fourth
interest in said Leased District. 0
For a consideration of $600,000 paid to the Choctaw and $200,000

paid to the Chickasaw, the two nations leased to the United States, by

Article 9 of said treaty of June 22. 1855, "all that portion of their
. I _

. common territory west of the ninety-eighth degree west longitude for the

permanent settlement of the Wichita and such other tribes or bands of
Indians as the government may desire to locate therein; excluding, however, all the Indians of New Hexico. and also those whose usual ranges
at present are north of the.Arkansas River, and whose permanent locae

tions are north of the Canadian River.“ So. it will be noticed. under

‘éxpress terms of the treaty the government obtained a perpetual lease

to the "Leased District" but was restricted as to locating tribes or

hands of Indians thereon in that tribes or bands ranging or permanently

located in specified areas could not. under the provisions of the treaty

quoted above, be placed in the Leased District.

-.

1 Ind. Cl. ‘Comm. 291 . - ' _ 303
I - I j?
Ehe lease arrangement continued until April 28, 1855. when another

treaty between the United States and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Fations

was concluded {in stat. 769) by which the too nations coded to the United

r
States "the territory west of the 98° west longitude, known as the

Leased bistrict,“ for an enprossed consideration of $300,000, however,
only $150,000 of the amount was paid, and that to the Choctaw, under the
provisions of Article 36 of the treaty. The sum of $50,000 was paid the
Chickasaw, but was later deducted from an award to the Chickasaw because
they were not entitled to the money in that they had not complied.with.
the terms of the treaty. (Finding He. 6). The only part of the $300,000
actually received and retained by either nation was that paid the Choctan
pursuant to the provisions er said Article M6. (Finding Ho. 6).

Both.petitioners contend that the claims here asserted come squarely
within the provisions of clause (3) of Section 2 of the Act creating the
Indian Claims Commission (60 Stat.l0H9; 25'U.S.C.A. 70). or. under

clause (5) thereof. The position of the petitioners is clearly stated it

the following statement appearing on page 31 of the Chickasaw brief:

"We believe that the claim herein presented falls
squarely within Clause 3 quoted above, and if any of these
grounds—~fraud, duress, unconscionable consideration, mutual
or unilateral mistake, whether of law or fact, and other
grounds cognizable by a court of equity——are present in the
execution of the Treaty of April 28, 1866, the treaty may be
considered for the purpose of this proceeding as if revised
in order to enable the Commission to decide this claim in the
light of applicable equitable principles.

'“Eowever. if for the reasons hereinafter set forth
and discussed in detail. the Commission does not feel
justified in sustaining this claim under Clause 3, then,
clearly it would fall under Clause 5.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 -6. = 309

“We submit that under Clause 5 the Commission need
not consider the Treaty of 1865 from the standpoint of
revising its terns, but rather consider it as one of the
elements in determining the transaction between the United
States and its Indian wards in the light of "fair and hon~

* arable dealings."

Clause (3) of said section 2, in so far as applicable here, reads:
“The Commission shall hear and determine the following claims against the United States on behalf of any

Indian tribe or band. . . .: (3) claims which would result
if’the treaties, contracts, and agreements between the claimant and the United States were revised on the ground of fraud,
duress. unconscionable consideration, mutual or unilateral

Inistake, whether of law or fact, or any other ground cog—
nizable by a court of equity;“

The specific grounds relied on by petitioners for recovery are
these: (1) Because of the duress of the representatives of defendant
during the Fort Smith Council and at Washington, the petitioners were“
induced to sign an involuntary treaty; (2) that there was a mutual
mistake of law with respect to the effect of Article III of the treaty
of 1865; and (3) the consideration.paid for the cession of the Leased

District was so grossly inadequate as to be unconscionable.

- -up

Duress
Ehe petitioners under the above caption, assert that the treaty of

- April 28, 1866 (lu Stat. 769), was brought about by duress exerted by

the representatives of the government at and before the conclusion of
the treaty. The principal occurrences complained of, and which are,
in.the:nain; relied upon as showing duress are (a) the Harlan bill and
(b) the fear that the lands, funds and annuities of the two nations

would'be confiscated because of the disloyalty of the Indians during

the Civil War.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 291   Q i , ' 310

-7The Civil War greatly disturbed the relations between the Indians
and the Government and the relations between the Indians themselves,
so it res imperative, at the close of the ear. that those relations be
reviewed in the light of events occurring during the war, and redefined,
With that object in view, the Government called a council of all the
southwest Indian tribes at Fort Smith, Arkansas, and the Choctaw and
Chickasaw, with some nine other tribes, net at that place on Septenber_8,,
1865, with commissioners appointed by the President. The Commission was
headed by D. N. Cooley, Commissioner of Indian Affairs. who acted as its
president.

On the opening day of the council. the Commissioner, in referring to

A forfeitures by the Indian tribes or nations who severed their allegiance

to the Government by making treaties with the Confederacy, said: “Alli
such have rightly forfeited all annuities and interest in lands in the
Indian territory. But with the return of peace . . . the President isV
willing to hear his erring childred in extenuation of their great crime..

He has authorized us to make new treaties, with such tribes and nations C

d

as are willing to be at peace among themselves and with the United States.
(Pet. Ex; 32, p. 31h). But on the second day of the council the Cemmis—
siener made this startling statement to the assembled Indians:

"Brothers: We are instructed.by the President to negotiate
a treaty, or treaties. with any or all of the nations. tribes or s
bands of Indians in the Indian territory. Kansas, or of the plains
west of the Indian territory and Kansas.

“The following named nations and tribes have by their own
acts, by making treaties with the enemies of the United States,
at the dates hereafter named, forfeited all right to annuities,
‘lands and protection by the United States: ‘ 1 Ind. Cl. Comm.'29l o -3- 311 _

"The different nations and tribes having made treaties with

the rebel government are as follows. viz: * * *l* Choctaws and
Chickasaes. July 12, 1861 * * * *.

"By these nations having entered into treaties with the socalled Confederate States, and the rebellion being new ended,
they are left without any treaty whatever, or treaty obligation
for protection by'the United States.

“Uhder the terms of the treaties with the United States,
and.the law of Congress of July 5,.l862, all these nations and
tribes forfeited and lost all their rights to annuities and lands.
The President, however, does not desire to take advantage of or
enforce the penalties for the unwise actions of these nations.

- "The President is anxious to renew the relations which ’
existed at the breaking out of the rebellion. (Pet. Ex. 32, p. 3l8)t

This statement was, however, corrected by Commissioner Cooler on the
fourth day of the council (September 12, 1865). It appears that the

Cherokees had taken his statement, ahove—quoted, literally. as they

were justified in doing, so he corrected the formal statement'by saying:.

"The Cherokee nation are at fault in interpreting what

was said by us on Saturday as to forfeiture of land, dc., as

a fact accomplished, but the commissioners said: 'Allusuch as
have made treaties, &c.,‘ have ‘rightfully forfeited &c.,‘ (under
the law of Congress, July 5, 18 2. which authorized the complete
forfeiture,) but the President does not desire to enforce the
penalties for the unwise action of these nations." (Pet. Ex. 32,

P} 3255Ihis correction served.to make the statement conform to that made at the

 

opening of the council on September 8, 1865, however, even the toned
down version of the statement contained the subtle threat of forfeiture
of annuities and land as a penalty for the disloyalty of those Indian
tribes who joined the Confederacy, such as the Choctaw and Chickasaw.
And on the last day of the Eort Smith Council, the U. S. Commissioners submitted a.proposed treaty to the Choctaw and Chickasaw dole»
gations, who. after considering the sane, reported to the Commissioners

certain amendments and modifications which the Commissioners declined.

l Ind. C1. Comm. 291 ' I ' 312
*9" '

pto consider. It was then determined that a copy of the proposed treaty

be furnished the delegations and they were instructed that "whenever
they determined to approve it * * * they would'be invited to come to
Washington to consummate the treaty. This will be referred to as the

‘unsigned treaty.‘"
I

A.treaty of peace, so-called, was concluded at the Fort Smith
Council on September 13, lS65 (II Kapp. 1050), which was signed by the L
Choctaw and Chickasaw'Hations and nine other tribes. This treaty is
historically known as the "unratified treaty" because it was never
ratified by the U. S. Senate. No great importance is given this treaty
as evidence. in itself, of duress in obtaining the treaty of 1866: it i:
the attitude of the treaty commissioners on which.petitioners mainly
rely as proof of duress.

On September 9, 1865, the President of the Commission informed the
‘Council the basis upon which the President of the United States would.
rrenew the relations which existed prior to the rebellion and.he stated

the new treaties must contain substantially the following stipulations:

"1. Each tribe must enter into a treaty for permanent
jpeace and anity with.thense1ves. each nation and tribe, and
with.the United States. ’

"2. Those settled in the Indian territory must bind themselves. vhen called.upon by the government, to aid in compelling
the Indians of the plains to maintain peaceful relations with
each other, with the Indians in the territory. and with the

United States.

"3. The institution of slavery which has existed among
several of the tribes must be forthwith abolished, and meas‘ures taken for the unconditional emancipation of all persons
Jheld.in.bondage, and for their incorporation into the tribes
on an equal footing with the original members, or suitably proVided £01‘:

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 “lo”
— 313
"N. .A stipulation in the treaties that slavery, or involuntary servitude, shall never exist in the tribe or nation,
except in punishment of crime.

1' "5. A portion of the lands hitherto owned and occupied.
by you must be set apart for the friendly tribes new in Kansas,
and elsewhere, on such terms as may be agreed upon by the

parties. and approved by the government, or such as may be
fixed by the government.

"or It is the policy of the government, unless other
arrangements be made, that all the nations and tribes in the
Indian territory be formed into one consolidated gcvernment,
after the plan proposed by the Senate of the United States,
in a bill for organizing the Indian territory.

"7. ho white person, except officers, agents, and employee
of the government, or of any internal improvement authorized r
by the government, will be permitted to reside in the territory.
unless formally incorporated with some tribe; according to the

usages of the band." (Pet. Ex. 32, pp. 318 and 319).

Ehe much maligned Harlan bill (Senate bill U59, 38th Cong., 2nd
Session) passed the Senate in 1865 but never became a law. The text’?
of the bill is not in evidence, however, the substance of it is set
forth in.Artiele 6 of the "unsigned treaty” of September, 1865, as

follows:

“ARTICLE 6. The Choctaw and Chircasaw tribes of Indians
promise and agree to submit and reconnend, at the first meeting of their respective general councils, the adoption of the
plan proposed in Senate bill #59, 38th Congress, 2d session,
to provide for the consolidation of the Indian tribes, and to
establish civil government in the Indian Territory; it being
understood to be the settled policy of the Government of the

.ited States that all the nations and tribes in the Indian
Territory'be formed into one consolidated government, after
the plan proposed in the bill above referred to, adopted.by the
United States Senate, 1865, the government of the United States
reserving said right."

The substance of the bill was also included as Number 6 of the required
provisions of new treaties as stated by Commissioner Cooley at the Fort

Smith Council. (Pet. 31. 32, p. 319)» This statement was made on;

_. .r....a'.._.. ..__-,_ __*__‘

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 291 t 314

September 9, 1865; and the "unsigned treaty" containing the above
quoted Article, was delivered to the Choctaw and Chickasaw delegates
on September 21, 1365 (Pete Ex. 32. Pa 353), but it was not until
seven months later that the 1866 treaty was consumnatedg Whether the
Indians knew about the Harlan bill, which is doubtful, they were fully
informed of the plan of the Government to consolidate the In ian tribes
and for: one consolidated civil goverroent in Indian territory by the
statement of the Commissioner and by the quoted section of the unsigned‘:
treaty.s i

As between the threat of forfeiture of their lands and annuities
and the plan for tribal consolidation in the Indian territory one would,
at this late tine, expect that the prospects of losing their lands would
have caused the greatest consternation among the Choctaw and Chickasaw,
however, such.appears not to have been the case for on September 18,
1865, (according to the official report of the proceedings: pages 3M5

and 3H5. Pet. Ex. 32), the Choctaw and Chickasaw submitted a formal

statement in which they agreed to sign the "unratified treaty,“ out

treaty or treaties as will definitely fix and determine our future relations with the United States government" and that “we do not consent
to. nor'do we understand the United States as neaning to assume the
control or*jurisdiction over our internal national affairs; or claiming

0 .. . Fl 0 c 
Jurisd1ction.or control over our local afiairs or national organieationad

This statement also made it very clear that in severing their "treaty

stipulzrtions" with the United States at the beginning of the Civil War

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 315

.12.

they acted voluntarily, .nd because such severance was as their “interest seemed to dictate." Two days later. September 20, 1865, these
nations asked leave to withdraw the statement above mentioned and
submit another. The request having been denied, the sane officers of
the Choctae.and Chickasaw Nations who submitted the first statement,
submitted another formal statement to the council, which was alnost
identical with the first except there was omitted the statements of
their reasons for severing their treaty Stipulations with the United
States and joining the Confederacy. At no place in either statement
is any mention made of the threat of forfeiture of lands or annuities.
Their chief concern apparently was to retain their tribal autonomy.

It is true, of course, that the above formal statements were submitted
before the two nations received a copy of the proposed treaty but there
is nothing to indicate that they had changed their purpose to demand
their tribal rights at the time or after they received the proposed

treaty, just as‘ they did at the council.

But whatever impact the statements of the Commissioner and the pro«

posal to create a consolidated government in the Indian territory had
on the Choctaw and.Chickasaw at the close of the Fort Snith Council,
we cannot escape the feeling that the Indians entered the 3ashington
negotiations with full appreciation of the demands made upon them at
Fort Smith and a determination to fight for the preservation of their
treaty and political rights. In this they were notably successful
for by Art. 10 the United States reaffirmed all its obligations arising out of treaties and acts of Congress in force prior to the Civil

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 ‘ 315

- n134War and renewed payment of annuities: by Article 5 a general amnesty for

all offenses committed before the signing of the treaty was stipulated: .

by Article 7 and 8 their tribal autonomy was in many Ways recognized
and preserved: and.by Article 9 money provided for education was to
remain invested and.the income therefrom made available for them in such
manner as the legislatures of the two nations might designate. This
record is not convincing as showing that the Choctaw and Chickasaw were
forced into a treaty. It is perhaps true that they aid not like sone

of the provisions, but that does not in itself shoe duress, especially
where it is shown that the Indian representatives were men of firmness 2
and ability. as the results show. A review of the whole record does
not convince us that the 1865 treaty was obtained by duress. Even at
the Fort Smith Council the Choctaw and Chickasaw representativesdise
played independence of action and diplomatic skill in submitting their
.statements mentioned above, their refusal to consider the proposed
treaty until they had had time to consider it,_and a delay of nearly ~
eight months before going to Washington for final negotiations. Then
it must not be overlooked that the treaty was ratified by the legislative bodies of the two nations. The record shows no facts-sufficient

to sustain the'burden of pr0Of necessary to-show duress on the part of‘

defendant in obtaining the treaty of 1865.

Eutual Mistake

 

It is next urged by petitioners that notwithstanding the fact that

by Article} of the treaty of April 28, 1866 (ll: Stat. 769). they did

bu-.l..<l.. '.'.4»II.'i..-' vfhiinb It‘-n-'J‘14"'

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 317

-1M"cede to the United States" the lands "known as the leased district."

it was intended by both parties to that treaty that the Leased District

s'was to be held in trust by the United States for the purpose of settling

lndians thereon and whenever the_United States abandoned that purpose
the lands not used for such settlement were held in trust for the excluvsive benefit of the Choctaw and Chickasaw. Hence, when the government

disposed of the surplus lands (the lands not allotted to Indians or reserved for Indian purposes), it became liable to the Choctaw and.Chickasaw

Nations for the value thereof or for the proceeds from the sale thereof.

Thus, we are asked to review the evidence connected.with the consummation '

of the treaty to determine whether the Indians and the Government, by’, I
mistake, used words which were not understood or intended by them as an
unrestricted cession but as a conveyance in trust for the purposes stat
above. In other words, the petitioners claim that in using the word
“cede” in Article 3 they intended to create (or perhaps continue) a trust
relation which constituted the defendant a trustee for the benefit of
petitioners. of all leased district lands not used for Indian settlement

or Indian‘purpoS8S, as required by the lease of 1855 (sec. 9, Treaty of

June 22. 1855, 11 Stat. 611).

It is true, as petitioners maintain, that under Clause (3) of Section 2 of the Act creating the Indian-Claims Commission (25'U.S.C;A. 70)
we may go behind the language used in a treaty and determine whether the
parties. because of mutual mistake. used language or terms therein which

gave the instruncnt a literal meaning or legal effect not intended by

‘the parties.

l 8
1 Ind. Cl. Com. 291 s 31

f 1.‘ I . i -15.
Following the treaty of 1855, the relations between these Indians
and the United States seened harmonious. but with the secession of the
Confederate States these Indians declared that their sympathies and
interests were with the southern states and they cooperated with the
Confederacy during the Civil War. The war and the acts of the Indian

govcrning'bodios dissolved these relations and subjected the Choctaw

' and Chickasaw to a forfeiture of their treaty rights existing'before the p

war. 50. following the termination of the Civil War, it was necessary
to readjust the relations formerly existing between the United Statesp
and the petitioners and it is the negotiations leading”np to the consummation of the treaty of 1866 and that treaty which.was one step in the
readjustment process, upon which present controversy arises. he shall
not undertake a critical review of the eoidonce offered here in support
of the petitioners‘ contentions for that was done most thoroughly by the
Court of Claims in Choctaw and.Chickasaw hations V. United States and
Wichita, 33 C; Cls. 1?. All the evidenceofiered.here was submitted to
€he Court of Claims and.considered by itin said case. That petitioners
soconsidered the opinion we quote from the Chickasan'hrief (p.695 this

statement: H,“ 1_ _ _ ‘p H&_
_ "The Court of Claims reviewed the whole history of the
"icession of 1866. and the subsequent Executive and‘Legislative
construction of it, and considering the cessien in the light
of the understanding of the parties and applicable equitable
principles, held that the parties intended the cession to
- create a trust for the settlement of other Indians on the
"Leased.District" lands, and that when the trust ceased, the
Choctaws and Chickasaws were entitled to compensation for
that portion of these lands opened to white settlement (3R~Ca
Cls. 17.)." r _ * ' - ' C

 -_-.-—--..--4» u... .. =..»v.- :

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 291 319

The above case was brought by the Choctaw and Chickasaw hations for the

proceeds from the sale of all land in the Wichita reserre, enich.was
sold by the United States, and for the value of the lands allotted under
the Act of March 2, 1895. The Wichita lands were a part of the Leased
District so the fundamental question for determination in that case, as
in the one here under consideration, grew out of the treaty of April 28,_
1866 (IN Stat. 769), hence, the similarity of the evidence in both.cases,
The Court of Claims decided that the Eichita lands, being part of the
Leased.District, were held in trust by the United States for the settlement of Indians thereon and when that purpose was abandoned as to any .
part of the tract, it held the part not devoted to Indian settlement in
trust for the benefit of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Fations.

The above case was appealed to the Supreme Court, United States V.
Choctaw Nation, 179 U. 5. H9”. #5 L. Ed. 291. and the decision of the
Court of Claims was reversed and the petition of the Choctaw and.Chickar
saw‘Nations dismissed. The Supreme Court in its opinion,:made this statement:

"In the jurisdictional act of Harch 2, 1895, 28 Stat.
at L. 876, 898, chap. 188, Congress authorized suit to be
brought in the court oi‘ claims, so that the rights, legal
and equitable, of the United States and of the Choctaw and
Chickasaw Nations, and the Eichita and AffiliatedIBands of
Indians in the premises ‘shall be fully considered and determined, and to try and determine all questions that may’
arise on behalf of either party'-taking care, however, to
add.that nothing in the act ‘shall be accepted or construed.
as a confession that the United States admit that the Choctaw’
and.Chickasaw Nations have any claim to or interest in said.
lands or any part thereof.‘ It is thus clear that the court
of claims was without authority to determine the rights of
parties upon the ground of more justice or fairness, much
loss, under the guise of interpretation, to depart from the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 320

-17.

plain import of the words of the treaty. Its duty was to
ascertain the intent of the parties according to the established rules for the interpretation of treaties."

Petitioners conclude from this language that the Supreme Court did not

pass upon the evidence offered in the Court of Clains, and considered

by that Court, as showing the intent of the parties to the 1866 treaty, I

up

but such conclusion is not Justified by the decision for we find.this

further statement:

"In other words. the rights of the parties are to be
determined by the rules established for the interpretation
of such instruments as the treaty of 1866, giving due weight
to every fact proper to be considered in ascertaining the
intention of the parties."

 

 

And, as the opinion shows, the Supreme Court reviewed the evidence considered by the Court of Claims as showing a trust relationship as to the
Leased District lands not used for Indian settlement, and reached an
opposite conclusion. Specifically. it discussed the treaty of 1855, the
negotiations at Fort Smith and Washington, the effect of the 1866 treaties
‘with the Seminole and Creek Hations, the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat.
989.p1025) which petitioners believe was a Congressional recognition of p
the trust character of the 1866 cession, and the Supreme Court mentioned
the "unsigned treaty" given the petitioners at Fort Smith. This evidence, the Court decided, did not show that the Choctaw and Chickasaw
and the United States intended anything different than an absolute cession in using the term “cede” in the 1866 treaty»

The Supreme Court made no mention of the administrative construction of the treaty of 1e66, as did the Court of Claims at pages‘ 11;ls—5

of its opinion, so it must he presuned.that it did not consider it of

l Ind. C1. Comm. 291 321

-18centrolling value. 1We have no reason to believe that the Supremel
Court would take any different view of the evidence submitted to us
(which, as we have said, was substantially the same as that offered
in the case before the Court of Claims) than it did in reversing the
Court of Claims. Moreover, we think the petitioners have failed to
prove that they intended, or that the defendant intended, anything:but

an absolute cession of the Leased District by the treaty of 1866.

Date on ehich Value Must be Determined.

The petitioners insist that the value of the cession by the 1866

treaty should be determined as of the time the lands involved here were

sold to white settlers under the agreements made from 1891 to 1895. The
lands in the Leased.District were not generally opened for sale until
1904, when the Wichita lands were opened: 1906, when the Kiowa, Comanche
and Apache reserve was first opened. and following 1897, when the Greer

County area was offered for settlement under the Act of January 18, 1897

(27 Stat. 990). W e presume the time f sale has been fixed on the

‘theory that the lands were held in trust after the 1866 treaty, however,

since we believe the Indians conveyed all their rights and interest

in the entire Leased District by Article 3 of the Treaty of April 28, 1866,

it follows that the absolute title then passed to the United States, and
the value of the lands in question must be determined as of that date.

Barribean.vt Brant, 59‘U. S. 93.

Adequacy of Consideration
For the purpose of determining the question as to Whether the consideration paid for the lands in the Leased District ras unconscionable

1 Ind. c1. com. 291 322

-19.
it is necessary to determine the value of the reversionary interest of
th0_Indians at the time of the 1866 cession. What the United States
needed and what it got by the treaty of April 23, 1866 (ih stat. 769)
‘is clearly stated in United States V. Choctaw, 179 U} S, M93, 531, where

the court said:

"When the United States concluded the treaty of 1866 with
the Choctaws and Chickasaws it did not need a cession of the
lands herein question in order simply to locate Indians and
freedmen on then. It already.had,'by the treaty of 1355: a.perpetual lease of those lands for the settlement of Indians. What
it needed, perhaps what it requiredu-at any rate, what it obtainedrwas an unqualified cession of the territory. unaccompanied.by any
declaration as to the use intended to be made of it, or by any
words qualifying the absoluteness of the title passed to the United
States. It took an absolute cession, without any declaration as to
the uses to nhich the territory ceded was to be devoted."
Thus, the defendant obtained the reversionary interest of the Indians in
the Leased District and the acquisition of the reversion also enabled the
‘United States to grant part of the lands to Oklahoma and to sell part to

white settlers, both of which it did.

The Leased District was controlled by Indians to and long after the
1866 cession so no part thereof had been sold while the Indians were in
possession. The only evidence offered.by petitioners bearing upon value,
and perhaps the only evidence available after a lapse of eighty-five
years, is that of Indian and Government transactions subsequent to the
treaty of 1866 involving the area in question and areas in the vicinity
of the lands in question.

The first occurrence involving land price (aside from the considerar
tion stated in the treaty) is found in said treaty of April 28, 1856

(13-Stat; 769}. It res therein provided (Art. 30) that the Choctaw and

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 323

Chickasaw should receive into their respective districts lying inncw
diately east of the Leased District, a limited number of Kansas Indians,
and by Article 37, the parties to the treaty fixed the price to be paid
petitioners for the lands selected by the Kansas Indians at "not exceeding one dollar per acre," to be fixed by the legislatures of the Choctaw
and Chickasaw Nations. no can assume, we think, that the maximum price
of one dollar nor acre represented the understanding of the Indians and 5
the Government of the value of the lands to be se1ected.by the Kansas
Indians. 0

about a.nonth before the Choctaw-Chickasaw treaty, the United States

on Karch 21. 1866 (lh Stat. 755), acquired a cession of 2,169,080 acres

G of land iron the Seminoles for $325,362, but later and by Act of harch 2,

1889 (25 Stat. 980,l00U) paid these Indians an additional $1,912,932. a
total of $2.238,30h, or slightly more than one dollar per acre. Most of
this cession adjoins the Leased District on the north, that is the Cane»
dian river divides the two areas. And by treaty dated June 1H, 1866

(13 Stat. 785), defendant acquired from the Greeks 3,250,560 acres of
land lying north and northeast of the Leased District for the sum of
$975al68 (30 cents per acre) and later, by Act of March 1, 1889 (25 Stats
757), paid the Greeks an additional sum of $2,280,857.10, in all
$3,256,025.10, or slightly more than one dollar per acre. The last payment to the Seminoles was for “all the right, title, interest and claim“
those Indians had in their lands which had been restricted "to locate
other Indians and freednen thereon“ by Article 3 of the treaty of march

21, 1866 (13 Stat. 7553a Likewise, in the Creek agreement (Act of March 1.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 291 324

. .. ~21i339: 25 Stat. 757. 759). it was recited that the United States desired
that "all. of said ceded lands may be entirely freed from any limitation in respect to the use and enjoyment thereof," having in nind, no
doubt, the restrictions contained in their treaty of June 11!», 1866

(114 Stat. 785), which limited the use of the land, as in the Seminole

treaty, to locating "other Indians and freednen thereon." So we see

that in 1889 (soneit:.renty-three years after the restricted cessions

of the Greeks and Seminoles) the Government and the Indians considered 9' in

itlworth $2,238,301!» (about. 70 cents per acre) in the case of the Creeks);
and $1,9l2,91%2 (about 88 cents per acre) in the case of the Seminoles,
for a cession which would free the lands from limitations as to the use
and enjoyment of the respective areas ceded. A
When we consider the C—overnnent's transactions involving large

areas of land within the Leased District we find the Government's ideas
of value of the lands therein more revealing. About 1869 the defendant
placed the Cheyenne and Arapahoe Indims on 2,159,159 acres of the
Leased District, and by Act of Eiarch 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 989, 1025'), it
paid the Choctaw and Chickasaw Indians $2,991,350 ($1.25 per acre) for
2.393,l60iacrcs of this land. This payment. according to the provisions
of the appropriation Act, was “to pay the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations”
of Indians for all right, title, ‘interest and claim which said nations
of Indians may have in and to certain lands now occupied by the Cheyenne
and Arapahoe Indians.” The payment of $2,991,950 to the Choctaw and

Chickasaw Nations for the Cheyenne and Arapahoe lands loses much of its

force as a criterion of value when we ‘read the Prosident’s critical

  1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 325

-22w

objections to the appropriation and the action of the Congress follona

us

ing the President's message; The‘President, by a special message

dnted.Fobruary 18, 1892. stated:

"If this section had been submitted to me as a separate
measure, especially during the closing hours of the session,
I should have disapproved it: but as the Congress was then

in its last hours a disapproval of the general Indian appro—
priation bill of which t was a.part would have resulted in

consequences so far-reaching and disastrous that I felt it
my duty to approve the bill."

Ehile Congress did not recede from its action appropriating the money,

it reduced the amount by $H8,800 by a resolution, to which was added

this proviso: , . 4

“Provided, however, That neither the passage of the
original act of appropriation to pay the Choctaw and Chickar
saw tribes of Indians for their interest in the lands of the
Cheyenne and Arapahoe reservation, dated March 3, 1891. nor
of this resolution shall be held in any way to commit the
government to the payment of any further sun to the Choctaw
and Chickasaw lndians for any alleged interest in the remainder

of the lands situated in what is commonly known and called the
'Leased.District.'" s

Coo United States v. Choctaw Nation, et al.. 179 U} S. MQU, at pages
5U2«5H7, Bowever, the fact remains that even after the reduction, the
amount paid was nearly $1.25 per acre for the interest of the petitioners
in.the Cheyenne and Arapahoe reserve and this area was, as we have

stated before, a part of the Leased District and covered by the 1855
lease, to believe the Congress had in mind fixing the value of the

tract at $1.25 per acre as of 1866. because the report (Pet, Bra #7,

p, 16) stated the value of the histrict to be more than $10,000,000, a
little more than $1.25 per acre, at the tine of the cessiono

Then we find that the Government placed the Kiowa, Conanch and

Apache tribes on 2,958,893 acres of the Leased District ,bout the year

' 326
l Ind. Cl. Comm. 291

-23;
1868 (15 Stat. 581, 589) and by an agreement nade on October 21, 1892,
‘but which was not accepted by Congress until June 6, 1900 (31 Stat;
672), the defendant purchased 2,033,583 acres of these lands for
L $2,000,000. or about ninety-eight cents per acre.
I The record also shows that 1,807,630 acres of the Kiowa, Comanche
and Apache reserve were sold for $1.25 per acre to white settlers and
380,000 acres thereof (part of what was known as the Big Pasture) '.-':ere'
sold for about $12.50 per acre. 53;-ue, thosesales were made some thirty-9
five years -after the cession, beginning in 1901 and extending over a.
"period of some thirty years after these lands were opened. to cntrgr in
1901, ‘but the prices paid by settlers indicate an intrinsic value of the

land at theitine of the cession above the ordinnr;-z lands ceded by

Indians generally.

Obviously, inidcternining the value of vast tracts of land, comprising many millions of acres, as of a tine beyond the nenery of man and
at a time when land occupied by Indians was put to very limited use,
we must use the evidence available under the peculiar conditions which
nust govern such inquiries. , So, in consideration of all the evidence,
including; the events and occurrences which we have recited above, we
believe we are justified in finding the land ‘in the part of the Leased
District involved here, was, in 1866, the time of the cession, reasonably worth one dollar per acre, or $14,499,551.

In connection with value, the dofendmotis only evidence consists

of a determination by one witness who fixed the value at twenty-five

cents per acre as of the date of the cession of 1866. We have reviewed

the testimony of this witness with care, “out find nothing in it to

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 327

—n 4-change the conclusion respecting value we have ‘stated above.

There must, of course, next ‘be determined the value of the lease,
for, as we have stated, it was the reversionary interest of the two
nations which the defendant acquired by the 1866 treaty. There has
been no direct evidence of that value. ‘but we krion that the Government paid the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations $800,000 for the lease of
the lzmds in the Leased District and the I‘0liIlq11iShI3CIli3 of the claimed
Choctaw rights to the area (some 6,500,000 acres) lying; west of the
hundredth meridian. Treaty of June 22; 1855 (11 Stat. 611, Arts. 9 and
10).  also know that the Supreme Court, in United States v. ichectarr.
179 U. s. 1491+, decided that at the time oi’ the "1855 treaty the petiwtioners had no interest or title to the lands lying west of the hun__dredth meridian, west longitude, It is true there has been some contention as to what part of the consideration paid was for the lease and

L _what_ part was for the relinquishrient, ‘but the outstanding fact is that
administrative officers of the government never recognized any rights
of the Choctaw in lands lying nest of the 100th meridian. Tihat the
government really get for its $800,000 was a lease on the Leased
District. "Jo believe it can be fairly concluded that the payment for
the relinquishoent was nominal and so understood by all the parties
to the treaty, Moreover, it is not without significance that_the Chick:
saw received $200,000 for the lease on its one-fourth interest in the
Leased District. t claimed no interest in the area west of the 100th
meridian. for that was claimed by the Choctatr, and the Choctaw received
exactly $600,000 for the lease on its three«-fourths interest, ?Ihile

according to Article 10 of the 1855 treaty such ‘payments were for the

1 Ind. c1. comm. 291

-25"reline_uish::ent and lease“ actually the only relinquishnent was by.

the Choctaw (see Article 9), 'but'it received the some proportionate 5

pa;ment as the Chickasaw, which, as we have stated, was for the lease
Onlyg It would seen, ‘therefore, that the value of the lease must be
the amount agreed upon in the 1855 treaty, namely, $800,000, or 10.3717
cents per acre for 7,713,620 acres contained in the Leased District.
Accordingly; taking the land involved in this claim as ‘being 1¥,1¥99,551.
acres and figuring the value at 10.371"! cents per acre, '.-7C'1'CaCh the

conclusion that $1P66.680 represents the value nf the lease on t.e part

of the ‘Leased District involved in thislp1‘oceeding. Therefore, deduct-ing this sun from $7-l,1L’_~3-9,551, the value of the part of the Leased
District here involved,‘ we find the petitioners entitled to the sun of

$1l.032,872 (value of the reversionary interest of the two tribes) of

_which sum the interest of the Choctaw is $3,023-1,6511, from which must be

deducted $87,'{Ul, the amount they received under the 1866 treaty, leavv-v

ing a balance of $2,936,913. And the Chickasaw are entitled to

’ $1,008,218, they having received no part of the consideration mentioned

in the 1866 treaty. The srmmt deducted from the Choctaw award,
$87,710.; is arrived at as shown inlthe next succeeding paragraph hereof.
As to the consideration 1.3.-w.ir.i‘.. the Choctarr, we have found that they
received, under the 1s66 treaty._$l50.O00 for 5.7859215 acres (threes
fourths interest in 7,713,620 acres) in the Leased District. On the
basis oi‘ the lands involved here they received $87,714]. for their _
32374.66} acres (three-fourths of 1;,1L99,S51 acres), or about 2,6 cents

per acre, for their reversionary interest in land found to be worth

$3o0E1!r.55’+, plainly. a grossly inadcq_uat0 consideration.

._.y...

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 329

a-26a
The Chickasaw received nothing under the 1865 treat3'for their
onemtourth interest in the Leased District or for their l,l2U,888
acres (one—fourth of h,h99,551 acres) involved in this C3500
‘In Osage v. United States, Docket Eco 99 decided December 30, 1936
we discussed the meaning of the torn ngnconscienablc consideration,"
as it applied to land cessiens, and there concluded that, while insadequacy of consideration was not in itself a ground for equitable
relief, it is a ground or basis for the granting of equitable relief
swhen growing out of fraud. In other words, inadequacy of price is an
incident or circumstance of frauds We did not find it necessary to
determine in that case how fraud.na3 be shown or inferred” however,
this case presents the question as to whether fraud has been shown or
nay be inferred from the evidence submitted. '
It seems clear that fraud.nay be inferred from the evidence, like
any other conclusions of faet,_ 3 Pomeroy‘s Equity Jurisprudence (5th

Eda 1931). see. 92?. And it is equally well settled that when great

inadequacy of price is sheen, price so small as to shock the conscience

of a correct mind (as we believe to be the case here), that fact in
itself amounts to decisive evidence of fraud, even though there be no
direct proof thereof. Eyre V} Potter, 15'U{ So M2; Graffan V.IBurgCss;
117 U3 s. 180; Loewe v. Von Almen, to 1:. 3. (26-..) 251; 9 An. Jur. 371-2,
sections 25, 26: 3 Pen. Equity Jurisprudence (5th Ed.) 63¥, sec. 927:
and cases citedi Poneroy states the doctrine, generally accepted; in

these words:

He 927. Gross Inadequacy.amounting to Fraud.-Although
the actual cases in which a contract or conveyance has been
canceled on account of gross inadequacy merely, without other

1 Ind. C1. Comm, 291 9 27 9 330

inequitable inciuents, are very few, yet the doctrine is
settled, by a consensus of decisions and dicta, that even
in the absence of all other circumstances, when the inadequacy of price is so gross that it shocks the conscience,
and furnishes satisfactory and decisive evidence of fraud,
it will be a sufficient ground for canceling a conveyance or
contract, whether executed or executory. Even then fraud,
and not inadequacy of price, is the true and only cause for
the interposition of equity and the granting of relief.”
us believe the facts in these cases bring then within the equity rule
stated above. A.purchase price of $87,791 (which was paid the Choctaw, and.nothing actually realized'hy the Chickasaw) for the roversienary interest of the two tribes north $3,032,872 is an unconscionable consideration under Clause (3) of said Section 2, quoted above.
Therefore, the Choctaw are entitled to recover the amount above mentioned, $2,936,913, and the Chickasaw are entitled to a recovery in

the sun of $1,008,218, from which respective amounts the offsets, new

to be considered, will be deducted.

OFFSECS
As shown by findings Nos. 12 and 13, the parties in each of the

cases. Dockets Hos. 16 and 23, respectively, have agreed that in the

Choctaw case the defenda.t is entitled to an offset in the sum of

$399,077.53, and in the Chickasaw case that defendant is entitled to an

offset in the sun of $105,209.89. The Commission, before approving the

"agreement, heard.the parties and also examined the report of the General
.Accounting Office (Defends EL. no. 29) and is convinced that the agree;

meat is a fair compromise of the amounts for uhich the defendant is

entitled to offset in the respective cases.

Deducting the offsets set forth above from the amounts found due

the_respective petitioners we conclude that the Choctaw Nation is

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 291 331
Retyped

entitled to an award in the sum of $2,587,835.47; that the Chickasaw
Nation is entitled to an award in the sum of $902,008.11; and that
separate judgments shall be entered in the respective cases. No
interest is claimed by the petitioners, nor can any be allowed in
either case.
At the oral argument it was earnestly contended on behalf of petitioners that the case, Choctaw'§ation v. Cnited States, 119 U. S. 1,

30 L. Ed. 906, sets forth the rule which should govern the decision in
this case, at least as to the amount of recovery. in that case it
appears that by the treaty of June 22, 1855 (11 Stat. 611, Art. ll} the
claim of the Choctaw for the net proceeds from the sale of land ceded
by the Indians by the treaty of September 27, 1830 (7 Stat. 333) was
submitted to the Senate to determine whether the Choctaw "are entitled
to or shall be allowed the proceeds of the sale of their lands." Fur»
scant to the submission, the Senate determined that the Choctaw were
entitled to the proceeds from such lands as had been soid, the value

of land scrip which issued in lieu of reservations and the residue at
12 1/2 cents per acre. The net amount of these items was determined

to be $2, 981, 247.30, only a part of which was paid. Shit was brought
in the Court of Claims under the jurisdictional act of March 3, 1881
(21 Stat. 504) to make the Senate's a*ard fine] after adjusting certain
alleged errors in the account stated by the Secretary of the Interior.
The Court of Claims refused to accept the Senate's determination, but
the Supreme Court adopted it because it was "the nearest approximation
to justice and right of the case that, after this lapse of time, it is

practicable for a judicial tribunal to reach."

..  ._ :,....-.-_.'. :..;- ..~.,-4..-‘..-._. c.... ..- .-_.:...-r..--.._.«..-..- :..m.'.:._‘=....:..'.;;....£'-....;..J.a..in'.Ji¢J;a.aLc'1—...-I.‘-a-a1'l

1 Ind. C1. Com. 291 332

_29_ , p .
A.reading of the opinion will show that under the submission the
Senate has the power to predicate an aware on any ground it thought
proper, so it gave the Indians the proceeds of sale; value of land
scrip ani an amount per acre for the resiaue, as a "practical node of

adjustment;“ and “net on the ground that the letter of the Treaty

"entitle sthen to ita"~~It reg ires ne~arg*uent;te'shenLthe inappli- '%**i

Carility of that case to the case here unier censideratien in which
the facts are entirely iifferents

The aefendant has suggested that because of the "scancaleus,
vituperative and inpertinent na tor“ contained in the Choctaw brief
it be stricken from the filess Much of the matter reflects upon the

lntegrity and.neral character of representatives ana officials of the

r3_.a--.1--an-.nuu-u -A .F\n-A L p-.......-..... LL .-. Y?'..... .3 ..L
U‘-I t val. &a.......l\—'-..I- mt, ‘~29 V l.a.:.J. u.L:.U U.:.J...a. hr

cs Courts are charged with legalizing
"intolerable acts of aggression by the Government taxing lands away
from Iniians under the guise of its general censtitutisnal guardia.shipo“ Such statements are improper ann unfit to submit to a juaicial

‘body. We shall not take the action suggested by defendant in this case

because we do not believe counsel will again resort to such extravar

oagant and improper languageJ~~

Chief Cennissiener ?itt and Commissioner Holt concur in the foregOing opinion;

July lu! 

.... 

