"t-'.-gt»-;.¢'-"'

THE EDIE‘ Tazaa 01? OKLAECMA, also )
known as THE MIAMI TRIBE, E11‘ A.L.,

Petitioners,

IRA S‘.?.L'V$T17‘.3 GODFROY, ‘a‘ILLI_A}i
ALLOLLA. GODFROY, J OHN A. O'w'*.-ENS,
on relation of THE ME.“ {I INDIETN
TRIBE and MIAMI TRIBE OF INDIANA,
and each on behalf of others
similarly situated and on behalf of
THE MIZAMI INDIAN TRIBE and various
bands and groups of each of them,
comprising the MIAMI TRIBE AND NATION,
. Plaintiffs,

THE Pzeom TRIBE or INDI..¢.NS or
OICLAHOB-EA and AMOS ROBINSON 32:13
on behalf of the WEIR. NATION, '

Petitioners,

THE POTTANAT CMIE Ta- E or INDIANS,
TF}-"j PRATQTETI mum (XI? '1‘ ‘ID ‘Dn"mw.r.ramrnn-.-.~

-—u young hr‘. do-4-QIOQ-in \JaLAqI--J

W?

L
.L£f._'.DE OF INDTIANS, ET £=...J.,
Plaintiffs,

THE KICKAPOO TEBE OF KANSAS,

THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF OI{I.§-.HQ-‘EA,

THE KICKAPOO NAZTION, ET AL., ' '
Petitio ne rs ,.

CITIZEN BAND OF PCT.-’-THAT CTEI IhDD.NS
or OKLAHCi~E.5., and POI‘.f£a'.!LT cm: NA.TION,
represented by CITI'-EN BAND 0? POTATr:'ATCi"II IN-DIAEIS OF OKL. '1"?.CE-%, ET AI»,
Petitioners,

F.ANN.¢.E~. '3 I}ID‘.L’5.N CCI~@‘.*fb’NITY, Wilson,
Michigan, FOPJ-EST COU FBI POTSQIATCTEI
CG-Ti-PJNITY, Crandon, Wisconsin, POTA-*"TC-I-II TRIBE or NATE N 01? I}$I.5..I~IS,
El‘ AL. , '
Plaintiffs,

Docket No. l3l
Docket NO. 31).;
Docket No. IS-H

Docket No. 317

Docket No. 307

Docket No . 29-?

‘C

June 1:, 1957

Decided:

mrolnos gig FACT

The Commissidn makes the following findings of fact:

I. The Miami Tribe of Oklahoma and the Eel River Tribe, petitioners

in Docket No. 253; the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma acting for and

on behalf of the Wea Nation of Indians, petitioner in Docket No. 3111; and
the Miami Tribe of Indiana, petitioner in Docket No. l3l, are authorized

by the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19115, ‘GO prosecute the

claims set forth in their respective petitions which arise out of the

cessions to defendant of lands by the petitioners in said dockets by the

J...-u-L
UGUQ

treaties of August 21, l8OS, 7 S 91, known as the Grouseland Treaty,

\

aty 5 that

F

and September 30, 3.809, { tat. 13.3, known as the Fort Wayne Tre
the petitioner, the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, and the petitioner, the
Miami Tribe of Indiana, constitute and represent all descendants of

members of the Miami Tribe of American Indians. (The above cessions are

shown in Royce as tracts S6, 71 and 72).

The Eel River Tribe was originaL!.y and at all times herein referred

-I--ll

W6

‘to, a part of the Miami. The Wee. Tribe 5 originally also a part of the

Miami Tribe but after 1805 separated from the Miami.

Prairie Band of

 

2. (a) The Potawatomie Nation and one of its ‘bands

the Potanatomie Ration, are petitioners in Docket No. 15-2? and are claiming

 

an interest in the lands ceded by the Treaty of September 30, 1809, and
described in Finding ll. The Potanatorzi was a party to this treaty and is

iami and Eel River tribes (Article 1).

'7 '.I-:.r.:'r-V‘

Article 3 of the treaty reads as follows:

The compensation to be given for the cession made in

first article shall be as follows, viz: to the Delawares

a permanent annuity of five hundred dollars; to the Miamies

a like annuity of five hundred dollars; to the Eel river tribe
a like annuity of two hundred and fifty dollars.; and to the
Putawatimies a like annuity of five hundred dollars.

The annuity referred to above was paid to the Pot watomi Tribe or

its two bands , the Prairie and the Citizens , until it was commuted about

the year 1909.

In the Treaty Journal of the proceedings at Fort Wayne on September
30, 1809 (Pet. Ex. 15, p. l5, Dkt. 253) referring to the compensation for

the lands of the Miami and Eel River tribes ceded by that treaty appears

this Statement :

'5' 4? ’-'r That even the whole cone nsaticn proposed to ‘oz: given

for the land would be given to the Miamies if they insisted
upon it but that they knew the offence which this would give

to the other_Tribes and that it was always C~overnor‘s intention so to draw up the Treaty that the Putawatinies &
Deliwares would be considered as participating in the advantages
of the Treaty as auies-of the Miamies not as having any right
to the land.

Neither Potawatomie petitioner has offered proof of its use or occupation of any part of the area ceded by the Fort \-.-‘a .e Treaty of September
30, 3.5309 (Tracts 73. and 72) although it had full opportunity to do so;
nor does the evidence offered by the other parties ‘to this consolidated
proceeding show any Potawatomi right or interest in such lands. These
petitioners base their claim upon the fact that the “tribe of Indians
called the Put watomies" were parties to said treaty and received the
annuities provided for that tribe by Article 3 of that treaty. The only

proof offered by the Potawatoni consisted of payments of such annuities

}..1
(:0
|\)

to ‘tr; e Potawatomi Nation or its bands, including the Prairie Emd, until
the annuities wem commuted. (Ens. 1 and 2, Dkt. 15-55)(B) The Citizen Band of Potawaoomi Indians of Oklahoma and the ?ota-—

 

1-zatomi Nation are petitioners in Docket No. 307, which was consolidated

 

for hearing with the other petitioners named in the title, amended their
petition on March 7, 1955, and thereby removed their claim for lands ceded
by the 1805 and‘ 1809 treaties. They, therefore, are not involved in

claims consolidated for hearing and must be dismissed from such consolidation.

(c)

the Kickapoo Nation are

The Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas, the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma and

petitioners in Docket No. 317, which was also con 

solidated for hearing with the others but claim no rights to Royce tracts

55, 71 and 72, ceded by the l8OS or l809 treaties and must therefore be

dismissed from the consolidation.

1956;).

(See petition as amended March 20,

(d) The Hannahville Indian Comaunity, Forest County Potawatoni Com 

munity and the Potawatomi Tribe are petitioners in Docket No. 29-F. This
case was consolidated for trial with the other cases mentioned above, but,
although given full opportunity to do so, such petitioners offered no
evidence of their capacity to sue or in support of the other allegations
of their petition, nor does the proof offered by other parties to the consolidated hearings support the clam of such claimants. Said petition

must ‘therefore be dismissed in so i'*r as basing a claim arismg out of,

the Fort Wayne Treaty of September 30, 1809.

518

J

e»
'I‘;é§'1:’,-‘W4

3. The lands historically used by the Miami Tribe included Royce

Areas 6 71 and 72 the lands involved in this “roceedin . At the
3 J I’

t eaty of August 3, 1795, 7 Stat. 19), Li tle Turtle, the Miami chief,
described the ancestral lands of the Miami Tribe as follows:

It is well known by all my brothers present that my forefather kindled the first fire at Detroit; from.thence he
extended his lines to the head waters of the Scioto; from
thence, to its mouth; from thence, down the Ohio, to the
mouth of the Wabash, and from thence to Chicago * %*% I have
now informed you of the boundaries of the Miami Nation where
the Great Spirit placed.my'forefather a long time ago. * %'%

Areas 56, 71 and 72 were within these boundaries. (Greenville Treaty

Journal, Pet ?‘. 8, pp. 570-1; Map, Ex. h, Dkt. 253).
h. (a) By Section 11;, Article III, of the Northwest Territory Ordinance of l?87, reenacted by the.Act of.august 7, l?89 {l.State 50), the

inhabiting the Northwest Territory:

The utmost good faith shall always be observed towards
the Indians; their land and.property shall never be taken
‘without their consent; and in their'property, rights and
liberty, they shall never be invaded or disturbed, unless
in just and lawful wars authorized by Congress; but laws
founded in justice and humanity shall from time to time
be made, for preventing wrongs being done to them, and for
‘preserving peace and friendship with th J.

On October 25, l79l, President‘Washington reported to.Oongress:

It is sincerely to be desired that all need of coercion in
future may cease and that an.intimate intercourse may succeed,
calculated to advance the happiness of the Indians and to attach
them firmly to the United States. '

S eems Il€C8SSal"f"""

In order to do this it
erience the benefits of an.imnartial

That they should exp
dispensation of justice.

That the mode of alienating their lands, the main source
of discontent and war, should be so defined and regulated
as to obviate imposition and as far as may be practicable
controversy concerning the reality and extent of the alienations which are made. (Pet. Ex. 91, Dkt. 253).

On July 30, 1793, treaty commissioners of the United States made the

following statement to the confederated Indian tribes assembled at the

rapids of the Miami River:

Brothers: We now concede this great point. Me, by the
express authority of the President of the United States,
acknowledge the property, or right of soil, of the great
country above described, to be in the Indian nations, so
long as they desire to occupy the same. We only claim
particular tracts in it, as before mentioned, and the
general right granted by the King, as above stated, and
which is well known to the English and Americans, and
called _the right of preemption, or the right of purchasing of the Indian nations disposed to sell their lands, to
the exclusion of all other white people whatever. (Pet. Ex.

83, Dkt. 253).

On April [1, 1791.1, the Secretary of war submitted his instructions
to General Wayne who was appointed to treat with hostile Indians. These

instructions included the ' following :

You will endeavor, to the’ utmost of your povrer, to induce
the tribes claiming a right to the said lands, to confirm the
boundary established by the said t reaty of Fort Harmar, with
the Six Nations, and Wyandots, Delawares, &c.3 for which purpose you will, among other considerations, offer-lst. The guarantee of the United States of the right of soil,
to all of the remaining Indian lands in that quarter, against the
citizens or inhabitants of the United States.

'55- -E? -9': It 171 be an object worthy of your attention, to endeavor,
as far as shall be consistent Wibh the main design of peace, to
form separate contracts, or treaties, relatively to boundaries,
with the several tribes to whom the lands actually. belong, avoiding, as much as possible, to confirm the idea of a union, or
general confederacy i‘ all the tribes, or of any patronage of
the whole over the lands of any particular tribes or subff’

divisions of tribes. But, as the said Indians are much attached

(‘D
\f1

to the idea of a general confederacjr, your proceedings,
in these particulars, will reouire peculiar caution and
management.

You will, in all your negotiations, carefully guard the
general rights of pre-emotion of the United States to the

Indian country, against all other nations and individuals,

as established by the treaty of l?83, with Great Britain.
But, in describing these rights to the Indians, you will
impress them with the idea that we concede to them, fully,
the right and possession of the soil, as long as they desire
to occupy the same; but, when they choose to sell any portion
of the country, it must be sold only to the United States,
who will protect the Indians against all imposition. (Def.

Ex. 19, pp. b, 6-7, Dkt. 253).

These" instructions are identical to those instructions given the
treaty commissioners appointed on December 1.1, 1793, to treat with the
hostile Indians in the Northwest terriuory. Wh.&e those commissioners
were unsuccessml in their negotiations, the Wayne instructions show
a consistent policy of a purpose to give the hostile Indians a right
of soil in perpetuity. (Pet. Ex. 91:, Dkt. 253).

On November 1:, 1791;, General Wayne stated to the I-Jyandots:

It is close upon six years since the sacherns and warriors

of the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pattawatamy and

Sac nations, concluded a treaty at the mouth of l*Euski.ng.un,

with Governor St. Clair, for removing all c uses of controversy,
and for settling boundaries between the aforesaid tribes of
Indians and the United States of America.

That treaty appeared to be founded on principles of justice
and equity, and to have been clearly and fairly understood,
and satislactory to all parties at that period, being the same
which you have recognized and recapitulated in your speech to

me, at this tine. (Pet. V‘. 97, Dict. 253).
5. Ca)" On August 3, l795', at Greenville, a treaty of peace was
enters into be ween the United Ststes, represented by General Ant‘-.ony

T

Wavne. and "the tribes of Indians, called the hfyandots, Delawares,

V a

Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chipewas, Putawatimes, Miamis, Eel-river,'Wea’s

KiCk&poos, Piankashaws, and Kaskaskias" (7 Stat. h9)- -A?$iCl3 III Of

the treaty fixed “the general boundary line between the lands of the
United States and the lands of said Indian tribes" and exacted certain

cessions from the Indians. Article IV provided that-the United Statea.relinquish their claims to all other Indian
lands northward of the river Ohio, eastward of the Mississippi, and.westward and southward of the Great Lakes and the
waters uniting them, according to the boundary line agreed
on.by the United States and the king of Great-Britain, in the
treaty of peace made between them in the year l783*%-* %.

subject to certain excepted tracts.

Areas 56, 71 and T2 are on the Indians‘ side of the Greenville

treaty line and.within the territory relinquished to the Indians.

Article v provided as follows:
To prevent any misunderstanding about the Indian lands
relinquished by the United tates in the fourth-article, it
is now explicitly declared, that the meaning of that relinquishment is this: The Indian tribes who have a right to those lands
are quietly to enjoy them, hunting, planting, and dwelling thereon so long as they'please, without any'molestation from the
United States; but when those tribes, or any of them, shall be
disposed to sell_their lands, or any part of them, they are to be
sold.only to the United States; and until such sale, the United
States will protect all the said Indian tribes, in the quiet
enjoyment of their lands against all citizens of the United
tates, and against all other white persons who'intrude upon the
same. And the said Indian tribes again acknowledge themselves
to be under the protection of the said United States and no other

power whatever. (Pet. Ex. 7, Dkt. 253).

(b) By the second paragraph of.Article III of said treaty it is

provided “for the convenient intercourse which will be beneficial to both

parties [So the treat‘ the said Indian tribes do also cede to the

n'ted States"“sixteen tracts of land within the northnest territory

 

relinouished by the United States to the twelve Indian tribes. And

é

in addition to said cessions, the Indians granted the United States

“free passage by land and by water %-% through their country“ (the

K?‘
Indians‘) and the usefof "harbors and.the mouths of rivers along the

I

lakes adjoining the Indian lands for sheltering vessels and boats, and
the liberty to land their cargoes where necessary for their safety."

(c) The Greenville Treaty'was submitted to the Senate by President

1-"

‘Washington on December 9, 1795, by a communication reading as follows:

I lay before you, for your consideration, a treaty of peace
which has been negotiated by General'Wayne, on behalf of the
United States, with all the late hostile tribes of Indians,
northwest of the river Ohio; together with the instructions
which were given to General Wayne, and the proceedings of the
‘place of the treaty, (h.American.State Papers 562).

T-IA?-tn;

---—--q.pq..’

Q g Q I 6
nnen the -enate re: cons;-:._ng ene -reen.llie

it the instructions to General Wayne (Def. ks. 11;, is, 16, 17, 18, 19)
and the Journal of the treaty proceedings. CPet. Ex. 8, Dkt. 253).
The treaty was ratified by the Senate and later proclaimed by the

President on December 2, 1795.
6.

(Pet. Ex. 7, Dkt. 253; 7 Stat. L19, Sh).
By articles IV and‘? of the Greenville Treaty, the United States
recognized t.e title of each of the tribal signatories to the territory
each had.a right to, which the United States relinquished by Article IV.
This recognition was intended by the parties and was in accordance with
the policy described in Finding 2.». at the time of the Greenville Treaty,

however, the United States was unable to make a division of this territory among its tribal owners.

U1

I88

General Wayne stated at the Greenville Treaty Council:

YOUNG‘-SR BROTHE5? , all of you, listen with attention: I
shall now reply to what as said yesterday by the Wyandotsg
I Hi then answer the otservations of the Little Turtle,
made in behalf of the Miamies and 'w'abash tribes.

YOUNGER BROTHE-.S, the Wyandots, Delawares, and Shawanese,
I am pleased to hear you say, with one voice, for the second
time, that I have done the greatest justice to you in dividing
the lands of the United States from those of the Indian nations,
by the boundary line which I have proposed. You request me to
fix the boundaries that shall divide the lands between the

respective tribes of Indians now present.
YOUNGER BROTHEIRS: A moment‘s reflection will show you the

impropriety, as well as impossibility, of my acting in this
business. You, Indians, best know your respective boundaries.

I particularly recommend to all nations, present, to continue
friendly and just to each dther; let no nation, or nations,
invade, molest, or disturb, any other nation, or nations, in the
hunting grounds they have heretofore been accustomed to live and
hunt upon, within the bOU.'nd.‘:r'3' which .5_=3_'1_::]__'_l_ 3191,: be g_g1-9e§_ ‘Q11; ________:
above all, I enjoin that no injury be offered to any nation, or
nations, inconsequence of the part any, or either of them, may

have pursued, to establish a permanent and happy peace with the
United States of America. (Pet. Etc. 8, p. 577, Dkt. 253).

General Wayne‘s instructionsof April 11,, l/',?9LL (Def. Ex. 19, p. 6),
required him to form separate treaties with the several tribes relative
to boundaries, however, bythe final instructions on April 8, 1795 (Def.
EX» 15, p. S), the General was authorized to accept a treaty uniting the
tribes in a single instrument, which he did.

President Jefferson, in several statements, confirmed the intention
of Article V to accord recognition of Indian title to the lands in the
Northwest territory west of the general boundary“ line.

In a statement to tribal chiefs on February 19, 1807, the President

said:

I ...J
('73

u-..-*e.‘-~‘

After the close of'our'*arwith the English, we wished to
establish peace and friendship with our Indian Neignoors also.
In.order to do this the first thing necessary was to fix a

BEL ‘L

firm boundary between them and us that there mi.ht be no
trespasses across that y either party. Not knowing then what
parts on our border belonged to each Indian nation particularly
we thought it safest to get a l those in the North to join in
one treaty and to settle a ge.eral boundary between them and us.
‘we did not intenneddle as to bhC lines dividing them one from
another because this was their concern not ours. we therefore
met the chiefs of the Nyandots, Delawares, Shawanese, Ott ways,
. Chippaways, Pontewatamies, Miamis, Eel Rivers, Weas, Kickapoo,
Piankeshaws, & Kaskaskias at Greenville & agreed on a general
boundary which was to divide their lands from those of the
‘Whites, making only some particular reserves for the establishJment of trade & intercourse with them. "This treaty was eleven
years ago, as Black beard has said. Since that, some of them
have thought it for their advantage to sell his portions of
their lands which has changed the boundaries in some parts; but
their rights in the residue remain as they were and.must always
'be settled among themselves. If the Shawanese and.Delawares and
their other neighbors choose to settle the boundaries between

their respective tribes & to have them.marked and recorded in
our books we will mark them as they‘sha1l agree among themselves,
&.will then give them strong writings declaring the separate
rights of each, after which we will protect each tribe in its
respective lands, as well against other tribes who might attempt
to take them from them, as against our own people. (Pet. Ex.

103, me-.. 253).

1‘ '1‘! l-‘'

0n.April 22, 1808, the President sent a message to other tribal chiefs,

O

stating:

Many among you must re.ember the t'ne when we were governed by
the British nation, and the war by which we separated ourselves
from them. Your old men must remember also that while we were
‘under that government we were constantly kept at war with the red
znen our neighbors. Many of these took side in the English war
agiinst us; so that after we had made peace with the inglish, ill
blood remained between us for some ime, and it was not till the
treaty of Greenville that we could come to a solid.peace and
jpcrfect good.understanding with all our Indian neighbors. This being
once done and fixed lines drawn between them and us, laying off their
lands to themselves and ours to ourselves, so that each might know
their own, and nothing disturb our future peace, we have from that
moment, my children, look upon you heartily as our brothers, and as
a part of ourselves. (Pet. ?'. lOL, Dkt. 253).

\£')

7. Shortly after Greenville, Governor William.Henry Harrison

became the administrator of the Indiana Territory. Under his administration, specific areas were accorded to designated Indian tribes. In
his report to the Secretary of War on.March 22, l8lh, Harrison reviewed

the location and claims of the respective tribes in the areas, and then.

stated:

" 'Such was the situation of the tribes, when I received the
instructions of President Jefferson shortly after his first
election, to make efforts for extinguishing the Indian claims
upon the Ohio, below the mouth of the Kentucky'river, and to
such other tracts as were necessary to connect and consolidate
our settlements. It was at once detennined, that the community
of interests in the lands amongst the Indian tribes, which
seemed to be recognized by the treaty of Greenville, should be
objected to; and that each individual tribe should be protected
in every claim that should appear to be founded.in reason and
justice. But it was also deternined.that as a measure of policy

. T ': CG Q01‘: 3... ‘Hug... -—  -oo---- - - -r ., '. 1 -'. 'which it would be desirable to purchase, should.receive a‘portion.
of the compensation, although the title night be-exclusively in
another tribe. Upon this principle the Delawares, Shawanoese,
Potawatamies, and Kickapoos were admitted as parties to several
of the treaties. Care was taken however, to place the title to
such tracts as it might be desirable to purchase hereafter, upon
a footing that would facilitate the procuring of them, by getting
the tribes who had no claim themselves, and who might probably

interfere, to recognize the titles of those who were ascertained
to possess them. '

It was pursuant to this policy'that recognition of the right of partioular tribes to particular lands was made in the treaties hereinafter set
forth. (Pet. 31:. 21; also treaties, Pet. Exs. 2, 3, 9, 81, in me.-.. 253).

8. The first of the treaties negotiated by Governor Harrison was
made at Fb:t.Mhyne on.June 7, 1803, with nine signatories to the Greenville

Treaty, inc uding the Mianis, Eel River and'Weas (7 Stat. 7h). It fixed.

9&4 I-an-J qls&\..J..1._g .§_CD

of the "Vincennes Tract“ which had been reserved to the

.-a

United States by Article IV of the Greenville Treaty. As delineated by
the Treaty of l803, the Vincennes Tract was a rectangular tract of land

in southwestern Indiana, extending a few miles into Illinois. It is designated as Area 26 on Royce‘s map of Indiana.

On August l8, l80h, Governor Harrison negotiated a separate treaty

with the Dela'are Tribe (7 Stat. 81), whereby the Delawares ceded a tract

in southwestern Indiana, which is designated on Royce‘s map of Indiana

as.Area b9.

‘The Miamis were not present at the Delaware Treaty of l80h. ln
their absence, an article was inserted into the Delaware Treaty to the
effect that, although, "the Miami.tribe a-a~%'were the original proprietors of that country“ between the Ohio_River and the hhite River,

will

nevertheless, the "United States _. in the future consider the Delawares as the rightful owners of all the country which is bounded by the
White River on the north, the Ohio on the south, the general boundary

line running from.the mouth of the Kentucky River on the east zghe Green»

ville'Treaty lin§7, and the tract ceded by this treaty’ Area h27, and thatceded by the Treaty of Fort'Wayne Agrea 2§7 on the west and southwest.“
(Art. IV of Delaware Treaty). i

When.the Miamis were apprised of this treaty, they not only'objected
to this purported recognition, but they further contested the Delawares‘
Tight 30 Cede Area h9. It became apparent to Governor Harrison that
further cessions could not be obtained until all of the interested tribes‘
were assembled and their respective rights defined. In the following

a treaty council was held at Grouseland attended by the Miami, Eel

'atcmie‘tribes.

}...J
~o

F)

As a result of this council, the Hiamis were induced to recognize
the Delaware cession of Area L9, while the Delawares and the United States
recognized the parmount title of the Miamis to the country between the

White River and the Ohio, which includes Area 56.

As reported by Governor Harrison to the Secretary of War on August

26, 1805:

The first object that engaged my attention, at the opening
of the council, was, to satisfy the Indians of our right to make
the treaty with the Delawares, that has been so much complained
of; and I found little difficulty to getting them to recognize
every part of that treaty, excepting the article which guaranties
to the Delawares the country between the 'h-Shite river and the Ohio.
As the information upon which that article was founded was derived
from the Delawares themselves, a good opportunity was offered to
ascertain the truth of the_cession said to have been made by the
Miamies at Fort Wayne, in the year 1803. The latter strenuously
contended, that the declaration which they made, on that occasion,
meant nothi.ug muL‘::‘.- than an assurance to the Delawaz-es, that they
should occupy the country as long as they pleased, but that they
had no intention to convey an exclusive right. During the whole
contest between these tribes, which lasted several days, I observed the most exact neutrality. I made the Dela ‘ares perfectly
comprehend, that the guarantee of the United States depended upon
their being able to make the Miamies acknowledge the cession of
Fort Wayne. This acknowledgement, however, the Miamies would not
make, and the Delawares finally gave up the contest, although it
was evident tome, that the declaration made by the Owl, on behalf
of the Miamies, at Fort Mayne, was fully as strong as the Delaware
chiefs had reported it to be. at the commencement of the council,
the Miami and Pattawatamy chiefs had hinted at the necessity of
increasing their annuities, so as to put them on a footing with
the Delawares. But I soon put an end to their hopes, by assuring
‘aha, in the most positive terms, that, as the United States had
made a fair bargain with the Dela-wares and Piankeshaws, who were
the owners of the land that had been ceded, not a six pence would
be given to any other tribe, in consideration of that purchase,
but, that they might obtain a further annuity, by a further cession
of land; and this brought on the negotiation for the tract ceded
by the enclosed treaty.

These negotiations culminated in the Treaty of Grouseland, executed

fI‘$

August 21, 1805 7 Stat. 91). The first article of the Grouseland Treaty

'-_,_‘_.*,'- 
.,q_,},_.,..

retracts the fourth article of the Delaware Treaty of 180k, and recognizes
the Hiamis as the owners of the tract between the Ohio and white rivers.

Article I of that treaty reads:
Whereas, by the fourth article of a treaty made between

the United tates and the Delaware tribe, on the eighteenth

day of August, eighteen hundred and four, the said United

States engaged to consider the said Delawares as the proprietors of all that tract of country which is bounded by
the'White river on the north, the Ohio and Clark's grant on

the south, the general boundary line running from the:mouth

of Kentucky river on the east, and the tract ceded by the

treaty of Fort Wayne, and the road leading to Clark‘s grant
on.the'west and southwest. .And whereas, the Miami.tribes, from
whom the Delawares derived their claim, contend that in their
cession of said tract to the Delawares, it was never their
intention to convey to them the right of the soil, but to suffer
them to occupy it as long as they thought proper, the said Dela'uares_have, for the sake of peace and good neighbourhood, determined to relinquish their claim to the said tract, and do by these

Q

presents release the United States from the guarantee made in the
O 0 ._ ,. .

'h9‘F'n1--o..ma'r\‘.L.-‘i A-r-scar? :3--4"? I‘-'3

and.four.

fl‘   flap AQQ J-QQJIL all;-I: dlntiu-I-.IlIIudIIn.q-ng 
Vuv U--our I-I...

' " ho ' 96;; LL "'
¢J.u.=~.u..u...)t.r, .l..bL-n-r ‘ 4.; J.&\aI-..L\-9‘-uL

$10.91?‘
3'

The Miamis, in turn, by the fifth article of the Grouseland.Treaty,
confirmed the l80h.Delanare cession of Area h9. .(Treaties, Pet. Exs. l, '
7, 9, ll, l2;‘Harrison.reports, Exs. l2, 21; Maps h, BO} Dkt. 253).

9.d By.Article II of the Treaty of Grouseland, the Miami.tribes made

the first of the cessions involved in these proceedings:

The said.Miami, Eel River, and Wes tribes, cede and relinquish
to the United Stat s forever, all that tract of country which lies
to the south of a ine to be drawn from the northeast corner of
the tract ceded by the treaty of Fort Wayne, so as to strike the
general boundary line, running from a point opposite to the mouth
of the Kentucky river, to Fort Recovery, at the distance of'fifty'
‘miles from its commencenen. on the Ohio River.

The tract so ceded is depicted on Royce's map of Indiana as Area 56.
1

It is inc_uded within the territory between the White River and the Ohio,

more fully described in the next preceding finding, and is thus vithin

the lands expressly recognized as belonging to the I-iiamis by the Greenville Treaty. (C-rouseland Treaty, Pet. E"... 1; Maps, EIXS. 1:, 30, 3'53. 353‘)ILO. By the Grouseland-Treaty the defendant confirmed the boundaries
of the land, the title to which had been recognized as belonging to the
Miami, Eel River and Wes. tribes by the Greenville Trea ..y of August 3,
1795. While the Delawares and the Potawatomi were parties to the Grouseland Treaty of August .21, l8OS (Royce tract 56), neither has asserted
rights in the area coded by this treaty.

ll. On September 30, 1809, at Fort Wayne, a treaty was made with
the Miami, Eel River, Delaware and Potawatomie tribes. (7 Stat. 11.3, 33-5)By the first artihle of this treaty, the Miami and Eel ‘River tribes ceded
the other two areas here involved: - The Hiami and Eel River tribes, and the Delawares and Potawatiués, as their allies, agree to cede to the United States all
that tract of country which shall be included hetween the boundary
line established by the treaty of Fort Wayne, the Trlabash, and a
line to be drawn from the mouth of a creek called Racoon Creek,
emptying into the Nabash, on the south-east side, about twelve
miles below the mouth of the'Vennilion river, so as to strike the
boundary line established by the treaty of Grouseland,‘ at such a
distance from its comrnencenent at the northeast corner of the
Vincennes tract, as will leave the tract now ceded thirty miles
wide at the narrowest place. and also allthat tract which shall
be included between the following boundaries, viz: beginning at
Fort Recovery, thence southwardly along the general boundary line,
established by the treaty of Greenville, to its intersection with
the boundary line established by the treaty of Grouseland; thence
along said line to a point from which a line drawn parallel to the
first mentioned line tiill bet:-Ielve zhiles distant from the same
and along the said parallel line to its intersection with a line
to be drawn from Fort Recovery, parallel to the line established

a by the said treaty of rouseland.

The first of these tracts lies in the western part of Indiana and its

west boundary is tn e T.~2'a-ash l'~?.i*.'er; it is designated on Royc'e‘s map of

Indiana as Area 71. The second tract is in the eastern part of the state,

11%

adjoining the Greenvill Treaty line; it is ‘esignated on Royce‘s map

of Indiana as Area 72.
The fifth article of the l809 treaty provided that "the consent of
the idea Tribe shLl" be necessary to complete the title to the first tract

of land here ceded (Area 71); a separate convention shall be entered into

between them and the United States 41- 4? ’X'.'‘

By the ninth article, Royce Area 73 (west of the Wabash) was also
ceded to. the United St tes, subject to the approval of the Kickapoos.

By a separate article to the same treaty executed on the same day
(7 Stat. ll§): additional compensation was granted to the Miami and
Eel River tribes for the reason that "the greater part of the lands ceded
to the United States, by the treaty this day concluded, was the exclusive
property of the hiarni Lotion and guar“nteied'v'to them by the Treaty of
Grouseland."

Pursuant to the fii‘t_h article of the foregoing treaty of September
30, 1809, a separate convention was entered into with the wee Tribe at

.r
-'. a

Vincennes on October 26, 1809 ( Stat. 316), whereby the Weas consented
to the cession of both Royce Areas 71 and 73, although 73 is not. involved
in any of the consolidated cases. (Treaties of Fort Way-ne, Ebcs. 2, 3 3 '
Wea Convention, Ex. 81; Maps, Eats. 11, 80, Dkt. 253). .
l2. Royce Areas '71 and 72, which were ceded by Article l of the

Fort Wayne Treaty of l809, and described L1 Finding ll, were the areas
recognized by the Greenville Treaty as belonging to the Miami, Eel river

and ‘~'.-Sea tribes, but within said A.rea_7l the Wea exclusively dominated

or controlled Sh9,08l acres -thereof, being the part lnng west of the blue

line shown on petitioners‘ E1:-chibit 53 in Docket No. 253- The 1003'-3'-011
of such line and the Wea acreage were agreed to by the defendant and the
respective petitioners in Dockets Nos. l3l, 253 and 31h, by stipulation
dated 'Now-amber 17, 1951: and filed in each of said dockets on November l8,
1951;. ‘(Pei-.. Eats. 1-1;, 10, 12-15’, 21, 25, 26, 33, 80-83).

13. The Miami and Eel River tribes, petitioners in Docltet No. 253,
the Hiani Tribe of Indiana and the Miani Indian Tribe, petitioners in
Docket No. 131, and the Wee Tribe, as represented by the Peoria Tribe
in Docket No. 311;, had exclusive title to the lands described in Findings
9 and ll (Royce Areas 56, 71 and‘ 72) at the time of the cessions thereof
to the defendant by the treaties of—l8OS and 1809, respectively; that the
titles to the lands so described were recognized by the Greenville Treaty
of _l?$’S and the boundaries thereof were confirmed ‘by said treaties of
August 22., 1805 and September 30, 1809, and October 25, 1809.

According}. , an interlocutory order, of which these findings will
be a part, will be entered which _wil_'L apply’ to each and all of the

dockets appearing in the caption of these findings.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissio ner

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Win. H. Holt
Associate Commi.ssioner

