8 Ind. Cl. Com. 111 138

BEFORE THE INDIAN CL£IMS COMMISSION

THE QUECHAN FEIEE OF THE FOEE IUEA
RESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA,

Petitioner,

VS.

)
)
%
% Docket No. 3l9
)
)

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Defendant.
Decided: Sept. 30, I959
Appearances:

Fulton'w. Hoge,
Attorney for Petitioner.

Louis L. Rochmes
of Counsel

Milton E. Bander, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General, Perry W}'Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF ggg COMMISSION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petitioner, the Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma Reservation of
California, an alleged identifiable tribe of American Indians, timely‘
filed its petition herein seeking recovery of compensation from.the
United States,defendant, under prorisions of the Indians Claims Commission.Act, (60 Stat. l0h9) for certain lands alleged to have been
aboriginally used and occupied by their predecessors in interest, the
Quechan (or Yuma) Tribe of Indians. The land so claimed is situated

along and near the International Boundary of the United States with

8 lnd. c1. Corn. 111 139
Mexico and the rommon : ate houndary line of the States of Arizona and
California, the lower Colorado River.

On November 19, 1953, this Commission entered an order consolidating
this case for hearing with the Indians of California cases, Dockets Nos.
31 and 37, et al. After the hearings in such cases as consolidated were
held, by order entered herein on October 6, 1955, thi5 0833 Was Severed
from the consolidated cases and permitted to proceed separately; The
testimony and all other evidence therein adduced in such cases, as consolidated, became a part of the record of evidence in this case.

The Commission's findings of fact and opinion non herein made and
rendered relate only to issues involving the Government's liability; all
other issues as valuation of lands, deductions of reservation acreage,
offsets and other pertinent issues as may be necessary to a final determination of this case are deferred for future proceedings.

The defendant stated certain objections to a ruling of this Commission wherein leave was granted petitioner to amend its petition to
"specifically include a claim under the provisions of Section 2(h)“ of
the Indian Claims Commission.Act, as follower“

Claims arising from the taking by tbe'United States,

whether as a result of treaty, cession or otherwise of

lands owned and occupied by the Claimant without payment

of such lands (R. 152-153).

(It is noted that, although leave to file such.amendment us granted
to the petitioner on July ll, 1955, no pastor to the original petition or
other amendment has been.filed.)

The defendant renews its objection in "Objection to Petitioner's‘

Requested Finding 2," stating:

8 ind. Cl. Com. lll 1&0

r r % t was not until th

e time of trial that peti~
tioner alleged any right to recover under Section 25L).
This we contend was too late. * % % ‘Def. Br. pp. 53-37).

Such requested amendment to the petition “specifically alleging”
petitioner's claim under the provisions of Section 2(h) was nothing»‘
more than a clarification of the original petition. The ruling of this
Commission.made on July ll, l9SS, overruling defendant‘s objections to
filing of same, therefore, stands now as when made. (R. lS2-153; See

‘ Def. Br. 35-37 for complete statement of its objections.)

The four fundamental issues presented in the petitioner's claim
are:

1. Whether petitioner has the legal capacity to maintain this
action? That is, whether this petitioner is, in fact, a presently

identifiable tribe of American Indians?

2. Whether petitioner is successor in interest to the historic

 

Yuma Tribe? That is, are its present tribal members, in fact, the
descendants of the historic Yuma Tribe?

3. Whether the historic Yuma Tribe held aboriginal Indian title

   

to any of the land here claimed? That is, what definable areas of land,
within the lands here claimed, were in fact, exclusively used and
°°°uPied in aboriginal times by the historic Yuma Tribe, and particularly‘
"at the time when sovereignty of the United States attached to same?

h. Whether such aboriginal lands, if any, were taken from this

the historic Yuma Tribe, and if so, when and what lands were taken?

'._r.- I, _—.I,;o
"-"f‘=€J’e'-"

R  9  a 5: ’\-.3?-'1 5-  

EEGLL CAFLCIFY

an.-—u.-not--in

 

1-11The Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma Reservation of California is an
organized tribe of American Indians with a Constitution and By§Laws.
(Cl. Ex. h). Petitioner's constitution was duly adopted by the tribe,
and approved by the Secretary of the Interior cn.December 18, 1936,

pursuant to the Indian Reorga.isation not of Jane 18, 1935. (25 U- S. C. A.

1...‘:

h7é). The jurisdictional requirements as to cdcnéification of the petiF

tioner tribe to bring thisiaction under the provisions of Section 2 of
l~the Indian Claims Commission Act are met.

While Section 10 of the Indian cieims Co tirsion Act permits "any
member of an Indian tribe, band or other idti*£*€eble group of Indians
as the representative of all its r-wbers" to y;;i:nt a claim to this
Conmission, it is further therein provided thntg _

¥wherever any tribal organization exists, recognized

by the Secretary of Interior as having antierity to
represent such tribe, band or group, snch_o§ganization

shall be accorded the exclusive privilege oj representing
such Indians, - e e."

   

       

 

‘we conclude that the addition of individual members as parties plaintiff *
to the named tribe, petitioner, would be superfluous and is unnecessary;
Defendant maintains that the Tribal Couneil‘s authority to sue

for tribal lands is limited to land “within the Fort'Yuma Reservation“

(Def. Br., P. 63). we note that Article Iv, Section 1(e) of the cone
stitution.expressly empowers the Council, “to present and prosecute any
claims or demands of the Quechan Eribe" (Pot. Pie 8, pa 2).

SUCCESSSRSHEP

:--j .115 2-.'VvI-an..-1.j

 

Defendant contends in Defendant‘s Requested ?indir¢ 2 (Def. Br., p, 6),

that competent evidence fails to disclose petitioner is successor to the

5 Ind. Cl. Com. lll 1h2

‘ . FL.-, 3-,-w-_ r“‘-nun: ‘in-I " ,. .-:a— 5,.‘ IF‘ ..._, -5» 2 I 5 _ ‘_""‘ ."'\':H- F. p. g-'. _ J. Jr ‘ I: (I-cg» ‘
hl StOl"'l.C Y "-".13. CI" '~<;‘,u.8 Ch;-.'..;.L J. .'. .~_U8 . JC».’."lr.:‘-. ca ...c,‘- ya. C ‘-’'-'..;1  ..:T '-.'.'.3---<'...:  C3. L-ht} {LLB UOI'lC
. -I."r"\ ‘ ¢  -E a- -..--‘.u-. ----v':' --1" - " . ': "'-"--1:’ 1- . .
tribe supplements the corporation “as ta.tv plaintil- ani no evidence is
.4. ,; a.

Q

ribal roli of April, 193a."

he t

1--u

adducei “to determine the composition of t
This Commission has no express jurisdiction in matters of enrollment

and other such governmental relations with ihiiridaal 4’

ans. These

?
I...

U

are administrative functions under jurisdi tion of the epartment of the
Interior and the Bureau of Indian affairs. The jurisdiction of this Commission is limited to claims defined by statate and presented on behalf
of a "tribe, band, or other identifiable gro:p of American Indians”
(Section 2, Indian Claims Commission Act, .‘ Stat. lOh9; 25 U.S.C.A. 70a).
The question raised by defendant as to successorship by this tribe

to the rights of the aboriginal tribe is a separate question from the
issue of present identity of the petitioner as a tribe of American Indians.
Successorship involves the proof of descendancy from the original tribe,
group or band. But we do not find it reasonable or necessary to identify
each tribal member of petitioner tribe as to the authenticity of his
tribal enrollment or as to his aboriginal antecedents or genealogy to

prove the successorship of petitioner to the aboriginal tribe.

It is sufficient for petitioner to show that it is the tribal

Government correspondence, and other records vticb estailish the continuous existence of this tribe of lndians (See Pet. Ex. hi tbroueh Z:

and Pet- EX- 10) from earliest historic times to the _risent. ‘We,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. I11 lh3

therefore, have concluded thtt petitioner is the successor to the rights
of the historical rune (er Quechan) tribe (Finding S).

"Yuma" is an English name and is synonomous with the Indian name
”Quechan." This tribe of Indians was first ide.tified in 1700 by Father
Kino, a Jesuit priest and explorer. They were found by him in the Gila
river valley and at the confluence of the Gila and Colorado Rivers. This
has always been the center of their territory and is where they are now
assigned a reservation. Kino records that the Yuma also lived on the
west side of the Colorado. Although he did not cross over, some 300 swam
over to greet him. (Forde‘s Ethnog. of Yuma Iniians, p. 99).

ABORIGIEhL IEDIAN TITLE.

 

_The Yuma were relatively undisturbed in Spanish and Mexican times.

They maintained their aboriginal culture almost unchanged until the

frg fifties of the last century} when the establishment of the caravan trail

-...,.

:;to Southern California terminated their freedom to pursue their native
culture (Forde's Ethncg., p. 88). They were a strong war-like people
with a population of about 3000 in l8h8., Their population was not diminished until after the United States acduired sovereignty of their soil (Driver,
r. 219; Heintzelman, 01¢ Ex. 10, p. 18). ‘Dr. A. L. Krceber described them as
a tribe of farming Indians in.California, living in independent social groups,
which were autonomous land-owning villages or "rancherios“ (R. pp. 11-12).
The petitioner seeks recovery of compensation herein for certain I
described land situated in the southern part of the area presently known

as the States of.Arizona and California. This claim is based solely upon

U Ind. Cl. Com. lll lhh

a claim of exclusive use and occupancy from time immenorial, and is

not based upon any treaty with or cession to the United States. The
lands claimed generally extend from about 8 miles northwest of Blythe,
California, down both sides of the Colorado River to some 20 miles below

its confluence with the Gila River. The claimed area also encompasses

_about 10 miles on either side of the Gila eastward to the Mohawk Range.

It includes an area extending from said confluence near the International
Boundary'with the Republic of Mexico, and bounded on the southwest by a
line of sand hills, almost to the Salton Sea.

The northern part of the area claimed by the Yuma Tribe includes
the southern part of the "Great Colorado Valley" which valley stretches
along the Colorado River from Parker, Arizona, downstream to Picachio,
California.

In 1828 the Halchadhoma Indians were driven out of the area, between
Palo Verde north to Parker by the Mohave Indians. The Halchadhoma were
virtually annihilated and the remnant fled and emerged with the Maricopa
“P the Gila River after a sojourn in Old.MeXico for a few years. Dr; A.
L. Kroeber, petitioner's exhert, stated that the Yuma displaced the
Halchadhoma in.the area of Palo Verde. , v I

The Yavapai also frequented the Colorado River on the east about
the area of Picacho. The Yavapai were not farming Indians and their
P13NtinB was with seeds borrowed from the Tuna. Such limited use could
not be considered more than "permissive use" by the Iavapai of Yuma land.

Likewise on the nest of the Coloado, below Bl the, Dr. Kroeber
related that Gifford in his studies of the Kamia (or Dieguenos) reported

the hamia were permitted by the Yuma to plant some in dry years. However,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll

Gifford stated "the Yuaa held the opposite bank and were evidently the
owners of the west bank."_ The Kamia use was limited to dry years when
New River and Alamo Slough dried up.

Petitioner makes claim to desert areas extending almost to thei
Salton Sea in the Imperial Valley area. There is no evidence to
support this claim. Dr. A, L. Kroeber, petitioner's expert, testified
he had altered his earlier visas and had concluded after a careful investigation, there was no Yuma occupancy of the Imperial Valley area
in aboriginal times. (Finding 18; R. 102-106)

The Halchadhoma and Maricopa Indians occupied the Gila River area
in the Mohawk Mountains. The Yuma.planted corn, beans, pumpkins and

melons on the moist flood plains of their rivers and gathered mesquite

beans up to fifteen.miles above the confluence of the Gila with the

~,% Colorado River, and along the Colorado River. The Yuma additionally

3

used Antelope Hill.to break_out metate slab for grinding stones. However,

the close proximity and danger of an attack from the Halchadhoma and

Maricopa necessitated an armed band of'Yuma to travel together to Ané

itelope Hill.s It is concluded that the Yuma use and occupancy boundary

did not extend to their claimed line on the'Mohank Range but only to

the area.of“Metate Mountains.

In dry years, when the river Tailed to flood their planting ground

and the mesquite beans were scarce, the Yuma were reported to eat rats,

mice, frogs and lizards.

life adjacent to the rivers for their subsistence. Their use of the

desert mesas was limited,

comucho Mountains about fourteen.miles northwest of Yuma.

The Yuma used wild tobacco found in the CalThey were essentially dependent upon the plant

8 Ind. 01. Corn. 111 ,  lhé

The defendant urges that “the historic Yuma Tribe had no title
to the lands claimed," basing this contention upon certain events prior
to l8h8 alleging that such lands were first under the dominion of the
King of Spain in lb92 which was a proprietorship belonging to the
Spanish Crown, that Spanish law recognized only mission settlements
of Indians and with only limited rights of a usufructuary nature (Def.
Br., pp. 6h-65), that after the Declaration of Independence of Mexico
recognized by the United States in 1822, thereafter Mexico‘s Supreme C
Executive Government established in 1828, set up a cautious procedure
designed to guard against fraud in land matters, and that Mexico never
recognized the principle of Indian title or aboriginal title, with the
exception of missions and towns (Def. Br., p. 6?).

‘We must reject the contention that any non-recognition of Indian
title by the prior sovereignty of Spain and.Mcxico would operate as a bar
to this petitioner's claim here. There is no difference in the po1icy'of
the United States as respects aboriginal possession in lands previously
Owned by Spain and.Mexico than in any other areas. (Mohave Consolidated

§..a§.e§. V- 13-8., 7 Ind. c1-com. 219, I_J_,_s_. v. Santa Fe Pac. $1.3. Co., 31h
U0 St  

Defendant also tontends that this Commission has erred in its interpretation of the Act of March 3, l8Sl (9 Stat. 631), as it was applied
to a fact situation similar to this claim in the Mohave Consolidated

93395 (7 Ind. Cl. Con. 219, Fdg. 22(b) at p. 2h2) and that we have thereby

"overruled" the 1901 decision of the Supreme Court in Barker v. Harvey

 

 Q go

(181 U.S. h81) (See Def. Br p. 78).

-aa&California side of the Colorado River were concerned.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 111 - 11.7

Plaintiff Indians in.Barker v. Harvey were held to have “abandoned”

 

; any claims to Certain mission lands in California which were based or 1
founded on the action of the Mexican government. The great weight of
the evidence fails to support defendant's contention that the Yuma
Tribe voluntarily abandoned its lands. The Yuma Tribe was not a mission
group of Indians and was not required to comply with the Act of March 3,
1851 (9 Stat. 631) in confirming or registering any land claim derived

from Mexico or Spain. (Mohave Consolidated Indian Cases V. Li. 5. 7 Ind.

 

01- Comm. 219; U. S. f. Sante Fe Pac. R.R. Co., 31h U. S. 339)

   

TAKDIG OF mm mums IN CALIFOHJIA
The onerative effect of the 1851 Act was'held in the Santa Fe case
as containing "machinery for extinguishment of claims, including those
based 5; Indian right of occupancy,“ insofar as lands situated on the

Section 13 of the 1851

M’

 Act extinguished the aboriginal Indian title of the Yuma Tribe to its

‘**a;’

California lands by declaring same “public domain" of the United States.
(See Fdg. 22(b); cf., Mohaue Consolidated Cases V; U.S., 7 Ind. Cl.
Comm. 219; Indians of California; 8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1, 29, 39; Indians Of

California, 98 C. Cls. S83, S92, Cert. Dene, 319 U. S. 76h). Consistent

 

with the above cited cases, we think the effective date that Yuma lands
in.Ca1ifornia became ¥public domain," on March 3, 1853, constitutes the
date of taking (Finding 23(b)).

TAKING OF YUMA LANDS IN ARIZ NA

 

The opinion in the Santa Va case distinguished the 1851 Act from

the Act oi‘«July, 1851: (10 Stat. ;=_.;.-3) which established the office of

. .....-.¢....._. -— .-u..-u.......n-u-..o....-....—-H-.-ca. ..-....-...-. .y-. ._ 8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll 1&8

Surveyor General of New Mexico and required him to make a report to
Congress on all claims of land under the laws, usages and customs of
Spain and Mexico as originated before the cession of the territory to
the United.States by the Treaty of Guadalupe Iidalgo in the territory
of New Mexico. The opinion stated:

The Acts of l8Sh and 1870, unlike the Act of l8Sl, merely
called for a report to Congress on certain land claims. If
there was an extinguishment of the rights of the Walapais,
it resulted not from action of the Surveyor General but from
action of Congress based upon his reports. "we are not advised
that Congress took any such action. (3lh'U.S. 339, 351)
The opinion on the question of the “taking” of the'walapais‘
3b0TiEina1 lands concluded that the Walapais acceptance of a reservation
established by executive order in 1883 must be deemed to have been a

"relinquishment of tribal rights in land outside the reservation and

notoriously claimed by others," as to any lands in Arizona.

18 The establishment-of a "reserve for Yumas“ by President Chesterp

h. Arthur's executive order of January 9, 188b, and the acceptance of
same and removal thereon of the Yuma Tribe, constitutes the date of
relinquishment of its tribal rights to lands outside such reserve.
Therefore, on January 9, l88h, the United States had extinguished Indian
title to those lands which the Yuma Indians held by exclusive use andr
°°°uPan°Y in.Arizona (Finding 26).

The petitioner has proven aboriginal Indian title in the Yuma

(Qucchan) tribe to the lands described in Finding 2l and the taking

or Same by the United States was nithout treaty of cession or payment

°f °°mPGnSation.

8 Ind. Cl. Como 111

Accordingly, an interlocutory order will be entered herein

adjudging the United States liable to petitioner for the value of
the lands described in Finding 21, less the amount of such'acreage
as is claimed-by this petitioner in Docket No. 320. The total

value of such net acreage shall be reduced in the total amount of

credits and offsets, if any, allowable under the Indian Claims Commission.Act.

EDGAR E.'HITT
Chief Commissioner

We Concur:

‘WILLIAM H. HOLT

 

Associate Commissioner.Arthur V. Watkins
takes no part in the rendition oi‘ this

Opinion because he has only recently become
a member of this Commission.

1149

