BEFORE TEE II~EDI1“-.N CLA DES COi~‘E~ESSION

THE SAEEZISH TRIBE OF II«3DI!'£€ ,
Petitioner,
V. I Docket No. 261g

THE UNITED STATES OF AEEERICA ,

VVVVVVVVV

Defendant .

Decided: March 11, 1958

FINDINGS OF FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

I. The Samish Tribe of Indians, petitioners herein, is an
identifiable tribe of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the United States along the shoreline of Guemes
Island and Samish Peninsula in what is now the Northwest portion
of the State of Washington. The identity of this aboriginal group
or tribe of Indians, as such, has been established in evidence as
required by the Indian Claims Commission Act of august 13, 1946
(60 Stat. 1049; 25 U.s. Code Sec. 70(a)).

EVIDEI‘ITI.3LRY F.=’~.CTS SUPPORTED ULTDJATE
FIEEIEEGS OF FACT I50. I I
(a) The United States Court of Claims found that the

Samish Indians were one of the parties to the Treaty of Point Elliott
by reason of the signature of "Pat-teh—us, 1‘Ioo-wha-ah Sub Chief“
(Duwamish, et :11 Indians V. United States, 79 C. Cls. 530, Findings

of Fact IV, Docket Bio. F-275 and Deposition, p. 297).

(b) The Samish Indians, eo-nomine, do not appear in the
Treaty of Point Elliott (l2 Stat. 927; II Kapp. 669), either in
the preamble or among the signatory Indian parties to the treaty.
However, the treaty cession includes the whole of the areas alleged
by petitioner to have been used and occupied by Samish Indians in
aboriginal times .

(C) Report of Lieut. De L. Floyd Jones, dated September 1:,

1853, states “Samish.-suppose l50 - located north of 2-Ehidbey's Island

on the Samish River" (Dft. Ex. 18?, p. 5).

(d) Isaac Stevens, Governor and Superintendent of Indian
Affairs, Washington Territory, reported on September 16, l85i+,nthe
Samish are on a small river of the same name. in the south part of
Bellingham Bay" (Dft. Ex. llb, p. 155).

(e) Governor Stevens reported December 30, l856, "The Lummi,

Neuksack and Samish have their headquarters at Bellingham Bay (Du.

wamish, et al v. United States, R. 766, 73.275).

(f) Indian agent E. C. Fitzhugh reported on June 18, 1857,
"Before and since the comancemencb of the Indian War in this 
’C0I'*./. I‘ve had under my supervision 3 tribes: Lummas, Iiooksacrlm;
and Samish - in all 850 * * * and the remainder, say 98 of Sara?
(Dft. Ex. I, p. 1100, 13).

(g) The most descriptive report in treaty times on “bad
identity of the Samish was made by agent E. C. Fitzhugh in his

report dated l8_57:

" =--.O\
ru

'- I
-:‘.?"‘.‘-‘_‘:T:‘...

The Samish as a tribe, appear to be more wandering than
the others (Lnmmi and §ooksack)., They have several islands
which they claim as their inheritance, together with a large
scope of the main land. They have some very fine bottom,
which they cultivate on a river, whence they derive their name.
Their principal fisheries are along the islands and in the channels, through the low bottoms or field lands adjacent to the
mouth of their river; They are governed.by one chief, but generally follow their own inclinations as they become associated,
‘with civilization. Their total number now I do not think exceeds two hundred, whereas ten or twelve years ago they were
one of the most numerous tribes on the Sound, and at that date
numbered over two thousand * * *. They have been nearly annihilated by hordes of northern savages that * * * infest our
own shores (Dft. Ex. 1, pp. 2, 3, e).

(h) Upchurch reported in Vol. 27, No. # (1936) of the
Pacific Northwest Quarterly as follows:

(5) The Samish, a band related linguistically to the
Clallam, the Songish.of Vancouver Island, and the Lummi, have
their name perpetuated in Samish Bay, Lake, Island, River and
Village, I am.inclincd to believe that the word Samish is a
different pronunéiation of the name Songish of the Vancouver
Island Band. So many generations have past that it is doubtful whether it could.be authentically determined today; The
Samish held Samish Island, Guemes Island, eastern Lopez Island,
Cypress Island, and Fidalgo Island, west of Fidalgo Bay where
they met the Swinomish. On the shores of the mainland in the
vicinity of Edison they met the No-wha-ha, sometimes called
Upper Samish, along a wide front. (6) The No-wha-ha, sometimes
called Upper Samish or Stick Samish, (although they are not linguistically related to the Samish as closely as they are to the
Snohomish or some of the other interior bands) occupied the
country from southern Lake'Hhatcom on Samish Lake and Samish
River south to where Mount Vernon now stands, where they met
the Kikiallis on the South * * *. They ranged easterly to the
'vicinity'of Sedro'Hoolley where they met bands of what are now
known as Upper Skaggits. Their principal villages were on the
Samish.River and what is now the village of Bayview.

(i) Both defendant‘s expert witnesses, Dr. Carroll L, Riley,
and clainwnrt‘s ethnologist, Dr.'Hayne P. Suttles, testified on the

hearing of the claim.that.Samish Indians were identifiable Indians

of aboriginal times (I1 Tr. pp. 9, lo, 11 and I Tr. 89).i Dr.
Suttles‘ thesis, "Economic Life of the Coast Salish of Hero and
Rosario Straits" contains by far the most extensive treatment of
Samish Indians among ethnological works.

2. We find this petitioner is the tribal organization of
Samish Indians whose predecessors in interest ceded their lands,
along with other groups of Indians, under the Treaty of Point
Elliott to defendant (12 stat. 927; II Kapp. 669; Fdg. la, e. 5.).

:1 EETIDEITTIARY FACTS SUPPORTING FIIEDING ISO. 2 L
(a) The chairman of the Samish Tribe of Indians testified

there are about 150 members of the Samish Tribe (I_Tr.' ll).

(Alfred Edwards; also M.-_:_.ry MCTIA1-re'11 Nansen}, ‘-7“ 4"‘-""""' *°'‘‘ N‘ “"*‘"" two

...... .. -- -.--—--u - ' ---up in-rs-VII  LFLAGA 5'

of his uncles and perhaps his father also had testified in the
previous trial of the Samish claims urged before the Court of Claims.
(Duwamish, et al. Indians vs. United States 79 C. Cls. 530, No. F-275
(1934)).
(b) The aged witness for claimant, Mrs. William (Ruth)

Shelton, stated that Saxnish Indians had occupied certain areas rsrf."
the Puget Soound since before treaty times (I Tr. pp. 26, 27, 28, .:..,
30) and she made identification of certain Samish areas, named 

Samish Indians and their uses of such locations in the latter part of‘

the nineteenth century .

(C) The following plaintiffs were parties to the treaty of

Point Elliott, viz: "* * * and the Samish Tribes," (listing ‘E311’-_"-.i'“'.”:~"?"T_

tribes). CDuwamish case, Findings of Fact Iv, Cit. Id).

(d) And defendant's expert, Dr, C. L. Riley, does not
dispute that petitioners were descendants of a separate tribe
but responds "as I know, they (Samish) were separate. Of course
they may'have lived with other tribes" (Dr. C. L. Riley, II Tr. 18) .

3, The petitioner and defendant stipulated at the opening of

the initial hearing of this case as follows:

There shall be first a determination in the matter of
Samish Tribe of Indians versus the United States of imerica,
Docket No. 261, the question whether the claimant, under the
law and facts to be adduced had, at the time of the alleged
‘wrongful acts by the defendant, aboriginal or Indian title,
‘within the meaning of the ict, to the lands described in the
‘petition,‘or any part thereof, and if so, whether the Defendant
unlawfully deprived the claimant thereof, postponing until such
determination, should such determination be favorable to claim.
ant, proof as to the value thereof, or as to any question of
fact not heretofore determined by the Commission.

.. 4. Petitioner alleges that it had exclusive aboriginal use and
occupancy of the following described territory within the area ceded
to the United States in the ?oint Elliott Treaty of January 22, 1855,

12 Stat. 927, II Kapp. 669:

Commencing at the Northwest corner of Section l9, Township 35 North, Range 3 E;N;H.; thence East along said l/l6
line to its intersection with the range line between Range 3
EJWIM. and Range # E;W.M.; thence Eorth on said range line to
the Northeast corner of Section 25, TownshiP 37 North, Range 3
EJW}M.; thence Nest along the Korth section line to its intersection with Chuckanut Bay in Section 25, Township 37 Eorth,
Range 2 E;H}M.; thence in a Southuesterly direction to the
Southern tip of Lummi Island; thence in.a‘westerly direction
through Obstruction Pass and to the Horthwest corner of Obstruction Island in Township 36 North, Range l‘H,H,M.; thence in a
Southwesterly direction to Port Stanle3'on Lopez Island in Section l2, Township 35 Earth, Range 2 %}N;H;; thence continuing
in a Southwesterly direction to Davis Point on Lopez Island
in Section 9, Township 3% Korth, Range 2 NIW,M.; thence in a
Southeasterly direction to Iceberg Point on Lopez Island; thence

around the Southern tip of Lopez Island and in an.Easterly
direction to the west entrance to Deception Pass in Township
34 North, Range l a;w,w.; thence in a Northeasterly direction
across Fidalgo Island and Fidalgo Bay to the Northern tip of
Marches Point in Section 28, Township 35 North, Range 2IEJ§4M.;
thence in a Northeasterly direction to point of beginning; in
Skagit, %hatcom.and San Juah Counties, tate of Washington
(Pet. Req, Fdg. of Fact No. 2)

5. The S&mish'winter'village locations were situated, within
the area of the United States, along the "back side" of Samish
Island (peninsula) at the mouth of the Samish River and on the nearby‘
Guemes Island, being moved.about from place to place, especially'in
this immediate area, after the influx of white settlers in treaty
times. The Samish are also described in.treaty times “to be a
more wandering class than either of the others" (Lummi or Nooksack).
(Report of agent Fitzhugh (1857) Dft. Ex, I, p“ 9 a u\

..-v """l.-/9 '10

6. The Samish Indian villages were located in aboriginal times

as follows:
I. Aatseque — on the south shore, Samish Island

2. Xwaimel - on the south shore, Guemes Island

- 3. Chankwenung - south shore, Lopez Island (a reef
netting location)

4. Kwaal — east shore, Fidalgo Bayl
The first two locations were exclusive, the la ter two j%intly'used
‘with other Puget Sound Indians ("Handbook of American Indians,"
Bulletin 30, Part 2, p, #21; Def. Ex. 2, pp II»? to II—l3).

Numerous additional use areas were used by the Samish seasonally with

6 11::
~..;

I
"'1'

other Puget Sound Indians. The aboriginal tribe (Samish Indians)
“was composed of one large village which was autonomous * * *”
(Pet. Req. Fdg. of Fact No. 13).

7. The Samish Tribe was in aboriginal times a separate and
distinct entity from the Nuwhaha Tribe sometimes called Stick-Samish
or Upper Samish. The Nuwhaha spoke a Nisqually dialect while the
Samish spoke a different Salishan dialect. In aboriginal times bad
feeling is said to have arisen between these two tribes. (Dr. Suttles,
I Tr. 132; Dr. C. L. Riley, II Tr. 11-14 3: 17). we find nothing in
the record of testimony or exhibits to justify a finding of Sam:'LshNuwha.-ha tribal merger.

8. Population. The Samish Indian population in the l850‘s

 

has been variously estimated and reported as figures between 98 and
2.00. The name Samish was omitted in the Lane, de Earle‘ , and Sterling
accounts and listings of Indian population. Schoolcraft, Gibbs and
Governor Stevens report Samish population as 150 as of the ‘year l851+.
In I856 Agent Fitzhugh of the Bellingham Bay Agency reported a Samish
population of 98 (iapparently an estimate). (Tr. I:-, l0 & ll).
9. Means of Subsistence. The Samish Indians, were sea-oriented,
fish eating Indians traveling among the numerous islands out from
Samish Bay by means of canoes hewn from cedar logs. They caught
halibut, herring, dog, humpback, spring and silver salmon, and sockeye. dug Clams, horseclams, and hunted seals off Smith Island. In

addition to the foregoing sea-life, they caught ducks, islander deer

and elk, and cultivated camas beds and wild berries, and later
potatoes, after about l8-14-O (Pet. Ex. 2, Map with symbols of food.

10. Subsistence Area. About the southwestern tip of San Juan
Island around the north shore of Blakely Island to Eliza Island,
just south of Lummi Island, to the center of Chuckanut Bay south
along the mainland coast to the mouth of the Samish -River southwestward across the mainland and continuing across Padi_"..lo Bay and
Fidalgo Island to the place of beginning (parts of this area were
intertribal subsistence areas) (Pet Ex. 2).

Nooksack and Samish dug clams and intermingled in joint areas
as users in common (Mrs. Lyons, I Tr. 17). Lummis and friendly
neighboring tribes used Samish territory as permissive users,

(Mrs. Shelton, I Tr. 37) . The plentiful duck and fish were jointly
shared around Samish Island and out on the flats by Samish, l.umni,
Swinornish and Twaha (Tommy Bob, II Tr. 62) and Lopez, Cypress and
San Juan Island areas were essentially free use areas (Dr. Suttles,
I Tr. 153; Dr. Riley, II Tr. 24).

11. On August 29, 1955 the defendant filed motion to amend
paragraphs 8, 20, Z. and 214-‘, respectively, of defendant‘s answer
to which motion petitioner filed their objections on October l0,
I955. Petitioner's said objections were overruled and this Commission entered its order permitting defendant to so amend its answer.

The substance of this amendment is a denial that the Samish were

“Treaty” Indians, and then a plea in the alternative, that if
petitioner's antecedents were a party to the Treaty of Point Elliott
and did therein make a cession of the lands described in paragraph IV
of'the petition, then the-United States has paid petitioner Indians,
and others, a valuable consideration for such treaty cession and that
"the so-called Samish Indians“ - participated in such payment and the
other consideration named in the Treaty. additionally; defendant
denies that petitioner was not accorded fair and honorable dealings.
12. The Samish Tribe of Indians exclusively used and occupied

an area of land in aboriginal times described as follows:

First Tract: Commencing at the mouth of Edison Slough,
sometimes called North Samish River, thence up said stream
to a point known as Edison Station; thence southwestward across the Ilatlands to a point in a principal bend of the Samish
River, said point being at the place where the North-South
Section line traverses the Samish River southwest of Conn School;
thence eastward to the principal inlet on Padillo Bay shoreline,
said point being approximately one mile north of the mouth of Joe
Leary Slough; thence northward along said shoreline circumscribing
Samish.Island (peninsula) to the place of beginning.

Second Tract: All of Guemes Island.
13. The lands described in Finding 12 were part of the lands ceded

to the United States by the terms of the Treaty of Point Elliott by

the Samish Indians. The date of signing of this treaty by the respective
parties was January 22, l855. This treaty was not ratified, however,

until some iour years later on March 8, 1859, and the date of such ratification by the United States Senate constitutes the date of taking (12 Stat.

927; II Kapp. 669).

1'4. any rights which petitioner, their ancestorsnand predecessors
in interest may have retained or acquired to any lands within the boundaries as set forth in Finding NO. l2 may be made the subject of inquiry
at the further hearing of this claim respecting the credits of the defendant and consideration paid to petitioner or its successor and predeces;
sors in interest, and as to the value of said lands as of the effective date

of the treaty, March 8, 1859.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J . O'I~Iarr
Associate Commissioner

 

Associate Commissioner

