BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE SNAKE OR PIUTE INDIANS OF )
I THE FORMER MAIHEUR RESERVATION, )
IN'ORDGON, )
)
Petitioners, %
vs. ' ; Docket No. 17

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
I Defendant. )

Decided: December 28, 1956

AMENDED FINDI1\I‘zS _Q_]§‘_ FACT

The Commission makes the following amended findings of fact in

accordance with the instructions contained in the opinion of the Court

of Claims filed on June 2, 1953, in The Snake or Piute Indiams of the

former Malheur Reservation in Oregon V. The United States, 125 C. Cls.

 

2111, which amended findings shall supersede the findings numbered 1
to 18, inclusive, heretofore made in the prior decision of the Com/

mission, filed on December 29, l9SO.

1. The petitioners herein are an identifiable group of American
Indians residing within the territorial limits of the United States
who are and for many years have been known and recognized by administrative officers of the defendant as "the Snake or Piute Indians of

the former Malheur Reservation in Oregon." Petitioners are the descendants of the bands or “Tribe“ of Snake or Piute Indians (also referred to as "Snake or Shoshone Indians") who were parties to an

unratified treaty negotiated and signed on December 10, 1868, by their

4 571-3

:1 pg (Corrected b;
4‘ 5 (2 Order of 2/L;/5?:

chiefs and headmen,'we4You4WeJWa (principal chief) Gsha-Nee, E-he—gant,
Po-Nee, Chow-Wat-Na-Ne, Ow--its and Tash-E-Go, and by J .8 W. P. Huntington,
Superintendent of Indian.Affairs for the Territory of Oregon, representing
the United States. (125 c. Cls. 2u1, 2u3).

2. The petitioners have the capacity and are authorized by the
lndian.C1aims Commission Act of August 13, l9h6 (60 Stat. 10h9) to
present the claims set forth in the petition fi1ed.with the Commission
for and on behalf of the descendants of members of the aboveumentioned
Snake or Piute Bands or Tribe of Indians, parties to the unratified
treaty of December 10, 1868, and as distinguished from descendants of
other Snake and Piute bands such as 0-Che-ho‘s, ChockeTote's and‘Winne«
'mucca‘s bands who did not claim the Malheur country as their owno

8. The lands to which petitioners claim.their ancestors held
original Indian title are those lands included within the former Mala
heur Reservation established for the “Snake or Piute Indians“ bye
Executive Order of the President on September 12, 1872, as modified by
Executive Orders of May 15, 1875 and January 28, 1876. The boundaries
of the Malheur Reservation area, as defined by the Executive Order of
January 28, 1876, are as follows:

Beginning at a point on the right bank of the Malheur River

where the range line between ranges 38 and 39 east of the_

'Wil1amette meridian intersects the same; thence north on

said range line to a point due east of the summit of Castle

Rock; thence due west to the summit of Castle Rock; thence

in a northnesterly direction to Strawberry Butte; thence to
Soda Spring, on the Canyon City and Camp Harney road; thence
down Silvies Creek to Malheur Lake; thence due east to the _
right bank of the South Fork of Malheur River; thence down,
said.right bank of the South Fork to the Malheur River; thence
down the right bank of the Malheur River to the place of
beginning, except such lands within these limits as have passed

or may pass to The Dallas Military Road on the north, and the
Willamette Valley and Cascade Mountain.Military Road.on the southo

The area in issue contains approximately 1,778,560 acres of land located
in southeastern Oregon, just to the north of Harney and Malheur Lakes

on the forks of the Malheur river. It may be identified as Tract Nos.
638 and 6h6 on Royce's Map No. 2 of Oregon.

h. The first recorded white contact with the Indians inhabiting
what is now southeast Oregon is found in the Journal of Peter Ogden
of the Hudson Bay Company who visited the Malheur and Harny Lakes
area in 1826. He reported finding an "incredible" number of Indians
in that area living in grass huts whom he referred to as "Snakes."

He commented on the wandering life they led and stated that if they
left "this region" the war tribes would soon destroy them. In 1832,
John Work; also a trapper for Hudson Bay Company, reported finding
Snake Indiansin the same area. These "Snake" Indians found and
described by Ogden and'Work were thereafter, during the white contact
period, repeatedly and consistently referred to in reports of United
States Military Officers and Government agents in the area as bands of
Snake or Piute Indians living in southeastern Oregon. ‘While they were
generally referred to as Snake Indians, they were also called "Snake or

Shoshone" or "Snake and Piute.“ They are now identified by reliable

authority as Northern Piutes.
5. In earlier aboriginl times, these Snake or Piute Indians in
southeastern Oregon comprised small groups or clusters of families who

gathered.roots, fished and hunted in areas with which each was most

familiar. At times they ranged over wide areas wherever food was
available. Since their was principally a foodmgathering economy, those

h 572

Indians ranging within an.area where a particular1y'important or unusual
food.was found were designated by other Indians as "Eaters" of such
food. The Snake or Piute Indians inhabiting the Harney"and.Malheur

Lake area and on the Malheur River and its tributaries in aboriginal
times have been classified as the ”Wadatoka" or "Wadatika” band of
Northern Piutes by anthropologists who have made special studies of

the Northern Piutes in Oregon.

In 1939 a study entitled “The Northern Paiute Bands“ by Dr. Omar
0. Stewart was published in the Anthropological Records of the University
of California (Vol. 2, No. 3) in which Dr. Stewart locates and names the
"sub-divisions" of the Northern Paiute Tribe occupying parts of Nevada,
Idaho, southeastern Oregon and California. He states that the inform
mation concerning “the twenty-one bands" was obtained.“through field
work and.consultation of the literature." On of the bands named by
Stewart is the “Wadatoka" (seed eating) band. In describing the
boundaries of the area he considered this band occupied, he states that
“discernible boundaries encompassed about 5250 square miles, including
streams entering Harney and Malheur Lakes and Malheur River." The described area is shown on.a map Dr. Stewart included in his publication,
and the 1and.in issue here is located within the exterior boundaries
E the area assigned to the whadatoka" band of Northern Piutes by Dr.
Stewart. According to Stewart there is no doubt but that the "Wadatoka“
was an aboriginal band.
Dr. Beatrice Blyth Whiting spent the summers of 1936 through 1938

doing field work among the Indians at Burns, Oregon, and in 1950 published a study called “Paiute Sorcery" in which she states:

The Piutes now living outside Burns, in southeastern
Oregon, are remnants of the'Wadadika (Nada-Eaters) band
of the northern.Paiutes. Their former habitat was Harney
Valley, centering around Malheur and Harney Lakes and extending ndrth to the headwaters of the Silvies and Silver
rivers and.south to Catlow Valley. On the east the members
of the band wandered as far as Drewsey and Riverside on the
Malheur river and the eastern base of the Steenes Mountains,
and on the west to the vicinity of Wagontire. They did not
consider that they owned this land to the exclusion of all
other people but in their seasonal wanderings they kept
pretty much within these boundaries. They were surrounded

by other Paiute bands, who, like the Harney Valley Paiute,
were named after their staple food.

Dr. Whiting in her publication in a footnote to her description of the
band's distribution stated that "this picture of the band distribution
correspons roughly with Omar Stewart's mapping in ‘the Northern Paiute
Bands.‘ % % % Actually each one of these bands could.be broken up into
smaller units. There was no real political organization within the
bands.and the named groups merely designated people who tended to visit

the same food gathering locales year after year. These people also

generally wintered in camps clustered around the same vicinity. In the

case of the Wada Eaters they wintered in the vicinity of Wadaba (Malheur

Lake), which was where wada grew plentifully."

Dr. Julian H. Steward, an anthropologist, who prepared a report on

the Ndrthern Piute Indians which is Defendant's Exhibit No. 198 and who

H.

testified for defendant, states in his report regarding Northern Piute

aboriginal food-named groups, as follows:

Owing to the combination of paucity of food sources, a
consequent exceedingly sparse population, and the erratic
local annual occurrence of most principal foods, physical
survival was such an uncertainty that individual families
moved from season to season and year to year to localities
where one or another food was reported to be comparatively
abundant. Since the principal foods were wild seeds, the

h 575

basic socio-economic unit was the individual family; larger
groups were possible only when there were temporary abundance,
such as game obtained in communal deer, rabbit or antelope

hunts, or fish taken during seasonal runs.

These subsistence factors prevented habitual utilization
of clearly defined territories by particular families or
groups of families, but they did not entail unlimited.migration

by any families. Two factors prevented wanton wandering. First,
detailed knowledge of certain terrain was essential to survival, and a family would travel each year principally within

an area.it knew. Second, the only permanent inter-familial

ties were marriage, not membership in clearly delimited and

well integrated supra-family bands or villages. iThese ties

were an.inducement for the different families to remain in

touch with their relatives.

Aboriginal Northern Paiute local groups, consequently,
consisted of families who were related through marriage and
who habitually ranged within a territory which varied accord»

ing to resources and other factors but which probably ranged
from 100 to 200 square miles.

Dr. Stewart further states in his report that "since the Paiute was
largely preoccupied with food they came to designate the people who lived
in different portions of the territory by some important or unusual food
obtained there, and.that occupants of a locality, temporary or permanent,
took the nane of the local food."

6. ‘Due to white emigration and settlement in southeast Oregon
around l8h5b there appears to have been a gradual change in the native
way of life of the Snake or Piute Indians in.that area. The destruction
of native vegetable foods, which had been their principal subsistence,
and the presence of white immigrant trains and livestock herds, which
the Indians could exploit as a new means of subsistence, caused these
smaller groups or hands to gather together in larger bands. They rem
sented the intrusions of the whites into their territory and, as a

result, became and were continuously hostile towards the whites until

-- '.-.:-.:.=.....' 
. , ._ 

finally subdued by the United States military forces in l868. ‘With
this formation of the larger bands and their expansion between l8hS
and 1868, certain of the Snake or Piute chiefs became prominent in
southeast Oregon and were recognized by Government agents and United
States military officers as chiefs or leaders of bands bearing their
name, and living in certain.areas.

‘We4You4We4Wa was recognized as the principal chief of the bands or
"Tribe" of Snake or Piutes inhabiting the country around Malheur and
Harney Lakes and on the tributaries of the Malheur River in eastern
bregon. E-he-gant (also known as Egan) and Owitze (also known as Oits)
were sub—chiefs or leaders under'We4You4We4Wa. Chockatote was a Piute
chief;whose band of Snake or Piutes lived in the vicinity of Yi-nax or
Sprague river in the Klamath Reservation area in southern Oregon.
Oche-ho was a chief whose band lived in the area near'Warner Lake, also
located in southern Oregon. 'Einnemucca was a well—known chief who, with
his followers, inhabited an area in western Nevada, but were frequently
sdthin.southeast Qregon. Leggins was a subnchief under Chief Winnemucca.

7. By the Act of August lb, l8h8 (9 Stat. 323) Congress created
the Territory of Oregon, which included the area inhabited by petitionrs'
ancestors. The Act provided that "nothing in.this Act contained shall
be construed to impair the rights of person or property now pertaining
to the Indians in said Territory, so long as such rights shall remain
unextinguished.by treaty between the United States and such Indians,"
and section lb of the Act secured to the inhabitants of said Territory

all the rights and privileges granted by the Northwest Ordinance of

July 13, 1787 (1 Stat. 52) wherein Article 3 provided as follows:

h 577

* % % the utmost good faith shall always be observed towards_the Indians; their land and property shall never be
_taken from.them without their consent; and in their property rights and liberty, they never shall be invaded or
disturbed, unless in just and lawful wars authorized by
Congress; but laws founded in justice and humanity shall
from time to time be made for preventing wrongs being done

to them, and for preserving peace and friendship'with
theme % * %

\

8. On June 5, 1850, Congress passed an Act (9 Stat. h37) authorizing
the negotiation of treaties with the Indian tribes in the Territory of
Oregon for the extinguishment of their claims to lands lying west of

the Cascade Mountains, and if practicable for their removal east of said

mountains. Section 2 of this act authorized the appointment of a Super»

intendent of Indian Affairs for the Territory of Oregon.
9. Pursuant to this Act numerous treaties were negotiated with
Indian tribes and bands in.western Oregon, but none of said tribes were

removed east of the Cascade Mountains. The following treaties were also

concluded pursuant to said act with Indian tribes east of the Cascade
Mountains:

(1) On June 9, l855, a treaty (12 State 9H5) was concluded with
the Walla'Walla, Cayuse and Umatilla Tribes in southeast'Washington
and northeastern Oregon Territories, wherein they ceded a tract of land
in northeast Oregon lying between the Columbia.River and the Blue
Mbuntains, including on the south the north fork of the John.Day'River,
and the Umatilla Indian Reservation was established in the northeastern
part of eastern Oregon.

(2) On June 25', 1855, a treaty (12 stat. 963) was concluded with

the Confederated.Tribes of Middle Oregon, wherein they ceded to the

United States a tract of land located in northncentral Oregon lying

h 578

1: 579

between the Columbia.Riyer on the north and hh degrees latitude on the
south, and the'Warm Springs Indian Reservation was established between
the Cascade Mountains and the Deschutes River. This cession embraced a
small portion of the lands subsequently included in the Malheur Reservation.

10. On June 1, 1863, J.'W} Huntington, Superintendent of Indian
Affairs for the Territory of Oregon, advised the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs that he had.collected such information as he could relative to
the “Snake or Shoshone Tribe of Indians" inhabiting the country lying
south and southeast of the lands purchased from the Confederated Tribes
of’Midd1e Oregon under the treaty of June 25, 1855, and the Walla Walla,
Cayuse, Umatillas and Nez Perce Indians under the treaty of June 9, 1855.
Huntington reported that the word "Snake" appeared to be the general
term applied to these Indians, who were quite distinct in language and
characteristics, inhabiting different tracts of country, but that all
‘were connected.by relationship, as they had intermarried with each other
over a long period of'years. He recommended that in the public interest
an effort be made to negotiate treaties with these Indians.

On September 12, 1863, Superintendent Huntington again wrote to
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs directing his attention to the various
bands of "Snakes" east of the Cascade Mountains occupying "the vast
region, only partially explored," lying south of the lands purchased
under the two aforesaid 1855 treaties, noting that all these Indians,
except a portion of the Klamath and Modocs, were and had been for a
long time in a state of actual hostility towards the whites.

11. On March 25, l86h, Congress passed an Act (13 Stat. 37) which

provided as follows:

1 That the President te, and he hereby is, authorized to
conclude a treaty with the Klamath, Modoc and Snake Indians
in southeastern Oregon for the purchase of the country
occupied by them.

An appropriation of $20,000 was also made for that purpose.

12. In a letter of treaty instructions to Superintendent Hunting»

ton under date of June 22, 186k, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
0. E. Nix, advised Huntington that although $20,000 had been appropriated
to negotiate treaties with the Klamath, Modoc, and other Indian tribes

in southern Oregon under the l86h Act, only $10,000 was being advanced,

since the United States was hard pressed financially due to the great

expense of the Civil'War. He urged.Huntington to be as economical as

possible in carrying out his negotiations but to proceed under the
186k Act to negotiate "such a treaty as in your judgment will best

isub—serve the interests of our citizens and the Indians." The letter

reads, in part, as follows:

It is not the policy of the Government to admit title in
the wandering tribes of Indians on the Pacific Coast, and
unless you find unsuperable difficulties, I could advise
that the treaty should be one of peace and friendship and
an agreement on the part of the Indians toxeside upon a
proper reservation to be selected and distinctly marked,
with an agreement on the part of the United States to provide them with necessary supplies, % % %._ If, however,
you find it necessary to negotiate for the exclusive
possession of any part of the country whichthey occupy
to enable our people to develop its mineral production
or avail of its agricultural resources. care should also
be taken in that case that the boundaries of the portion
retained by the Indians shou1d.be clearly defined, % % %

% % % I invite your attention to the enclosed copies
of correspondence from the late Superintendent Agent Steel
(California), and especially to his remarks in.relation to
the character of the treaty which should in his judgment
be negotiated, these remarks commend themselves to me as
being of practicable value, nevertheless I have thought
it proper in view of communications from.you % % % to

leave the questions as to whether the proposed treaty
shall be one of cession, or merely of peace and.friendship to the discretion of yourself and associates. In
either event you are carefully to avoid any extravagant
stipulations in favor of the Indians.

The enclosed letter of Steel's dated March 8, 186a, described
the "Snake or Shoshones" as a very numerous trite of rather “roving
proclivities," traversing from.southeastern Oregon, a part of Washington,
Idaho, Nevada and Utah Territory. As to the character of the treaty to
be negotiated with these Indians, Steel suggested in his letter that:

A treaty with them as in fact with all other Indians whose

country is not required for immediate settlements, should

he only for their good.behaviour and.the right of way and

grazing etc. In any case the principle of presents and
stipulations for purchase should be avoided. %,% “

I\

13. On August 1, 186b, Superintendent Huntington acknowledged

the June 22, l86h letter of instructions and enclosures, and advised

the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that he intended to proceed immediately
ito hold a council with the Indians in the vicinity of Klamath Lake to
conclude a treaty‘with them, but that it would be impossible to include
all the Indians covered by the l86h Act in one treaty as they were
scattered over too vast a region to admit of their being collected

at one place. He stated.that the bands near Klamath Lake were friendly
and desired.to make a treaty, but the bands to the north and east of
Klamath Lake were at war with the whites and military expeditions had
been set against them. Huntington requested that the additional
$10,000 appropriated under the l86h act be forwarded for use in negotiating a treaty or treaties with the Snake Indians "who occupy the

country south of Blue Mountain and east of the Klamath and Goose Lakes."

L 581

In a letter dated October 2h, 186b, to Superintendent Huntington,
the Commissionr acknowledged Huntington’s letter of August 1st and
authorized him to negotiate treaties with the Indians mentioned in his
letter and advised that the $10,000 had been placed to his credit for
that purposee

lh. On.October lh, l86h, Superintendent Huntington negotiated
a treaty (16 Stat. 707) with the Klamath and Modoc and Yahooskin Band
of Snake Indians wherein they ceded a tract of land Lying in south»
central Oregon and northern California (Royce Map, Oregon 1, Tract M62)
and a treaty reservation was established for them near Klamath Lake on
the southern.border of Oregone In his report on the treaty to the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs on December 10, 186k, Huntington described
the country ceded under the treaty as containing great mineral wealth and
excellent grazing lands. He also stated that the reservation designated
as a home for the Indians was “not likely to be traversed by any imp
portant line of travel, and but a small portion of it will be coveted
by whites for settlement.“ Huntington also advised that as soon as the
snow would permit, he intended to cross the mountains to eastern Oregon
and "by means of a treaty to put a stop to the horrid state of'War
which has existed.there for several years past," and that before the
next summer he hoped to report an end of hostilities and the opening
of “that rich mineral country to exploration and settlemente"

15. On September 1, 1865, Huntington reported to the Commissioner

of Indian Affairs that he had.returned from "the Snake Indian.country,

‘having accomplished a treaty with a portion of the hostile Indians of

‘J’.

i\)

that region who have so long been a terror to the whites who have
sought to enter that country for mining and agricultural purposes."
This treaty (114 Stat. 683) was concluded on August l2, 1865, with the
Woll-Pah-Pe tribe of Snake Indians who agreed to remove to the Klamath
reservation, and ceded to the United States a triangular shaped tract
of land located in east-central Oregon.

16. It appears that a small part of the land ceded under the
Klamath and Modoc treaty of October 15, 1861;, was later included within
the boundaries of the Malheur Reservation as established by Executive
Order in 1872. The tract or land ceded by the Woll-Pah-Pe Tribe of
Snakes under the treaty of August 12, 1865, conflicted with and overlapped both the cession of June 9, 1855, by the Walla Walla, et als.,
and the cession of October 111, 1861;, by the Klamath and Modoc and
Yahooskin Band of Snakes. That part thereof not included in any other

Indian cession is shown on Royce Map of Oregon 1 as Cession No. 1171;,

h S83

and the major portion thereof was later included in the Malheur Reservation.

In a letter to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, dated October 15,

I866, Superintendent Huntington described what he considered to be the

territory formerly inhabited by the Woll-pah-pe tribe of Snakes with

whom he made the treaty in 1865, which‘ letter reads, in part, as follows

My impression is that they have spent the summer in the
region between Crooked river on the north, Harney Lake
on the east, Summer and Upper Klamath lakes on the south,
and Mount Paulinee and Oweah Valley on the west.  * '3?
This band of Indians have inhabitedit heretofore, and,
in my opinion, have done so this past summer.

The area so described by Huntington was not a part of the lands included within the boundaries of the I-ialheur Reservation as it was later

establ ished.

h 58h

1?. Superintendent Huntington has unable to negotiate a treaty
with thetremaining bands of Snake or Piutes in southeast Oregon covered
by the Act of March 25, l86h, supra, until the late fall of 1868. These
bands had resented the intrusion of the whites into their country and
had.been continuously hostile after l8h8. This hostility continued
until in 1866 when an aggressive military campaign was conducted against
them by the U; 3. Army under General Crook, and as a result over half

868% the Indians were killed and the remainder reduced to a state of starvation.
By June of 1868 most of these Indians had surrendered and were placed
in.camps near various Army posts in southeast Oregon under military
surveillance.

On June 30, 1868, after their surrender, General Crook met in council
at Camp Barney, Oregon, with Chief'We—you-we-wa and certain sub-chiefs,
uhom.he described as “the principal bands of hostile Indians infesting
the country of'Malheur river, Castle Rock, Owyhee and Steins Mountains
under their principal chief We~ah~nee~wa,'where it was mutually agreed
that they return to their own country, establish their headquarters

in the vicinity of Castle Rock:% % %." (Oef. Exo 212).

18. In.the late fall of l868, Superintendent Huntington.made an
extended.expedition into that part of southeast Oregon Lyin east of
the Cascade Hbuntains. Under date of December 22, 1868, he submitted
a detailed account of the results of the expedition in a report to the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. In describing the region traversed,

he reported that it was vast in extent, and the hostile Indians who

inhabited it had theretofore prevented any but a most partial and

imperfect exploration.

to visit the Snake Tribes, ascertain by personal inspection their precise

He explained the object of his expedition was

condition, and.take such measures as were within his power to secure a

continuance of peace that had been.recently inaugurated.

in detail the history of the military expeditions against these Indians,

Huntington.reported that hostilities had ceased and gave the temporary

locations of the Indians as follows:

(1) At'Warm Springs Agency about Sb souls.

(2) At Yi-nax, on Sprague river about 130.

('3)

(hi
(5)
(6)

(7)

This place is
about 55 miles east of Klamath Agency and Fort Klamath,
and 80 miles west of Fort Warner.

At Fort‘Warner about 250 souls. t"0-tsche-ho", the Chief
of this band acknowledges "We-yowawe-waV as his principal
chief since the death of Pau—li—ne. "In fact I find.this

13.0 has +.1*11a mo 31': *~~~-A-- 1' 1»---I *'

.-.... -'- _’
-.. -- -.-.-. s._\..-r Intel. -5-‘. O-./C1.i1\u(-I3 -3-   UQ

At Fort Harney about 700 souls. (We-ah-wa’s band)

At Fort Smith about 150 souls. "I did not visit their camp."
The "Wah-tai—kin" band - numbers unknown - vaguely estimated at 300 to LL00 souls. This band was in the vicinity

of Fort Werner when hostilities ceased and part of them

came in to the Fort. They soon left, however, and went

off in a southeasterly direction. Their whereabouts is
unknown, probably in Nevada or Utah.

Scattering bands and families - numbers unknown, estie
mated at 300 souls. There are many little camps of"
Indians yet hiding among the mountains and in the
marshes, afraid to come in. They are scattered from

the Cascade Mountains to the Owyhee and from the Blue
Mountains far down in Nevada.

Superintendent Huntington.then stated.that after visiting the different

camps, he had a final council with the chiefs and headmen at the camp

near Fort Harney, and agreed to a treaty which was reduced to writing

and signed by him.on the part of the United States and by the “Chiefs”

After reciting

1: S85

on the part of the Indians. He stated.that "the Snakes also agreed

to remove to and reside upon such reservation as may be allotted to
them by the U: 8. Government.“

Huntington then discussed the question of what disposition should
be made of the bands of Snake or Piute Indians who were parties to the
treaty. ‘He stated, in part, as follows:

First: By creating a.reservation in their own country,
establishing an agency thereon and collecting them upon

it. The arguments in favor of this course are, it involves
no great expense of moving them and it will be more satisfactory'to them.than to remove to some distant locality
with which they are unacquainted. The objections to it are
that any Agency there must always be enormously expensive
owing to the great cost of transportation, and the climate
being extremely cold is unfavorable to agriculture % * %.

 

Second: By removing them to some reservations already

established. There is abundant room at Klamath and Siletz.

Klamath is open to the same objection as the Harney Lake

region.% % % but if they are removed thereg they will be
immediately upon the borders of their own countgg and

liable to return to their old haunts. % % % Underscoring supplied)

 

Huntington.recomnended their removal to the Siletz reservation on the

coast of Oregon, stating that the distance would make it impossible for

_'..: -'.:.:u_-a

them to escape and “return to their own country.”

19. The full text of the treaty Superintendent Huntington nem
gotiated with the chiefs and headmen of the bands of Snake or Piute
Indians on December 10, 1868, pursuant to the Act of March 25, l86h,

and.the letter of treaty instructions of June 22, l86h3 supra, is as

follows:

Treaty made this tenth day of Dec. A. D. 1868 at
Fort Harney Oregon between the United States represented
by J. W} P. Huntington, Supto Indian Affairs and the
Snake or Shoshone Indians represented by Weuyoumwenwa,
Gsha-nee, E-hemgant, Po-nee, Chow-wat-nawnee, Oxwitsg
and Tash~e—go, Chiefs and Head menu

h 58?

L Article 1 - Hostilities heretofore existing between
the whites and the Indians parties to this treaty cease
from this date. No penalties or punishment to be ins
flicted for acts don by either party during the war.

Article 2 - The Snake Indians acknowledge the
dominion of the United States and agree henceforth to
submit to its authority and obey such Laws as may be
enacted for their government and guidance.

Article 3 - It is mutually agreed that when any
crime depredation or offense is committed by an Indian
of the Snake Tribe he shall be delivered.up to be
punished according to law, and likewise when any crime
or injury is perpetrated by any white man upon the
Indians aforesaid the punishment shall be inflicted
according to the Laws of the United States and the
State of Oregon. '

Article h - The Snake Indians agree that they will
reside upon suchzreservation as may be hereafter allotted
to themend that they will obey the authorities lawfully
placed over them. And the United States hereby guarane
tees protection to such Indians in personend in property
while upon such Reservation.

Article 5 - Future provisions will be made by the
government of the United States for the permanent location
of the Snake Indians and for their education, government,
food and clothing and for allotment of lands in severalty
to them when their advancement warrants it.

Article 6 - Complaints may be made by the Chiefs or
Head men of any offense committed by whites to the agent
in charge of the Tribe or to any other officer of the
United States in the vicinity and in case wrong has been
done or crime committed redress is guaranteed.

Article 7 - This treaty is only preliminary to a
more complete treaty to be made hereafter under the

direction and authority of the Government of the United
States 5

Done at Fort Harney Day and.Year above written by

the parties whose names appear hereto and in the presence
of the Subscribing Witnesses.

J.'W; P. HUNTINGTON
WE4YOU4WE4WA

(L S)
X (L s)
GSHA-NEE} I (L s)

h 587

E-HE-GAI\‘T 2: (L s)
PO-NEIE 3: ( L s)
CHUI»I»WATnNA~Is1EE X (L s)
0I»I=-ITS X (L s)
TASH-==EeGO X (37, s)

Witnesses:
W} R. PARNELL

1st Lt. 1st Cavalry PVT Maj U.S.Ao
Army Camp Harney Oregon
W.F.Rkm
2nd Lieut 23d Inft Bat Capt U.S.A.

Although the foregoing treaty was received by the Commissioner of
Indian.Affairs, so far as the record discloses, it was never submitted
to the Senate of the United States for ratification, and no further
treaty was negotiated Jith these Indians as promised in Article ? of
said.treaty.

20. On.August 10, 1868, Superintendent Huntingtonis successor,
A. B..Meacham, wrote to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs advising
him of the necessity of immediate action "in behalf of the Shoshone
or Snake Indians in southeast Oregon," and directed his attention to
Hnntingtonis report of December 22, 1868, stating that from the report
and other sources he had learned "Huntington was to have met them
again in early spring; he failing to do so, the Indians returned to
their old homes to fish and hunt and gather roots." Meacham stated
that it was his opinion.the Indians would consent to be placed on the
Klamath Reservation, but not the Siletz, and requested instructions
to promise them assistance on condition they remove to the Klamath
Reservationo

On October 29, 1869, Superintendent Meacham wrote to the Commanding

Officer at Camp Harney advising him of his arrival at the camp to remove

14 58?

J

the bands of Snake or Piute Indians from that vicinity, and other parts
of southeast Oregon, to the Klamath Reservation in southern Oregon as

directed by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 'Meacham.stated he had

found Chiefs'Winnemucca,‘We-ah-weawah and Ocheys there and when he informed them of his intentions they had indicated they would not remove

_ until ordered by the military, claiming “Col. Otis” gave them permission

to remain at Camps McDermott, Harney and Warner. He requested that Col.

Otis attend a formal council to be held with the Indians on November 8th

at Camp Harney to make a formal turnover of the Indians to him as Superinv

h 589

tendent and to assist in inducing them to remove to the Klamath Reservation.

21. On November 8, 1869, Superintendent Meacham and Col. Elmer

Otis opened a council at Camp Harney with seven Snake or Piute chiefs,

which council lasted several days. Four of the chiefs present, We—ahweawah, E-e-gan, Pon-ee and Ow-itz, had signed the unratified treaty
of December 10, 1868. ‘When the treaty was shown to them they recognized

it and acknowledged their signatures. The seven chiefs were told by

iMeacham and Otis that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs wanted them to
remove to the Klamath Reservation which had been selected by the Governe
mnt as their future home, and insisted upon their agreeing to move.
Those chiefs who had signed the 1868 unratified treaty would not agree
to move, stating they had been promised by Superintendent Huntington

at the time the treatv'was negotiated and signed that a reservation.
would be established for them “in their own country" where they desired
to remain.

Despite the insistence of Meacham and Col. Otis that the

chiefs were obligated to move to the Klamath, the chiefs who were parties

to the B868 treaty refused to move and continued throughout the council
to insist they had been promised they could live on a reservation in
“their own country,“ and requested that the Commissioner be advised of
their'wishes to remain in their own country.

The two chiefs attending the council who were not parties to the
l868 treaty, 0-che-ho and.Chock+tote, consented to and did remove their
hands to the Klamath Reservation. The country occupied and claimed by
Oche-ho's band was in the vicinity of'warner Lake near the Klamath Rea
servation. The country formerly occupied by Chock~tote”s band was also
in the vicinity of the Klamath.

22. On.March 3, 1871, Congress passed an Act (16 Stat. 566)
prohibiting the making of further treaties with Indian nations, tribes
or bands, which ended any possibility of the ratification of the treaty
of December 10, l868, or the making of a further treaty, as agreed in
Article 7 thereofa

23. Thereafter, the Government selected a tract of land on the
headwaters of the Malheur River within the area to which petitioners’
ancestors claimed to hold.original Indian title, and created the
reservation.herein known as “the former Malheur Reservation in Oregon“
in the manner shown below.

On March 8, l87l, Superintendent Meacham was in Washington? D. Go
and, in a letter written.hy'him on that date to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, requested that "all that portion of the country in.the

State of Oregon situated between the forty—second and fortymfourth

parallels of latitude, and from 117 degrees to 120 degrees of longitude”

N
7 be withdrawn from the public domain for eighteen months "with a view

of selecting an Indian reservation on which to consolidate Indians

east of the Cascade Mountains, except those who may select lands in
severalty from reservations where they are now located." His recommendation was approved by the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs on
March 10, 1871, and.by the Secretary of the Interior on.March lh, 1871.
By Executive Order of the President on March lb, 1871, the area of land
described above was withdrawn from the public domain.

By October 1871, funds had not been appropriated by Congress for
expenses incident to establishing the proposed reservation. In a
report to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated October 25, 1871,

relative to Indians in southeast Oregon not on reservations, Superintendent Meacham directed attention to the "Snake or Shoshone Indians living

in.the vicinity of Camp Harney" who had been subjugated three years before.

He advised of the effort made in 1869 to remove them to Klamath but
“they persistently refused," and he had lacked authority to compel
them to move, and pointed out that "a large tract of country has been
withdrawn, -1': -3': -4- within the boundaries of which I was instructed to
locate for them a reservation, % %»% the welfare of these Indians, and
the public necessities, suggests action on the subject.“
After the withdrawal of the lands in 1871, investigations and

recommendations were made by U. S. Militany Officials as to suitable
sites for the proposed reservation. On April 15, 1872, Col. Elmer

Otis, who had attended and assisted in the council of November, 1859;

at Camp Harney with the Piute chiefs, wrote from Headquarters, District

of the Lakes, Portland, Oregon, to the Assistant Adjutant General of
the Columbia at Portland, making certain statements and recommendations
with.reference to the Indians in the District of the Lakes and vicinity
which, in part, are as follows:i

I have been stationed where I have had intercourse with a
large portion of these indians since October of 186?. The
Piute bend of Snake indians are now scattered all the way
from the headquarters of the Owyhee river on the west end
of Elamath.reservation, on an east and west line, and on
a north and south line from the headwaters.of John Day and
Malheur rivers on the north to the Truckee river on the
south. I do not mean.that they occupy the whole of the
country'but that they range through it.

The principal bands are as follows: First,'we~ahawa’s
band, principally roaming on the headwaters of the Malheur
river and Stein.Mountain country. This is the largest of

all the bands probably numbering from 500 to 800 souls.
We-ahawa I consider the head of the Piute Nation.

 

 

Second. 0~che«ho's band numbering a little over 200 souls.

Third. Chock+tote's band numbering a little over 100 souls.
The last two bands are now on the Klamath reservation.
Omche~ho’s band is very much dissatisfied.where it is. *-% %
They'would prefer coming back:to their old country in the
vicinity of'Warner Lake. Chock~tote‘s band are as far as

I know tolerably well satisfied where they are. They are
near the country they formerly inhabited.%-% %.

Fourth. There is a.band of Piutes at Camp McDermitt in
Nevada within.three miles of the Oregon State line. % % *

Fifth. On the Truckee reservation is a band of Piutes
numbering about 300 souls. % % %

-'.‘£-%-3?

I would.recommend that all the different bands (except
perhaps Chock+tote‘s band) be established on a reservation
somewhere on the headwaters of the Malheur river, the
tein_Mountain country about either Earner or Harney
Lakes, and that the reservation be tolerably large, as
much of the country is a barren waste and must necessarily
be large to obtain sufficient land for tillable purposes.

h 593

The waters of the Malheur contain at times of the year
plenty of fish and there is much land capable of tillage
in.that vicinity. In the country about Stein's Mountain
and'Harney and'Earner Lakes are spots capable of tillage.
Besides this is a country which these Indians inhabited,
that they know, and.where the majority desire to stay.
We—ah~wa's band in.counoil with the Superintendent of
Indian Affairs for Oregon, in the fall of 1869 at which
I was present, rem torily declined to remove from that
count , and I have no idea that they could be removed
‘without a strong force of troops involving a war. * * *
(Underscoring supplied.)

On.April 18, 1872, General Canby, commanding the Department of
the Columbia wrote the Assistant Adjutant General at San Francisco
relative to the recommendations made by Col. Otis in his letter of
April 15, 1872, which in.part is as follows:

-% %-% So much of the subject of this report as relates to
the Modoc and Pi~U—te Indians of Oregon has for a long
period been.under consideration and the suggestions and
recommendations are fully approved. % % %‘Major Otis‘
knowledge of these Indians and an experience of several
years in that section of the country entitles his opinion
to the favorable consideration of the Commanding General
* *‘*. The recommendations made by Major Otis looking

to changes in Military posts in that part of the country
should be considered in subjection (sic) to the changes
that may be made by the Department of Interior in the
location of the Indians. Anticipating, however, that the
action indicated by the Executive Order of March lh, 1871
'would'be taken at an early period, a good deal of information
has been collected in relation to the country embraced in
the proposed reservation. This information points to the
country drained by the Malheur river as supplying the requisites for an Indian reservation more fully than any
other part of the tract specified in the Executive Order,
and the Forks of the Malheur as the best point for a.Military post for the supervision and control of the Indians
that may be established on the reservation. % % %

On June 17, 1872, Superintendent Meacham‘s successor, T. B.
Odeneal, reported.to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that he

agreed.with Major Otis and other military officers and citizens,

that the reservation site should be selected on the headwaters of
iMalheur river, or in.the Stein Mountain.country on.which the Piutes
or Snakes should be located, and requested instructions stating
“there are 500 Piutes on the headwaters of the Malheur river who have
never been on any reservation and 200 more at Yainox who desire to go

backrto where their people are in the Malheur countryc"

‘DIn reply to Odenea1's report the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
on July 6, 1872, instructed Superintendent Odeneal to examine the
country "at the headwaters of the Malheur river" and report by natural
boundaries a sufficient quantity of land for a suitable reservation for
“said Pi-utes or Snake" Indians.

On July 29, 1872, Major Otis wrote Superintendent Odeneal suggesting
the "most natural" boundaries for the proposed reservation to be

established on the forks of the Malheur river. After an inspection of

the Malheur area, Superintendent Odeneal adopted the boundaries suggested
by Major Otis and reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs under
date of August 22, l8?2, in part, as follows:

Upon receipt of your letter of the 6th ultimo, I proceeded
at once to South~Eastern Oregon, examined the couhtry at

the headwaters of the Malheur river,°and selected a
Reservation for the Snake or Piute Indians, with the following natural boundaries, towit; Beginning at the mouth of

the North Fork of the dalheur~river, thence up said North
Fork, including the waters thereof, to Castle Rock; thence

in a northwesterly direction to Strawberry Butte; thence to
Soda Spring, on the Canyon City and Camp Harney Road; then
down.Silvies River to Malheur Lake; thence East to the South
Fork of Malheur river; thence down said South Fork, including
the waters thereof to the place of beginning; (to be known as
“Eblheur Reservation"), including all lands within said
boundaries, excepting so much thereof as may have been
granted for Military or Wagon Road purposes.

7 I have made the Reservation large, first because I
could not well describe it by natural boundaries in
any other way, and secondly because of the utter worthlessness of most of the land for any use to which it
might be converted by settlers, and for the further
reason that I could include hunting grounds, fisheries,
berries, roots, etc. '

%'.- -A-%

This is the home of most of the Snake Indians of whom

I saw very few, but I learned from persons familiar with

them, that they desire the establishment of any Agency

and.Reservation where I have selected these. % % %

(Underscoring supplied).

The Commissioner of Indian Affairs forwarded Superintendent
Odeneal's report to the Secretary of the Interior on September h, 1872,
with a recommendation that the tract of land described in the report
be set apart and reserved as an Indian Reservation for the "Snake or
Piute Indians," and the President be requested to issue an Executive

Order accordingly.

On September 12, 1872, the Acting Secretany of the Interior trans. mitted the Commissioner's letter to the President with a recommenation,

of approval and on that date the following Executive Order was issued
by President U. S. Grant:
Let the lands which are fully described in the accompanying
letter of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs be set apart as
a reservation for Snake or Piute Indians as recommended in
the letter of the Secretary of the Interidr of this date.
The Malheur Reservation was modified by Executive Orders of'May 15;
1875 and January 28, 1876. The former order added a portion and the
latter order redefined the reservation excluding a part that had been

added.by the Executive Order of May 15, 1875. The boundaries of the

reservation as it was finally defined by the Executive Order of

h 595

January 28, l876 and afterwards administered by the Indian Department
have been heretofore described and set forth in our Finding No. 3.

2h. It is apparent from all the evidence in the record that
the Government selected the tract of land "on the headwaters of the
Malheur river“ for the Malheur Reservation because it was not only
suitable for Indian reservation purposes, but was also the area recognized by military officers and officials of the Interior Department
dealing with Indians in southeast Oregon as the established home country
of the bands of Snake or Piute Indians who were parties to the unratified treaty of December l0, 1868, and was the_only area where those
bands were willing to live.

25. At the time the Malheur Reservation was established, the
majority of the members of the bands who had been parties to the 1868
treaty were living on or near the reserved area and went willingly on
the reservation to reside, and they remained there until their rem
moval in 1879 by the defendant to Yakima Reservation in'Washington
following thy Bannock Far. Through the efforts of Government agents
other bands of Snake or Pintes inhabiting other areas in southeast
Oregon and adjacent areas in Nevada and Idaho were brought to the
reservation to reside but most of them refused to reside there perma-I
nently and returned to the lands formerly occupied by them. There were
also some bands of nonetreaty Snake or Piute Indians in southeast
Oregon.who refused to leave the territory they considered as their home,
and so were never on the Malhenr Reservation.

A census of the "Piute or Snake” Indians at the Malhenr Reserm

vation taken on June 309 l87?, lists 762 “men, women and children."

2; 595

Of these, 195 were classified as Snakes under Chief Egan and the
others as Piutes, listing lh3 under Chief Oits, 283 under Chief Tanwahta and lhl under Chief Winnemucca. On February lh, 1878, the
agent at Malheur listed 8h6 Indians “entitled to subsistence" at the
.Malheur Agency.

26. The Indian agent at the Malheur Reservation from August, l87h,
to July, 1876, was Sam Parrish. In his annual report on September 2,
1875, to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Agent Parrish reported
that he had found most of the Piutes were peaceable, quiet and willing
to work. He described the rapid progress made by the Indians in learning practical farming and the possibilities of their raising abundant
crops if only the Government would furnish them the necessary tools
and equipment. He stated that funds were insufficient to erect the
necessary buildings at the Agency such as a school, hospital, barns and
particularly houses for the Indians for protection from the winter‘s
cold and storms.

8 In.July, l876,'W} V. Rinehart succeeded.Parrish and.remained as
agent in charge of the Malheur Agency until it was discontinued in 1880.
In a.report to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on August 12, 1876,
Rinehart also described the buildings at the reservation as "totally

inadequate to meet the requirements of the service," and insisted.that

.the erection of a grist mill would go far toward stimulating the

Indians to the cultivation of small farms for themselves. In a report

to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on August lh, 1877, Agent HineI

hart again directed the attention of the Commissioner to the insufficiency

h 597

of the appropriations made by Congress for the Malheur Reservation
and the urgent necessity for additional funds to provide proper care
for the Indians. He stated that the appropriation for the reservation
for 1873 had been $50,000 but the appropriation had been.reduced each
year until it was only $20,000 for 1877 and that of the $20,000, it had
cost $l3,6h6,00 for flour and beef issued, $6,000 allowed for employees,
leaving only $36k to purchase clothing, hlankets and all other supplies
for the Agency. In his annual report on Augustgl, 1878, Rinehart estimated it would require $80,000 per annum to properly operate the Malheur
Reservation.while the appropriation for 1878 was but $15,000. He ad»
vised the Commissioner that the excessive delays in the delivery of
supplies and the small quantities furnished had occasioned.much complaint
among the Indians on the reservation and that at times, owing to the

lack of subsistence at the Agency, it had been necessary to turn most

of the Indians away to support themselves in the mountains as soon as
snhsistence could be found there, He also reported that Circular No,

l0 issued by the Government on March l, 1878, in relation to Indian
labor, had created much uneasiness and many complaints by the Indians

on Malheur listing the causes for the complaints—=that issues of beef
and flour would soon be discontinued by the Government; that the Indians
were required to farm to earn their subsistence, yet they were not fnrn
nished tools and equipment with which to work, reducing'wages to 50
cents a day when they conld.earn $1.00 a day working for settlers;
denying the Indians the right to purchase ponies and requiring them to

exchange their prized ponies for cattle, sheep or hogs; and, finall ,

forbidding the issue of rations to visiting Indians,

A further cause for the dissatisfaction of the Indians was the

encroachnent of white stockmen on the Malheur Reservation. In December,

' 187?, Agent Rinehart reported to the Indian Department this cause was

likely to produce future trouble as some of the trespassers were so
bold as to even take up their residence within the reservation and made
no secret of their intention to occupy and use the land. In his August 1,
1878 report, Supra, Rinehart stated that 20 of these trespassers had

lh0O horses and 10,839 cattle on the reservation and that when a Government order had been issued for the removal of the stock, none of the
settlers had.complied but instead had urged.that the western portion

of the reservation be cut off and opened to settlement, and that to

avoid conflict between the settlers and the Indians, he had recommended
to the Department on May 20, l878, that settlers be permitted to lease
"the coveted.portion of the reserve for a term of five years, at a

rental of $1500 a.year.“

27. During the spring of 1878, Bannock Indians from the Fort
Hall Agency in Idaho were frequent visitors at the Malheur Agency and
reported their grievances. These reports caused the Piutes to become
increasingly restless and dissatisfied, fearing that Agent Rinehart
would also deliver them over to the military who would disarm.them and
take away their prized ponies. This situation was reported.to the
Indian Department and the military by Rinehart with a warning that the
Malheur Indians wou1d.be sympathetic with the Bannocks in the event of
an outbreak at Fort Hall.
28. On June 1, 1878, forty-six Bannocks visiting at Malheur requested and were denied rations under authority of Government Circular

No. 10 and although the principal leader of the Malheur Piutes, Chief

Egan, begged Rinehart to give the Bannocks rations as visitors he re:
fused and Egan divided his own.with them. On June 2nd a report was

received at the Malheur Agency of the Bannock outbreak and on June 5,

l8?8, all the Malheur Indians quit work and left the Agency, congregating ‘

at the fish traps on the main Malheur river some 20 miles from the Agency
headquarterso ‘With the exception of about 100 Wwinnemucca“ Piutes under
subwchief Leggins, substantially all the Malheur Indians joined the
hostile Bannocks in hostilities and depredations against the white
settlers and the military.

299 "When J.'W. Scott from Camp Harney visited the camp of the
lndians on June l0, l8T85 he found Chiefs Egan and Oitz with the hostile
Malheur Indians and one hundred Bannock warriorso In reply'to Scott’s
question as to ‘e-.Th.y they had left the reservation, Chief Egan informed

him that the Agent {Einehart}

had lied, cheated and robbed them and at
times refused to issue subsistence when he had ample supplies on hand
and “they might as well die fighting as to be starved to death;“ that
while they did not expect to whip the whites, he would.fight as long
as he could and then the Great Father at'Eashington'would.give them
more supplies as he did when they quit fighting before without trying
to make his people work for ito

30. The ”Bannock:Uprising" was subdued in the late summer of 1878
and as the hostile Malheur Piutes surrendered they were held under
In January, l879,

military'guard at Camp Harney on the reservationo

pursuant to the order of General Howard, Commander of the Pacific

h 600

Division of the Army, with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, the hostile Malheur Piutes consisting of the bands of Oits,
Egan and Tan-wa-da, men, women and children, together with Leggins

and his band of 100 Piutes of Chief I-Iinnemucca‘s tribe who had not been
involved in hostilities, were removed by the military to the Yakijna
Reservation in Washington.

31. About the time of the removal of the Indians from the Malheur
Reservation, it was announced in the public press that in an interview
General Howard had stated that "the Malheur Reservation must and shall

be broken up.” Immediately stockmen and settlers went on the reservation
with their herds and occupied the most valuable portion of the lands
disregarding all official orders of removal as trespassers.

32. The Malheur Agency buildings were taken over by the military
during the Bannock uprising but the Agency was reopened by the Indian
Service in September of 1878. For several years the defendant's agents
tried but were unsuccessful in their efforts to induce theremaining

Indians in the area who were entitled to reside on the reservation to

remove there and make it their home.

The Indian Agent at Malheur recommended in_his annual report of
August 15, 1879, that the Agency be discontinued and gave some of the
reasons why the reservation remained unoccupied by Indians. His report

read, in part, as follows:

-11- -11- -r The Indians who originally inhabited this region,
and who claimed the soil, have all been removed. Their
removal was far from unjust, though unnecessarily severe.
Exile from their country is but mild punishment for the

, cruelty and fiendish crimes committed by them last summer.

1:601

_. .\.»-.-.n ..v—.u.I-.

However much.they desire it, I deem it unsafe and unpolitic
to permit their return. Since they left, the Agency has been
a whole year without an Indian. The only Indians now in this
region.with which to repopulate this reservation are the
'Weisers, 139; Ochoho's I00; and.the'Winnemuccas perhaps 100
since Leggins left. Of this material, the Weisers participated
in the hostilities last summer and have not yet surrendered.
Ochoho‘s band deserted their reservation at Yainax and are
now straggling about Fort Bidwell % % %. 'Winnemucca's people
deserted.Pyramid Lake reservation for this and soon abandoned
it for a worthless life of independent vagabondage % % %.
Besides, it is n n believed that none of these Indians desire
to locate here. This is not their home. An Indian’s home
remains where he was born. ‘Wanting this simple but powerful attraction, there is nothing to bind them to the place.
And even if all these remnant bands were located here, the
recent defection in'Winnemuoca's band, over the treatment

of Leggins, destroys all cohesive power that was relied

upon by an agent to hold them together for his management
and control.

33. From the time of tleir arrival at Yakima Reservation in
February, l8?9. the majority of the Snake or Piute Indians were dis»
contented there and insisted on being allowed to return to the Malheur
Reservation. No special provision had been made for them at Yakima and
they were regarded as intruders by the Yakima Indians. Their language
was totally different from that of the Iakinas and they did not get
along'well together. The Piutes felt they were ill treated and were
determined never to regard Yakima as their permanent home.

3h. In Januany I880, Chief Winnemucca, his daughter Sarah and
several other members of his band of Nevada Piutes visited Washington,
D. C., and obtained a letter from the Secretary of Interior authorizing
all Pintes at Yakima to return to the Malheur Reservation.but without
expense to the Government for transportation. In May of the same year
Sarah Winnemueca arrived at'Yakima to escort the Piutes back to the

Malheur Reservation, however. the Agent at Yakima, J. H. Wilbur, refvsed

to permit the Piutes to leave. In.explanation of his refusal,‘Wilbur
informed the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in a letter dated May 31,
1880, that about the time of Sarah Winnemucca's arrival with the
"somewhat indefinite promise from the Department" he had received
letters of protest from citizens of eastern Oregon and from General
Howard declaring the return.of the Piutes would.be a signal for
bloodshed and murder and since his own observations satisfied him
their conclusions were correct, had.refused to allow the Piutes to
leave until receiving more definite instructions. He also stated that
he believed most of the Piutes would be satisfied to remain at Yakima
if assured that such was the desire of the Government.

On June 25, 1880, the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs rescinded the permission granted for the return of those Piutes at Yakima
to the Malheur Reservation giving as the reason that reports showed
that "if the Piutes attempted to mach across the country from Yakima
to Malheur it will be attended with great risk of life on the way."

35. In December of 1880, the Malheur Agency was discontinued at
the direction of the President. In a letter dated November l8, l88l,
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs informed the Secretary of the Interior
that all Piute Indians then at Yakima would be ‘required to remain there
permanently and that the Agent at Yakima had been instructed to make
them understand that as the Malheur Reservation had been "abandoned"
by the United States as an Indian reservation, they could not return
there but must make Yakima their permanent home.

36. Although it was not occupied or used as such, the Malheur

Reservation continued to exist as an Indian reservation after the closing

h 603

of the Agency. The Commissioner of Indian Affairs recommended in his

annual report for 1880 and 1881 that the Malheur Reservation lands
be appraised and sold and the proceeds used to assist the Piute
Indians in their future efforts at self support. He pointed out in
his 1881 report that a memorial from the Oregon Legislative Assembly
praying for the restoration of the reservation lands to the public
domain for free settlement under homestead and pre=emption laws, had
been referred to his department by the United States Senate Committee
on Indian Affairs but such proposal did not receive the approval of
his office and he recommended that any plan for the disposition of
the reservation which did not provide for substantial return to the
lndians "for whose sole benefit it was established and set apart"
should not recieve the approval of the Department. However. the
urgent and persistent appeals by the people of Oregon to restore the

lands to the public domain caused the Department of Interior, in 1882,

to modify its former recommendations and reduce the quantity of land

.recommended to be retained and sold for the benefit of the Indians

to less than one quarter of the whole reservation. On September 13,
1882, the President issued an Executive Order restoring the greater
portion of the Malheur Reservation to the public domain.

37. The Commissioner of Indian Affairs recommended the sale of
the remaining Malheur Reservation lands for the benefit of the Piute
Indiansamwhich was not done. By Executive Order of May 21, 1883, all

the remaining lands, except a tract of 320 acres, were restored to the

public domain and by Executive Order of March 2, 1889. the 320 acre

tract was also restored to the public domain. None of the lands included within the Malheur Reservation were sold for the benefit of
the Snake or Piute Indians who formerly inhabited the area and they
have never been.compensated for said lands.

38.

The Piutes commenced stealing away from the Yakima Reservation

soon after their arrival there in February 1879. About 300 Piutes left

in the summer of 1883 and by fall of l883 all Piutes at Yakima, withi
the exception of'the bands of Paddy Capp and Oitz, had either escaped
or were permitted to leave. A considerable number of them eventually
returned to their old home country in Harney Valley and settled near

the town of Burns, Oregon, on the border of the former Malheur Reservation where they have remained. There are about 110 Piutes now

located near Burns, Oregon.

In June l88h, Paddy Capp and his band left Yakima and settled upon
the Duck Valley reservation located on the State line between Nevada and
Idaho. By Executive Order of May h, 1886, three townships were withdrawn from the public domain and.set apart as an.addition to the Duck
Valley reservation "for the use and occupancy of Paddy Capp's band of
Piutes and such other Indians as the Secretary of the Interior may see
fit to settle thereon." In 188? there were 115 Piutes on.the Duck
Valley reservation. There are over 500 Piutes there at the present time.

In August 188b, Oitz's band of Piutes were permitted.to leave
‘Yakima and they settled.upon the Warm Spring reservation in central
Oregon and.have remained there to the present time.

39. The Piute Indians who returned from Yakima and settled near

Burns, Oregon, recieved no assistance from the Government until about

h 605

1898 when lOh allotments of 160 acres each were made to them.within the

former Nalheur Reservation.aream However, the evidence indicates such
allotments were made after all the productive land in the area had been
acquired by'white settlers, and the allotted land would not sustain the
Indians. The Piutes continued to live in.camps in the vicinity of Burns,
dependent upon public charity for partial support. In l9lS, the majority
were afflicted.with trachoma, causing officials in Burns to refuse admission of the children to public schools. In 1928, the Government built
22 small cabins on a small tract of land near Burns, donated by‘a citizen
for use by the Indians. Nothing substantial was done for the Indians
by the Government in the way of improving their poor living conditions
until 1938, when it purchased a half section of land adjoining Burns
and.constructed more substantial houses which with small gardens with

‘water facilities have since been leased to the individual Indian families

at a nominal rental.

ho. Upon consideration of all of the evidence now in the record

in this case,_the Commission finds that petitioners” ancestors, the
Snake or Piute bands or tribe who were parties to the unratified treaty
of December 10, 1868, had.exclusively occupied and used in Indian
fashion from time immemorial to January 1879, the area of land included
Hithin.the boundaries of the Malheur Reservation in Oregon as it was
defined and described in the Executive Order of January 28, l876, with
the exception of their temporary joint occupancy of the land along with
‘various other bands of Indians who were brought by the defendant and

placed on.the reservation after it was originally established by the

Executive Order of September 12, 1872. The boundaries of said tract
of land so exclusively occupied and used by petitioners, as defined
by the Executive Order of January 28, 1876, are hereinbefore described
in Finding No. 3. The petitioner bands of Indians above mentioned have
never ceded nor relinquished their original Indian title to said lands.
. 111. The petitioner bands or tribe of Snake or Piute Indians

mentioned in the preceding finding were deprived of their original
Indian use and occupancy title to the lands specifically described in"
Finding 3 in January, 1879, by the action of the United States in
forcibly removing them from said lands to the Yakima Reservation in

Washington and restoring such lands to the public domain without their

consent and without the payment of compensation therefor.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

1:607

