2 302
Retyped

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE BLACKFEET AND GROS VENTRE
TRIBES OF INDIANS, residing
upon the Blackfeet and Fort
Belknap Reservations in the
State of Montana,

Petitioners,

V. Docket No. 279

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

N./\J'\nd'\—?\u./\./‘-u./\.J\./\-.J\..l\.J\..l

Defendant.

Decided: Decanber 17, 1952

Appearances:

Ernest L. Wilkinson, with whom
were John W. Cragun, Glen A.
Wilkinson and Francis M. Goodwin,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

um. D. McFarlane and Ralph A.
Barney, with whom.was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General William Amery

Underhill,
Attorneys for Defendant.

‘ OPINION OF THE COMMISSION
Holt, Associate Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Comr

mission.

.This case is before the Commission on the defendant's motion
for summary judgement, based on the proposition that the claims contained in the petition herein are res judicata by reason of the prior

judgment of the Court of Claims, rendered on April 8, 1935 in case

No. E-427, styled Blackfeet et al. v. The United States, reported

in 61 c. Cls. 101.

There are four claims asserted in the petition in the present
case.

(1) The first is a claim for damages (interest) in such an amount as will compensate petitioners for the alleged delay by defendant in making payment for a portion of their lands which the

Court of Claims in the previous case, mentioned above, found had

been taken by defendant.

(2) The second claim is based upon a revision of the agreement

' between petitioners and the defendant, approved by the act of Congress

of May 1, 1888 (25 Stat. ll3), wherein petitioners and other Indians
ceded l7,S00,00 acres of their reservation lands to the defendant
for a total consideration of $4,300,000,or 24-l/2 cents an acre.

It is alleged in the petition that the lands ceded had a far greater
value and the defendant, in inducing petitioners to sell their lands
for such a small price, acted fraudulently, paid an unconscionable

! .

consideration therefor, took advantage of the unilateral mistake of
petitioners as to the value of the lands at the time of the cession,
or acted not consistent with fair and honorable dealings.

They seek

an award under this claim in such an amount as will constitute just

compensation for petitioners’ proportionate interest in the 17,500,000

acres, alleged to be 9,502,500 acres, and the amount actually paid by

defendant.

2 303
Retyped

2 304
Retyped

(3) The third claim is based on an agreement of September 26,
1895, ratified by the act of June 10, 1896 (25 Stat. 321, 353), under
which the Blackfeet Tribe, a petitioner herein, ceded to defendant
that portion of its reservation west of a line set forth in the act.
It is alleged that by the act of May ll, 1910 (36 Stat. 354), the
area was made and remains a part of the Glacier National Park, but
through a mistake in the survey of the eastern line of the area, the
defendant wrongfully included therein 45,000 acres of the Blackfeet

land not ceded, for which the petitioner here seeks payment of just

compensation.

(4) The fourth claim is for a general accounting by the defendant
for all property of funds received or receivable and expended for and
on behalf of petitioners, and all interest paid or due to be paid on
any and all funds of petitioners.

The defendant by its motion for summary judgment asks a dismissal
of the entire petition, asserting it is entitled to a judgment as a
matter of law in that all the issues contained in said petition have
been heretofore litigated and judicially determined, or could have
been, the the Court of Claims in the prior case No. E-427 (81 C. Cls.
101), and, therefore, the same are r3§_judicata by reason of the
judgment in that case.

The record in the former case (No. E-427) relied on by the defendant as adjudicating the claims set forth in the present petition,
shows that case was before the Court of Claims under the special jurisdictional act of March l3, l924 (43 Stat. 2l), which conferred jurisdiction upon the Court of Claims, with right of appeal to the Supreme

I
. 3 .
so-«.-L.-In nu-O

_. '. .' ' " . _ ..'
....-...A-«can»-u\A§ua..Lr\...a.-J-'-..'..

2 305
Retyped

Court of the United States

* * * to consider and determine all legal and equitable claims against the United States of the Blackfeet,
Blood, Piegan, and Gros Ventre Nations or Tribes of Indians, * * * for lands or hunting rights claimed to be existing in all said nations or tribes of Indians by virtue
of the treaty of October 17, 1855 (Eleventh Statutes at
Large, page 657, and the following, * * *, and all claims
arising directly therefrom, which lands and hunting rights
are alleged to have been taken from the said Indians by
the United States, and also any legal or equitable defenses,
set-offs, or counter claims, including gratuition, which the
United States may have against the said nations or tribes,
and to enter judgment thereon, all claims and defenses to
be considered without regard to lapse of time; and the
final judgment and satisfaction thereof shall be in full

settlement of all said claims.

According to the opinion of the Court of Claims, four claims were

" asserted in the petition filed in that case by the present petitioners

under the foregoing jurisdictional act. The first was a claim for loss

and damages resulting from the alleged failure of the defendant to protect game and hunting rights in certain territory defined in the 1855
treaty; and while the claim was denied, it is not an issue in the
present case. The second was a claim for surface and royalty values

of l3,36l,200 acres of land assigned petitioners by Article 4 of the

treaty of 1855, alleged to have been taken by the United States without the consent or agreement of petitioners without payment of compensation; and the third, a claim for the value of an additional 2,092,420

acres of land alleged to have been taken by the defendant by virtue of
the Executive order of.&gust l9, 1874, and for which they were not

compensated. These two claims for the taking of petitioners‘ lands

were considered together by the Court of Claims, and the court, in

its Finding No. XIV, found that out of the territory assigned to pe2 306
Retyped

titioners by the treaty of October 15, 1855, an area constituting
15,289,344 acres (shown on Royce's Map of Montana No. 1 as areas

399 and 574)had been taken by defendant under the provisions of the
act of Congress of April 15, 1874 (18 Stat. 28), and the Executive
order of August 19, 1874; that after deducting therefrom petitioners‘
proportionate share, amounting to 3,027,594.24 acres, of certain
other lands which the court determined the defendant had added to
their reservation as originally constituted under the 1855 treaty,
the court found the petitioners were deprived of l2,26l,749.76 acres,
for which they had received no compensation, fixing its value at the
time taken at $6,l30,874,88. The fourth claim by the Blackfeet Tribe
was based on the acts of defendant under the act of Congress of

May 11, 1910 (36 Stat. 354), in taking from them and depriving them
of certain timber rights and hunting and fishing rights in a tract

of land constituting a part of Glacier National Park, which rights
had been reserved by them in the agreement ratified by the act of
June 10, 1896 (29 Stat. 321), which claim was denied by the court,
but is considered in this opinion in connection with the third claim

in the present action.

THE FIRST CLAIM

The scope of our inquiry as respects the first cause of action,
set forth in paragraphs 7 through 10 of the petition in the instant
case, has been much circumscribed by the pleadings and the admissions

of the parties.

It is definitely alleged in paragraph 8 of the petition herein

2 307
Retyped

that by the treaty of October 17, 1855 (ll Stat. 657), the Blackfeet
Nation (which included the Blackfeet, Piegan, Blood, and Gros Ventre
tribes of Indians) were given the exclusive control of a large reservation, described in the treaty; and that by certain acts of Congress,
Executive orders, and agreements set forth in said paragraph 8,
l2,26l,749.76 acres of such reservation were taken from said Indians

by defendant without compensation.

It is further alleged (par.7) that under the jurisdictional act
of March 13, 1924 (43 Stat. 21), the Blackfeet Nation sued the defendant in the Court of Claims for the lands so taken, and on April 8,

1935, obtained a judgment against defendant for the value thereof,

$6,130,874.88, which award was reduced to $622,465.57 by allowed offsets. (Def. Ex. No. 6, pp. 11-12). No allowance of interest was awarded for the period between the taking of the land and the date of
the judgment, and the Indians now allege that their lands were taken
under circumstances that entitled them to just compensation under the
Fifth Amendment, which required the payment of interest at 52 per
annum from.the dates of the taking to the date of the judgment amounting to a sum of approximately $l8,000,000.00 As to the effect
of the judgment, petitioners allege (par.7):

* * * Petitioners are advised, believe, and therefore
ever that the findings of fact and conclusions of law therein determined between the parties are conclusive and binding
on both petitioners and defendant, and that defendant is estopped by the said judgment to deny any" of the matters or
facts therein put in issue and determined.

a...
gun.

It is this judgment,rendered by the Court of Claims (E-427),

which defendant pleads as res judicata in its motion for summary judgment,

2 308
- Retyped

contending that the Court of Claims had full power and authority, under
the 1924 jurisdictional act under which the former case was tried, to
award a judgment for just compensation for the lands "taken," including
interest if it had been requested. As to this judgment, petitioners
claim that under the jurisdictional act that court could not allow interest as a part of just compensation under the Fifth Amendment because
under that act the court could only award a judgment for the value of
the land taken but, as to the conclusiveness of the judgment, they
state in their brief:
It is admitted that (1) petitioners were parties to
the prior Blackfeet case, supra; (2) the Court of Claims
had jurisdiction to render the judgment that it handed

down in the prior case; and (3) the judgment rendered was
on the merits of the claims asserted in the prior case.

As we understand petitioners’ position, it is that because the
former special jurisdictional act of March l3, 1924, which is set
out above, made no mention of the acts of Congress, Executive orders,
and agreements by which the lands were taken, and permitted only a
claim "arising directly" from the October 17, 1855 treaty, the Court
of Claims had no jurisdiction to award interest as a part of just
compensation under the Fifth Amendment; so, as they allege, they are
now suing for such interest which can be allowed under the Indian
Claims Commission Act.

An examination of the findings of fact, judgment and opinion
(Def. Ex. No. VI, pp. 1-29) plainly shows that the Court of Claims
considered the claim it adjudicated and for which an award was made,

arose out of the 1855 treaty because it was the Indians’ right of occupancy given by that treaty that was violated when their lands were

. ' x
' ‘ w ‘ '- '/ '. I A .
- .I ,.
u-....-..L...-.-4.1.:-q..J_..;......-a-;_.......u.rL....J....... ..

-A-....—on.u ..-'I

2 309
Retyped

taken by the several acts of Congress, Executive orders and agreements

‘pleaded in the petition herein. It is difficult to see how the mention

of such acts of Congress, Executive orders, etc., in the jurisdictional
act would have added anything to the powers it had and exercised, namely,
the power to compensate the Indians for the lands unlawfully taken from
them. There certainly was nothing in the jurisdictional act to prevent
the allowance of interest as a part of just compensation, had the court
considered the taking protected by the Fifth Amendment.

In support of their contention, petitioners cite these cases:
Yankton Sioux v. United States, 272 U.S. 351; United States v. Creek
Nation, 295 U.S. 103; United States v. Klamath & Modoc Tribes, 304
U. S. ll9; Shoshone Tribe v. United States, 299 U. S. 476; United States
v. Alcea Band, 341 U. S. 48; and Rogue River Tribe v. Unites States,
ll6 C. C15. 454. An examination of the jurisdictional acts in these
cases will show how inapposite they are. Take the Shoshone case, for
instance. There the jurisdictional act authorized the consideration
of claims "arising under or growing out of the treaty of July 3, 1868

.‘

* * *, or arising under or growing out of any subsequent treaty or agreement * * * or any subsequent Act of Congress affecting such tribes."
Clearly the reference to subsequent treaties, agreements, or acts of
Congress was to permit the assertion of any additional claims resulting
therefrom, and did not add anything to the court's power to adjudicate
claims arising out of the 1868 treaty. In fact, the award made in

that case was based entirely on the violation of the 1868 treaty.

The other cases are to the same effect.

2 310
Retyped

It is a well-established principle of law that where private
property is taken or appropriated for public use, without payment of
compensation, the landowner is entitled to just compensation, which
includes not only the value of the property when taken but such additional amount, usually measured by interest, as will produce the
full equivalent of that value paid contemporaneously with the taking.
This just compensation is provided by the Fifth Amendment of the
Constitution and its ascertainment is a judicial function which cannot

be taken away by statute. Monongahela Navigation Company v. United

States, 148 U. S. 312, 37 L. ed. 463 (1893); Seaboard Air Line Railway

H Company, et al. v. United States, 261 U. S. 299, 304 (1923). This rule

has been followed since 1926 by the Supreme Court in Indian cases
where there has been a "taking" or appropriation of Indian lands by
the United States, within the meaning of the Constitution, and interest
has been allowed as a part of just compensation, although the jurisdictional act was silent as to the allowance of interest. Yankton
Sioux v. United States, supra, (1926); United States v. Creek Nation,
supra; Shoshone Tribe v. United States, supra; and United States v.

Klamath, supra. It should be noted also that the Court of Claims was

aware of this rule in 1923, for in the case of Cook Q Company v. United

States, 80 C. Cls. 708, the Court of Claims in dismissing a petition
in which the plaintiff sought to recover interest as a part of just
compensation on a former judgment rendered for the value of property
taken and appropriated by the Government, said:

As a matter of law, this court in ordinary just

compensation cases prior to the decision of the Supreme
Court in the Seaboard Air Line case was of the opinion

2 311
Retyped

that under Section 177 of the Judicial Code interest could
not be included in the judgment. The Seaboard Air Line
case, 261 U. S. 299, was decided by the Supreme Court
March 5, 1923, and since then this court has included

interest.

 

Since the jurisdictional act in the former Blackfeet case contained no restrictions concerning the allowance of interest, and required the Court of Claims to determine all legal and equitable claims
against the United States, a reasonable interpretation of the act

would be that the Court of Claims had the power and authority to

grant petitioners whatever relief they were legally entitled to receive by reason of the loss of lands secured to them by the 1855
treaty. It is possible that both the court and petitioners may have
believed that interest was not allowable as a part of just compensation
under the facts in the case, although the language of the opinion shows
that the court considered the taking of the land as having been done

under Congressional authority, for at page 130 of the opinion the court

said:

The United States did not, subsequent to the conclusion of the treaties, restore the lands ceded to the
public domain until 1874, and only then in pursuance of

congressional authority so to do, * * *.

Nevertheless, the cause of action for the value of the land with the
interest increment thereon was inseparable, and just because the Court
of Claims did not include such interest in awarding compensation for
the lands taken does not alter the fact that the court had authority I

and jurisdiction to grant such relief if the facts shown established

that the taking of the land by the defendant was under such circumstances as would give rise to an implied promise by the Government to

pay just compensation therefor.

2 312
Retyped

In considering the effect of the former judgment of the Court of
Claims as res judicata, we also have the question of whether the present
claim for interest is upon the same cause of action asserted and adjudicated by that court. The well established rule is that if it is upon
the same cause of action, the judgment upon the merits in the prior
case is an absolute bar to the subsequent action between the same parties
not only in respect of every matter which was actually offered and-received to sustain the demand, but also as to every ground of recovery
which might have been presented. But if the second suit be upon a

different cause of action, the prior judgment operates as an estoppal

only as to matters actually in issue or points controverted, upon a

determination of which the judgment was rendered. Cromwell vu gig;
County, 94 U. S. 351, 24 L. ed. 195. It is plain that‘the actionable
wrong suffered by petitioners was the taking by the defendant of the
lands secured to them by the 1855 treaty. This taking, in our opinion,
gave rise to a single cause of action for all damages resulting from
the loss of the lands, and therefore the first branch of the rule applies. It was this cause of action that was submitted to the Court

of Claims, and the damages that court considered had been sustained

by petitioners were fixed and determined and a final judgment entered.
What the petitioners are now asking in the present petition is the
allowance of additional damages which were not requested in the former
action. Such a claim does not present a new or different cause of

action, but only seeks additional relief upon the same cause of action

adjudicated by the Court of Claims in the former case.

I..¢u.l.‘a...

2 313
Retyped

The petitioners say they did not claim interest as damages for
delay in payment of their lands in the former case. Granting this to

be true, the Court of Claims had jurisdiction to award interest as a

part of just compensation, and even if the present claim is grounded
on the Fifth Amendment, this does not, however, permit a splitting of
an existing cause of action, all of which could have been asserted

and adjudicated in the former action. _The rule is stated in Stark v.

Starr, 94 U. S. 477, 485, 24 L. ed. 276-278, as follows:

It is undoubtedly a settled principle that a party

seeking to enforce a claim, legal or equitable, must

present to the court, either by the pleadings or proofs

or both, all the grounds upon which he expects a judgment

in his favor. He is not at liberty to split up his demand

and prosecute it by piecemeal, or present only a portion

of the grounds upon which special relief is sought, and

leave the rest to be presented in a second suit, if the

first fail. There would be no end to litigation if such

a practice were permissible.

The petitioners had the opportunity in the prior case to establish
their right to the interest they now claim as a part of just compensation for their lands taken, but did not elect to do so. In these
circumstances, the petitioners claim for damages for the taking of
their lands having been submitted and passed upon by the Court of
Claims, and no appeal having been taken as permitted by the 1924 jurisdictional act, the judgment of that court is res judicata and bars the
prosecution of the present interest claim before this Commission.

The petitioners say that the Indian Claims Commission Act has
"accorded new and additional jurisdiction" not found in the former

jurisdictional act of 1924, and so the former judgment should not

stand as a bar to this new action. This contention would undoubtedly

ul .‘ . . ° ._ - ' '
. «.4. =l....'..-*.t._ '.-.n...:.l. an ..........a .c.. -.-'-..  -u.

2 314
Retyped

be true if the claim now presented for interest constituted a new and
separate cause of action that was not within the jurisdiction of the
Court of Claims to determine and had not been adjudicated in the prior
case. But Congress did not see fit to waive the defense of a former
adjudication in the Indian Claims Commission Act, and provided in

Section 2 of said act that all defenses shall be available to the
United States with the exception of limitations and laches.
Fair and Honorable Dealings
The petitioners also appear to base their present claim upon the
5th clause of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act: "claims
based upon fair and honorable dealings that are not recognized by any
existing rule of law or equity.V
Having in mind that claim here pleaded is for interest, it is

difficult to see how under any circumstances interest can be allowed
under the 5th clause, since no interest is provided in the Indian Claims
Commission Act, and under numerous decisions of the Court of Claims and
the Supreme Court interent can never'be allowed on claims against the
Government in the absence of an express provision therefore in a relevent statute or contract. "The only exception arises when the taking

entitles the claimant to just compensation under the Fifth Amendment."

United States v. Alcea Band, 341 U. S. 48, 95 L. ed. 738. No one has

yet had the temerity to contend that a claim predicated upon the "fair
and honorable dealing" clause is a claim.based upon a taking under the
Fifth Amendment. So even though the claim formarly asserted and the

one now pleaded were based upon the "fair and honorable dealings"

2 315
Retyped

clause of our act (which we do not even intimate), no interest could
be allowed.

In the case of Western Cherokee Indians, 33 al, v. United States,
116 C. Cls. 665, the Court of Claims, in construing the effect of the

"fair and honorable dealings" clause of Section 2, at pages 677, 678

of the opinion, said:

* * * Clause (5) obviously has reference to the
fudamental character of the claim.rather than to the
theory on which an Indian tribe or band may seek to
invoke the jurisdiction of the Indian Claims Commission.
Cf. Sioux Tribe g§_Indians v. The United States, ll2 C.

c1s‘."39, 45, 46; Sioux Tribe 3; Indian v. _'_I'_h_e_ United
States, ll2 C. Cls. 50, 57; If the claims made by
appellants in these cases could be again heard and
determined by the Indian Claims Commission, it would

be difficult to imagine a-claim, even though previously
considered and decided on the merits by this Court,
which could not be relitigated before the Commission
merely by basing the claimed right of recovery on the
provision of clause (5), supra. Clause (5) was intended,
as its language clearly shows, when considered in the
light of its history and other provisions of Section

2, to cover only moral claims based on justice and fair
dealings or broad principles of equity and justice, with
respect to which no court had theretofore made a determination on the merits, or could have made such a determination under the terms of prior jurisdictional acts.
See_zh§_Western (Old Settler)Cherokee Indians_§5 al, v.
‘Z§§_United States, ll4 C. Cls. 7l6.

Except for the provisions of article XI of the
treaty of August 6, 1846, and the resolution of the
Senate thereunder, allowing interest at the rate of
5 percent per annum on the principal sums determined
to be due under treaties, agreements or acts of
Congress, these appellants would never have had a
‘valid claim for interest, either as a claim legal or
equitable or a claim based upon "fair and honorable
dealings," in view of the provisions of other statutes
prohibiting the allowance of interest against the
United States. Western Cherokee Indians v. zhg_United
States, supra; United States v. Qld_Settlers, 148 U. S.
427, 478; Cherokee Nation v. United States, 270 U. S.
476, 490. 'Ihe claims of appellants are;;therefore,
foreclosed as £§§_adjudicata. ' '

~ .

2 316
Retyped

The Second Claim

The second claim asserted in the petition in the present case,
as stated above, is based upon a proposed revision of the agreement
between petitioners and defendant, approved May 1, 1888, in order that
petitioners may recover damages in such an amount as will constitute
just compensation for their proportionate share of the 17,500,000 acres
of land which petitioners and other Indians ceded to the defendant by
that agreement for the alleged grossly inadequate and unconscionable
consideration of approximately 24-1/2 cents per acre.

The defendant in asking the dismissal of this claim contends
that the issue as to the value of this land ceded to the defendant
was considered and judicially determined, and the matter is £g§’judicata
by reason of the former judgment of the Court of Claims in 81 C: Cls.
101. The petitioners say that it is not, because no demand was made
on this claim in the previous case in the Court of Claims, and that
court had no jurisdiction of such a claim. we believe the petioners'
statement is substantially correct.

In mhe opinion in the prior case, the Court of Claims lists four
separate claims as being asserted in the petition which we have set out
above. This list does not include a claim such as is presented here,
and from an examination of the petition filed in the prior case, which
is defendant's Exhibit 1, we do not find any referance therein to the
1888 agreement, nor was any demand made for additional compensation
for the lands ceded under said agreement.

It is true the Court of Claims (Find. No.XV) found that the

May 1,1888 agreement was concluded with the various tribes, including

2 317
Retyped

petitioners, wherein they ceded all their right, title and interest

in and to the lands embraced within their reservation except for three
small tracts; also, that the United States had fully complied with its
obligations thereunder by paying the $4,300,000 consideration it had
agreed to pay for the ceded area of some 17,500,000 acres. However,
it senns obvious to us that by this finding the court only determined
that the consideration for the cession as fixed by the 1888 agreement
had been paid. There was no attempt made by the court to fix the
actual value of the land ceded, as that question was not an issue in
the case and was not determined by it, nor was any part of the award
made by the court in payment for the lands in question. The law is
well settled that in an action between the same parties wherein a
claim or demand different from those sued upon in the prior action is
presented, then the former judgment is an estoppel only as to those
matters in issue, upon the determination of which the judgment was
rendered. Cromwell v. County_g§“§ag, 94 U.S. 351, 24 L. ed. 195.

It is also apparant from the language of the jurisdictional act
under which the prior action was tried that the Court of Claims was
not granted jurisdiction to adjudicate a claim much as is presented
here. That act gave authority to the Court of Claims to consider and
determine all legal and equitable claims presented for lands "taken"
from the Indians-but not a claim for lands "ceded" and which would

result if the treaty or agreement under which the cession was made

was revised on the ground of unconscionable consideration, or unilateral mistake of petitioners as to the value of the land at the time

of the cession, as asserted by petitioners in the present case. Thus,

2 318
Retyped

while the Court of Claims did not have the power or authority to adjudicate a claim.based on the grounds asserted in the present case,
such authority has been granted to this Commission by Section 2 of the

Indian Claims Commission Act in clause (3) (25 USC 70a). See The

 

Cherokee Indians,_§EL§1, v. The United States (114 C. Cls. 716).
It follows that the judgment in the prior case is not a bar to
the prosecution of this claim, and the defendant's motion to dismiss

as to this second claim.is overruled.

The Third Claim

The third c1aim.asserted in the petition herein is for payment

C of just compensation to petitioners, Blackfeet Tribe, for approximately

45,000 acres of its reservation lands. The petition alleges that by

the agreement of September 26, 1895, supra, said tribe ceded a portion

of its reservation lying west of a line fixed in the agreement, but
through a mistake in locating the eastern line of the cession the defendant erroneously included 45,000 acres of the reservation in addition to the lands ceded, and by the act-of May 11, 1910, Congress

1

made the entire area a part of Glacier National Park without compensating
petitioner for the unceded portion.

The Government, by its motion for summary judgment, again sets up
the prior judgment in the Court of Claims as a bar to the prosecution
of this claim, asserting that all the issues involving the Glacier
National Park lands were judicially determined, or might have been

litigated and determined in the former action. The petitioners say

it is a different claim or demand from the claims adjudicated in the

2 319
Retyped

prior action, and that it was not presented nor considered by the

Court of Claims because that court did not have jurisdiction of such

a clanm.l

The petitioners did assert a claim in the previous case involving

the 1895 agreement and the act of l9l0. However, according to the
allegations of the petition filed in that case, the claim asserted

was one to recover only for the loss of rights reserved to the Blackfeet Tribe in the 1895 agreement to hunt, fish in, and remove timber
from.the lands ceded, which rights were alleged to have been terminated
by the act of l9lO, making the land ceded a part of the Glacier National
Park. But said petition did not allege any claim, nor was any demand
made, for the loss by the Blackfeet Tribe of unceded land taken as a
result of an erroneous survey of the eastern line of the lands actually
ceded. Clearly, such a claim was not involved nor determined in the
previous case, for, as shown by the opinion of the Court of Claims
listing the claims it considered as being asserted in the petition

(4th claim set out above) and in its findings thereon, the only issue
considereh and determined by thatcourt concerning the Glacier National

Park lands was whether the Blackfeet Tribe had been deprived of its

game and timber rights in the land ceded by the 1895 agreement. With

-respect to this question the court's Binding XVI was in pertinent part

as follows:

Prior to the act of May ll, 1910, the Indians of
the Blackfeet Reservation did not exercise to any appreciable extent the rights reserved in the aforesaid agreement of September 26, 1895, to hunt and fish in and
remove timber from the land ceded in the agreement, and

such rights were authoritatively terminated by the limitations of the act of May ll, l9l0.

2 320
Retyped

So it is obvious that the decision of the Court of Claims did not
adjudicate the issue as to the loss of unceded land through an erroneous survey, even if it might properly have been presented and

determined as urged by the Government. See §£, Louis, Browneville

§_Mexico Railway_§g, v. The United States. 63 C. Cls. 103.

It is argued by the Government, however, that all the issues
raised in the present claim.relative to the 1895 agreement and the
Glacier National Park Land existed at the time the prior suit was
brought, and could have been and should have been presented for adjudication in the action along with petitioner's other claims under

the same agreement involving the same lands. While it seems that defendant considers the claim for game and timber rights reserved in
land ceded by the agreement and the claims for rights occurring for
the land taken as a result of an erroneous survey constitute a single
or entire cause of action, we believe the facts before us show otherwise.

A recognized test in determining the identity of claims or causes
of action¥is whether the proof necessary to sustain one would establish
the other, and if different proof would be required a judgment in one
is not a bar to the maintenance of the other. 30 Am.Jur. 917. Sec.
174. It is true that both the former and present claims concern land
placed in the Glacier National Park, but the former claim.was for a
violation of a right to use for certain purposes the land that was
actually ceded, while the present claim is for the value of another

portion of the Park lands wrongfully taken by an error in survey.

Thus it is evident that different legal rights were violated which

I
_.-0-.° u... .

2 321
Retyped

would require substantially different proof to sustain each claim

based on the different legal right that was violated; and if established
by proof, each claim would authorize by itself independent relief, and
the assertion of one did not necessarily require that the other be
joined in the same action although it might have been litigated in

the first action. In the case of the United States v. zhg_Haytian
Republic, 154 U.S. ll8, 38 L. ed. 930, 934, the court, in considering

a like contention made by the defendant herein that a judgment concludes not only matters actually in controversy but all those which
might have been adjudicated, said:

* * * The proposition which they support is well
stated in an excerpt from Freeman on Judgments, quoted
in the brief of counsel; ‘an adjudication is final and
conclusive, not only as-to the matter actually determined,
but as to every other matter which the parties might have
litigated and have decided as incident to or essentially
connected with the subject matter of the litigation, and
every matter coming within the legitimate purview of the
original action, both in respect to matters of claim and
of defense.

If the deduction drawn by counsel from this and
similar language were true, then a judgment upon one
cause of action would be conclusive as to every other
existing at the time, although not embraced in the suit,
abd although the parties were not obliged to join it
therein. This would destroy the right of parties to sue
separately upon distinct causes of action, and would be
subversive of the entire theory of the thing adjudged.
The mistake lies in construing the words ‘which might
have been raided.‘ as applying to a cause of action other
than the cause of action embraced in the suit. In other
words, the doctrine is that the thing adjudged includes
not only the direct results of the cause of action which
the judgment concludes, but also all things necessarily
incident to and growing out of that cause which the
parties might have joined in the suit.

It is our conclusion that the present claim is a separate and distinct

cause of action and did not have to be joined in the prior case in the

2 322
Retyped

Court of Claims. The defendant's motion to dismiss this claim is overruled.

The Fourth Claim

The fourth claim asserted herein is for an accounting by defendant
of all property or funds received or receivable and expended by defendant on behalf of petitioners under a number of treaties and acts
of-Congress, as well as for interest paid or due on funds of petitioners.
The defendant has not in its motion or brief advised us of its reasons

for believing that this claim.for an accounting is res judicata by

reason of the prior decision in the Court of Claims. Defendant merely

_ says that the formerjurisdictional act was sufficiently broad to

render the judgment now sought for an accounting, and calls attention
to the reports of the General Accounting Office which were filed in
the prior case in the Court of Claims, used in considering the offsets allowable to defendant in that case. The petition in the former

case does not contain any request for an accounting such as presented

here, and none was considered by the court in that case, so the plea

of res judicata as to the accounting claim.is overruled.

Conclusion
In accordance with the foregoing opinion, the defendant's motion
for summary judgment is granted as to the first claim stated in petitioners‘ petition (paragraphs 7-10, inclusive) for damages measured

by interest for the delay in payment for its l2,26l,749.76 acres of

2 323
Retyped

land, which is dismissed.

The defendant's motion for summary judgment is denied as to the

second, third, and fourth claims stated in the petition.

/s/ Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

we concur in the foregoing:

/s/ Edgar E.'Witt

Chief Commissioner

/s/ Louis J. 0'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

