BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAI&S COMMISSION

rm camno TRIBE or omnsora. ET AL... )

Plaintiffs, ; p

v. 3 Docket No. 226
mm U'NI'JlED STATES or ALERICA, ;
Defendant. g

Decided: March 8, 1956

Appearances:
0. R. McGuire, with whom was
Jay H. Hoag,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs,,

Clifford R. Stearns, with whom

was Mr. Assistant Attorney General.
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION 93 Tee oonnlsslon

G-an-unfiil

Witt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Plaintiffs herein, The Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma, et al., sue for
the value. less proper credits and offsets, of approximately 1,000,000
acres of land located in northwestern Louisiana and southwestern
Arkansas which they allege was ceded to the United States by the Caddo
Indians by treaty entered into between said Caddo Indians and the
United States through its Commissioner, Jehiel Brooks, on July 1, 1835.

The petition of the plaintiffs contained. among others, counts
These

for lands in the State of Texas and the State of Oklahoma.

counts were dismissed on the merits because of failure of proof by

3 21h

order of this Commission entered on March 1, 1955. The issue for determination by this Commission was confined to the area described in Article I
of the treaty of July l, l835, as set out in Finding 2 submitted herewith.

The Caddo Indians who bring this suit are the remnants of three
once powerful confederacies whose people occupied the area of what is
now eastern Texas, southeastern Oklahoma, southwestern Arkansas, and
northwestern Louisiana at one time. When they were first contacted by
De Soto‘s expedition in ISM2 they were found in the above general area.
From that time on, as indicated by the findings, there was periodic
contact by the Spanish and then the French until about 1700 when the
contacts became more or less continuous with the French on one side and
the Spanish on the other and finally with the United States after the
Louisiana purchase in 1803.

The three confederacies referred to above were the Kadohadacho,
Natchitoches and Hasinai. The Kadohadacho, or Caddo Confederacy was
composed originally of four principal tribes who resided around the
area of the big bend of the Red River in what is now Arkansas and extending along the river where it borders Texas and Arkansas. There was
one village beyond the Arkansas border below present day Idabel, Oklahoma.
on the Texas side of the river. These villages were occupied by the
Nanatsbho, Upper Natchitoches, Upper Nasoni, and Kadohadachoe
Dr. Swanton, who is one of the foremost authorities on the Caddo, includes

the Petit Caddo who lived on Sodo (Caddo) Lake in Louisiana as a part of

the Kadohadacho Confederacy. At a later date the Cahinno Caddo from the

Ouachita River in Arkansas and the Upper Yatasi joined the Kadohadacho

Confederacy.

The_Natchitoches Confederacy was composed of the Doustioni,
Ouachita and Natchitoches tribes and these were joined later by the
Lower Yatasi.

The third Confederation was that of the Hasinai and was located
in what is now eastern Texas. This group can be disregarded since they
never occupied any of the territory involved in this suit and their
principal contact with the Caddo came after the treaty was signed and
the Caddo finally moved over into Texas.

Around 1777, while the Spanish owned Louisiana, and the Caddo
Qenfederacy still occupied its aboriginal area around and above the
great bend of the Red River, there came an epidemic which killed large
numbers of the Indians. At about the same time the Osage Indians comwenced a state o£ serious warfare against the Caddo and caused the Caddo
tg consider the advisability of moving southward to escape them. This
neve evidently took place about 1788 according to contemporary correspgndence. They moved some miles below their ancient village. but after
gbeut two years the attacks of the Osage forced them to move again.

They moved southward and joined the Petiti Caddo around Caddo Lake about
1?§Q gr l80Q, which is within the area ceded in 1835. This move took
the Qadde from the big bend country all the way down to Caddo Lake.

En 1803 when the United States purchased the Louisiana Territory
grge Erance the Caddo were all living within the area ceded by the
treaty ef July 1, 1835, with the exception of the lower Natchibaches
and @931. Qne of the first accounts of these Indians after American

gggqpatien ef the area was given by Dr. John Sibley in 1805. He reported the location of the Caddo as being within the area which was

1: 21

later ceded. The FreemanrCustis expedition up the Red River furnishes

further corroboration of the location of the Caddo in 1806. The Nicholas
King map made on this expedition shows the deserted villages to the north
and northwest. During this period the 1ewer Natchitoches and Adan‘. lived
below the cession area, but appear to have moved up to join the other
groups sometime before 1835. There seems to be no question but thatv
the remainder of the members of the Caddo and Natchitoches Confederacies
had merged into a single group prior to the treaty of 1835. The increasing settlement of the area and the decreasing number of Indians
made it feasible and necessary that there be such a merger as a matter
Of Self-interest. According to Swanton there is no record of any other
tribes than the Caddo in the entire region in spite of later shiftings.
The absence of any archeological deposits within the immediate

area of the cession does not indicate a failure of the Caddo and
Natchitoches Confederacies to have used and occupied the area to the
extent that they controlled it. Certainly the Yatasi. Adai, and
Natchitoches had occupied their lands from first contact and there is
no indication from the evidence that the same was_not true of the Petit
Caddo. When the principal tribes of the Caddo decided to move southward
there was no doubt about their right to do so nor any question of their
friendly reception so far as is known. The evidence indicates that the
Caddo proper had considerable influence throughout the whole area and

were looked up to by all the other tribes as being the original stock

from which all had sprung.

Accepting then the ownership of the land generally by the Caddo
Confederacy, it becomes a question of the area actually used and

occupied by the group. There is evidence to the effect that the Caddo

,continued to assert a claim to a large area, including their former

homes above the big bend of the Red River and on over to the buffalo
crdssing at Pecan Point. The fact remains, however, that this land
was not used and occupied by them in the usual Indian manner. They
very probably crossed the area in going up into Oklahoma to hunt,
buffalo, as they continued to do at least as late as 1825. As stated

in the Quapaw case, 128 C. Cls. “S:

* ° * Indian tribes, in the absence of a treaty reservation,
have only an occupancy and use title, or right, the fee
being in the United States, and when an Indian tribe ceases
for any reason, by reduction of population or otherwise, to
actually and exclusively occupy and use an area of land
clearly established by clear and adequate proof, such land
becomes the exclusive property of the United States as _
public lands, and the Indians lose their right to claim and
assert full beneficial interest and ownership to such land;
and the United States cannot be required to pay therefor on
the same basis as if it were a recognized treaty reservation.

This same problem is presented with regard to the area between

Sulphur Fork and the Red River to the north. This area was included withv

in the treaty description, but there has been no "clear and adequate

proof" as to its use and occupancy by the Caddo Indians. Admittedly the

treaty boundaries, as set out by the Indians, were accepted by 3r00kSo

The fact remains, however, that the setting of boundaries by treaty does

not create a.prima facie case of ownership. There must still be a showing of use and occupancy by the claimants, or a recognition by the
United States of ownership, before they can be held to have been the

beneficial owners of any described area. (See Klamath and Modoc

1*. 211+

Tribes and Yahooskin Band of Snake Indians v. The United States of
America, I.C.C. DH. No. 100). As stated in 1825 by George Gray,
the agent, the boundaries of the Caddo were between Cypress Creek
on the south and Sulphur Fork on the north. He says that these
boundaries were generally recognized by everyone within the area.
Upon being instructed to investigate the matter and report, he confirmed the boundaries as he had previously stated them. As contrary
to this definite statement of Gray's there is no proof that the
Caddo used the area above Sulphur Fork as of the time of the cession
in 1835, nor apparently did they use it for years previously. We
may speculate that hunting parties went intdhthe area from time to
time and certainly the hunting parties which sent into Oklahoma on
periodic buffalo hunts may possibly have g=:;ne through it. On the
other hand. it is equally possible that such parties went up through
present Cass and Bowie counties in Texas in order to reach Oklahoma.
This route would seem more practical. Another circumstance which
would indicate that the Caddo did not use and occupy this area is the
comparatively high degree of agriculture practiced by these Indians.

It is stated in contemporary reports that the original Caddo villages
had extensive fields surrounding them and it appears also that nearly,
if not all, of the other Indians throughout this general area practiced
agriculture extensively. Swanton states that when the Caddo first moved
from their original location late in the eighteenth century they moved
some piles below their ancient village, but were forced by the Osage
This

to move on down to Caddo Lake where they joined the Petit Caddo.

failure to locate above Sulphur Fork on the second move may be

1: 21:;

significant, or it may not, but it certainly adds nothing to the claim

of use and occupancy by the Caddo. Perhaps some hunting was done in

the area of_Mil1er County, but there is no adequate proof of it. The
preponderance of the evidence in the record indicates that the Caddo
were not using and occupying the area of what is present day Miller
County, Arkansas, during the period prior to and at the time of the
cession in 1835.

With reference to the claim of recognition through the treaty
involving the Louisiana.Purchase. it seems obvious that Article III
referred to the white inhabitants and not to the Indians. Article VI
says only that the United States will honor any prior agreements made
between Spain and the Indians until such agreements are superseded by
agreements between the United States and the Indians. There is no
evidence in the record of any agreement between Spain and the Caddo
which would tend to support plaintiffs’ contention. On the contrary,
the Caddo agreed to code to the King of Spain ”--all proprietorship
in the land which they inhabit-—." _Certain1y if a treaty made with the
Indians by the United States in which land boundaries are set forth
does not constitute recognition of Indian title, then it cannot be
inferred from a treaty in which the Indians were but third party beneficiaries.

Plaintiffs‘ contention that the case of the United States v. Brooks,
et al¢,(1O Howard “M2, 13 L. Ed. 489) is res judicata as to the issue of
recognition by the United States of pit‘-.-:a:'u::‘.‘t;i;fI""s‘-I‘ ownership of the ceded
The facts inarea does not seem to this Commission to be tenable.

volved in the Brooks litigation are fully set out in the Courts‘ OpinionsM 220

It is our opinion that this litigation merely decides that the Indians
had passed to the Grappes and their assigns whatever title they had to
the land involved in that litigation. and that the United States had
also relinquished its interest in said land and, therefore, that neither
the Indians nor the United States had at the time of that litigation

any title to the land involved.

In addition to this question of res judicata being inapplicable
because of these facts-it would also seem to be inapplicable because
of a lack of privity between the Indians and the Grappes, Brooks, et al.
It is undisputed that the Indians were not parties to that litigationthey were not privies to the judgment-how then can they or the United
States be bound thereby as to the instant case, because of no mutuality
of estoppel? Unquestionably, had the decision been in favor of the
United States, such decision could not, under the law, be res judicata
as against the Indians.

From the evidence it seems clear that the Caddo by the end of the
eighteenth century were no longer able to use, occupy and control in the
usual Indian manner their aboriginal claimed holdings. The combination
of epidemics and the warfare by the Osage Indians had forced them to
move twice prior to 1835, and had reduced the combined numbers of the
Caddo and Natchitoches Confederacies to something in the neighborhood
of five or six hundred people.

In accordance with the findings of fact, it is the opinion of this
Commission that the predecessors in interest of plaintiffs herein did

use, occupy and control the area of land as set out in finding No. 12

from aboriginal times until the treaty cession of July 1, 1835, and that

h 222

the plaintiffs are entitled to an award for the value of the same, as
of July 1, 1835, if the consideration paid by defendant was unconscionable or inadequate, less proper credits and offsets. if any,

to which defendant may be entitled.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. o'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt ”
Associate Commissioner

