BEFORE THE II~."DI.5.N CI£:.I.3:-1:3 CC1E=Z>:-IZSSIOR

CITIZEK seen or FOTA¥ATOKI"
INDIAKS 0? oKLaaonA, et al.,

1:3 POTAEATOHIE TRIBE OF IEDIRES,
THE PRAIRIE BRKD OF THE PGTé— '

)
)
)
Petitioners, )
)
)
WATOKIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, et al., )

Docket No. 154M
Petitioners,

JAMES STRONG, et al., as the Representatives and on behalf of al '
members by blood of the CHI PEEA
TRIBE OF INDIANS,

Docket Ho. l3—$i

Plaintiffs,

Representatives and on behalf

_. .."". - -- .. -.-:—- ‘ . '3.“  ‘ _-1" 4-. -.
VJ. <:.4...x. uaczuuciz: u_y u.:.Uu\..L u.:. taut

OTTAWA TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Plaintiffs,

HAHNAHVIIIE INDIAN COKHUNITY,
'Hilson, Michigan, FOREST COUNTY,
POTAHATOHI COMHUNITY, Crandon,
disconsin, et al.,

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

) Docket No. hO—K
%

)

)

D .

) Docket No. 29—K
)

)

)

)

Plaintiffs,

VS.
THE UHITED STATES OF AHERICA, 3
Defendant. )

Decided: June 30, 1958

FIHDINGS OF FACT

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
l. Dockets léé, 15eK, l3—K, A0-K and 29-K were consolidated for

trial on the question.of Indian title to the land involved.

three sets of Proposed

ff}
'0
F
f..J
4
( J
‘U
[1
(-1
F-’
( f‘
}....l
O
:4
‘D
"3
LI‘)
*1
Q
5'...
1 J
tn
"'1"
[U
<1
(3
H)
3.:
}—-'
(D
K).

rin5i3$E 0: Fact an‘ Briefs and of Objections to Defendant's Proposed

Findings; one jointly by the petitioners in Dockets lab and l5—€, one

jointly by the petitioners in Dockets l3~K and AO~K, and the petitioners in Docket 29~K have filed separate pleadings. Each of the parties
has the Capacity to institute and prosecute actions before the Indian

Claims Commission, and each of the claims asserted in these respective
dockets is within the jurisdiction of this Commission.

2. The Ottawa, Potawatomi and Chippewa Indians are each of Algonquin stock. Their languages are not identical but are mutually intelligible. Since their earliest contact by the white man, neither
nation has had a political entity embracing all the cultural or ethnic
grouriugs under their national name, but each has been divided into
ieparate units, groups or bands, acting entirely autonomously and independently of any central authority. Each separate unit was early
identified with its geographic location, and the United States has
dealt with such separate units as political entities, particularly
‘with respect to land purchases. Since time immemorial it has been a
common.custom among each of these units to confer membership upon
those individual Indians residing with any one band or group. A per: —
nent change of residence from.the land of one band to that of another
constituted a corresponding change in membership and an abandonment or
waiver of right to participate in property or other rights of the group
or band in which membership was formerly held. In like manner, and
through int rmarriage, members of one nationality were readily adopted

‘ "'5

into bands or another.

The Otta1~.-'a were canoe Indians, traveling; great distances in their

bark canoes... The .‘Pota=.-satozri did not use caress but  horses which enabled them to keep in communication with each other. (Def. Ex. 3., pp.
133, 11¢-:6, Dkt. 1&6) The three divisions were each agriculturalists,
annually planting and tending cornfields abouttheir villages but hunting and trapping during the winter season within areas sufficiently far
removed from their village sites for the wild game. to be plentii"ul.

3. The Saginaw Chippewa Indian tribe of Michigan and one James
Stmg as representative of all members of the Chippewa Tribe of Indians
originally filed Docket 13 with this Commission, setting out the claim
presently advanced in Docket 13--M‘, together with several others. By
process of amendment this claim is now advanced by James Strong and
some 80 other individusl petitioners. It has heretofore been determined that the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe oi‘ Michigan is comprised of
the former Saginaw, Swan Creek and Black River bands of Chippewa Indians
(Dockets l3--H, l3--J)‘, but it has not been positively established that
any of the several individual petitioners herein are successors in interest to the Saginaw, Swan Creek or Black River bands of Chippewa In-»
dians and entitled to institute this action.

Only two groups of Ottawa Indiansw-rere receiving annuities from the

United States in 1.821. "I"'.3I“e3--J.

They were Ottawa Indians residing in the
sent State of Michigan who were known as the Ottawa of Grand Ri"."'E:"i'.L'."
Ottawa Indians. residing in the present State of Ohio who were knoz-rr:
as the Ottawa of the Ivhumee, Blanchard‘s Fork and Roche de Boeui‘. 

petitioners in Docket 1+0-K and consolidated Dockets 1+0-B, C, D, E, and

, are successors in interest to the Ottawa of Grand River in Eichigan,
and include Indians whose ancestors resided in the northern part of the
area here involved and who were known as the Grand River Band of Ottawa
Indians, as well as other Ottawa Indians whose ancestors in 1821 resided
about L‘Arbre Croche and elsewhere within northern Hichigan. ( 2 I.C.C.
A61—&67)

The petitioners herein, Citizen Band of Potawatomi Indians of
Oklahoma, the Prairie Band of the Potawatomie Tribe of Indians, and the
Hannahville Indian Community, Wilson, Michigan, and Forest County Potawatomi Cdmmunity, Crandon, Wisconsin, and the several individuals representing these various groups,'were before this Commission in Consolidated Dockets 71-A, I5-J, et al. The Commission there determined that at
one time a southern division of the Potawatomi Indians consisted of five
separate units which were known as: (1) The United Nation, including
federated or allied individual Indians of Ottawa and Chippewa ancestry’
and sometimes called the Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawatomi Nation, which
resided west of lake Michigan; (2) Potawatomi of St. Joseph, more commonly called the Potawatoni of Indiana and Michigan; (3) Pot watomi of the
Prairie and Kankakee; .(L) Potawatomi of the Wabash; and (5) Potawatomi
of the Huron, sometimes called the Potawatomi of the Huron and Raisen
rivers, or the Huron Band of Po awatoni Indians. That the United Nation,
the Kankakec Band, Wabash Band, and St. Joseph Band ultimately united
to form the United Potawatomi Nation in Kansas, and subsequently divided into the present petitioners, the Citizen and the Prairie Bands.

eizecnt-ed bv the Peta».-atozni Indians before or during 1833, and it continued to reside in 3-iichiga. . The Pokagaon Band is a group of the St.
Joseph Band of Po‘t"vato.r;1i Indians who had become converted to the
atholic faith and by reason thereof were given permission in the suplementary articles to the Potawatoazi treaty of l833, (7 Stat. 431,
1; l.C.C. 14,90) to remain in I-Eichigan when the St. Joseph Band moved west.
A number of other Peta‘.-rat.orni Indians refused. to move west and instead
moved into northern Wisconsin, northern I--‘-dchigan and Canada. Yet other
Potawatomi Indians moved to Kansas and later returned to their homeland;
these can not new be identified. The Huron Band, the Pokagon Band, and
those individual Potawatozzzi who either remained in the east without permission or returned there from Kansas, exclusive of those residing in
Canada, are represented therein by the Hannahville Indian Commmzxity of
Wilspon, Iéichigan, and the Fdrest County Potawatomi Cormunity of Crandon,
Wisconsin, the petitioners in Docket 29-K. Said petitioners make no
claim in their own right but assert that they zrepresent Indians whose
ancestors were members of the Potawatoni Nation and owned the land ceded by the Treaty of August 29, l82l;"that they are entitled to participate in any

ward hereinafter Wanted based upon that treaty. "

DThe petitioners Michael Williams and Alhert Llackety are descendants
of merzzbers of the Pokagon and the Huron band, respectively, and appear
in behalf of all r:'=.e::1bers of such bands and their descendants.
5. Under the Jurisdictional Act of I-iarch 19, 1890, the Potawatomi

Indians in Michigan and -Indiana presented their claim of right to participate in tribal annuities and funds of the Potawatc-mi Ilation to the

oourt of Claims for adjudication. The Cctit found, and the Supreme
Court affirmed (270. C15. AO3,lA8 U.S. 689), that following the 1833
treaty of cession 2,812 Pctawatomi Indiansémoved west of the Hississip7

pi River and 1,100 remained in hichigan or Endiana; that of this later
number only 291 were entitled to remain in the east and continue to participate in funds and assets of the Potawatomi Nation under the supplementary articles of the 1833 treaty; and that the United States had
waived an additional requirement that this group more into northern
Michigan. This enumerationexcluded the Potawatomi of the Huron who.
were not parties to that litigation. (Dkt. 15-J, Fdg. A3, A I.E.C..503)
The 291 persons permitted to remain east of the Mississippi River
‘wore thereafter known as the Pokogon Band of Potav"t~T‘ Indiar". T16

urts decreed in the above litigation that an accounting of the assets
and funds of the Potawatcmi Nation was due the Pokagon Band on the ratio
of 2,812 to 291. (Pet. Prop. =F_dg. 28, me. 29-~K)

Thereafter. on April 21, 190A, 33 Stat. 189, 210, Congress appropriated $78,399.25 for distribution.among 271 other Potawatomi Indians
residing in Michigan and Indiana who the Court of Claims found in subsequent 1itigatitmLL37 C.C1s. 427, l8? U.S. 370) had been omitted when
the Pokagon Band was enrolled preliminary ;o disbursement of the moneys
paid to the membership ofthat band upon the accounting made to it under
the earlier action.

Potawatomi Indians residing in Wisconsin also claimed a right to

participate in the annuities and funds of the Potawatomi Nation (Dkt.

\

l5~J, Fdg. 36, A l.C.C. 500). On June 21, Congress directed the

Secre1;.¢_ry of the interior to in~.resticete their claims, enroll the claimC:

ants and report. (3!+St-t. 380) Tim ergrollltzent was conducted by Walter L

N. Wooster in 1907-8. All Potawatomi Indians who-se ancestors had removed
west of the Mississippi River or who had resided in southern Wisconsin
and Michigan were oxzzi ted from that roll. 1:57 Potawatomi Indians residing in the United States and 1,550 residing in Canada who had at least
one ancestor, on either side, having Potawatonti blood, and iveho were not
enrolled with any other tribe of Indians were then enrolled. Their
ancestors included Chippewa, Ottawa, ienominee and Winnebago Indians.
(Dkt. I5--J, Fdg. 56,57, 2. I.C.C. 510,511)

Following the Secretary's report that $..{,1;.7,339 represented the proportionate share in tribal annuities and funds which these enrolled Indians
would have received had they participated in Potawatomi annuities theretofore paid (House Doc. 830, 60th Cong. lst Sess., 38 Stat. I02, June
30, 1913), Congress appropriated that sum for distribution amorg A57
Potawatomi Indians residing in Wisconsin and upper Piichigan. None of
the appropriations were taken from assets or funds of or charged against
the Potawatomi Indians who had moved west of the I-iississippi. (Fdg. 57,
Dkt. 15-J, A I.C.C. 511)

6. Among the Indians signatory to the treaty of Greenville, '27
Stat. 1+9, dated August 3, 1795, was the St. Joseph Band of Potawatomi
Indians. While that treaty recognized that Indian title or right of
occupancy of land in the Northwest Territory remained in the Indians
residing upon it, such recognition was limited to the parties signing

that treaty, and did not relieve them from the necessity of identifyIndia?¢

ing the land to which their right of occupancy attached. Iafiarai

vs. United States, 5 I.C.C. I80, 2114..

 

7. Unde the treaty of Ghent in l7d3 the United States accniru
ed sovereignty and technical control of the country south of the Great
lakes. The Indiantribes therein continued hostile to the new nation, and
a series of military conflicts finally led in I795 to the establishment
of a boundary line between the various Indian tribes and the United
States by means of the Treaty of Greenville, 7 tat. #9, in Whidh the
policy of right of Indian occupancy of the land with the fee title therew
to:remaining in the United States was carefully set out. The lucrative
fur trade with the Indians in this region which had been instigated by
the French and developed by the English who took over control of this
region from them, the preservation of peace and safety along the frontier,
the necessity of controlling h*vig*tion on the Great lakes which promised
30 be of major importance to the economy of the country, and the need for
new lands to accommodate the expanding nation, all led to the United States later adopting a policy of treating with these Indians occupying the country
west of the l795 treaty line, for the acquisition of their lands, trade,
friendship and allegiance. (Def. Ex. 51, Dkt. 1&6)

8. On June 1, l820, the Secretary of'War, John C. Calhoun, advised

one Solomon Sibley and one lewis Cass, then Governor of the Territory of

Michigan and Superintendent of Indian Affairs therein, of their appoint- ment to treat with the Indians in Eichigah Territory for which purpose

Congress had appropriated $20,000 on April ll, I820. (Pet. Ex.l5, Dkt.
29-K) The powers of the treaty commissioners were broadly stated.
It is the wish of the President trat the whole of the I.dian

titles withdJi'Lhe peninsula of Nichigan should be exiinguishu
ed, in order to strenethen our population and resources in

that heretofore feeble portion of our country. .A.y suitable
arrangement by which tle tribes who now inhabit it can be induced to change their residence to the west of lake T i
r even to the west of the Mississippi, will meet with hi

approbation.

The commissioners thereafter arranged to hold a council during
August, 1821, at the site of Chicago because any needed military protection would be readily available from.nearby Fort Dearborn, and because

it was conveniently located for thezamemmodation of the Indians and the

transportation of supplies. (Pet. Ex. 95, Dkt. 1&6) DEring the Council Governor Cass advised the Indians:

The country we propose to purchase of you is this. Beginning
at the south end of Lake Michigan, at the mouth of the Missikonomico, or Grand Kononick, and running towards sun-rise
untill it strikes the lands that the Pottowatomies granted to

their father at Fort Heigs. From thence running along the
line of Hull's treaty north to a point directly opposite the
mouth of Grand river on lake Michigan, and thence due west to
the mouth of that river. In other words, all the lands between.the Grand Konomick and Grand river on lake Michigan exa
tending towards the rising of the sun until it meets the old

grants.

The council began August 17th, 1821, and closed August 23rd.

The treaty was signed August 29th, 1821, and was forwarded to the Secretary of War on September 12, 1821 (Pet. Ex. 93, Def. Ex. 61, Dkt.‘lA6),
and was ratified and proclaimed March 25th,il822.C’3tat. 218)

9. (a) The area ceded by Article 1 of the 1821 treaty is located
in the southeastern corner of the southern Michigan peninsula, in see{gw
ern Michigan and northern Indiana. t is identified as Area 11? upon
Roycehs Kaps of Hichigan l and Indiana. (B.A.E. Vol. 18) It is described in the treaty as follows:

* * Beginning at a point on the south bank of the river St.
J seph of lake Vichigan, near the Pare aux.?aches, due north
T .

i---.

.; Rum's Village, and runnine thence south to a line drawn

“CD
T051!’ INT‘:  I'll:-4y-\

1 9 1'1 1.
ta 1:3 r -F‘ . _ /"\ -I-.-u-_~
ado east iron the southern extreme or Ian. nicnlgan, thence

6 423

with the said line east to the Tract ceded by the Pottawatomies
to the United States by the Treaty of Fort Keigs in l8l7, if the
said line should strike the said Tract, but if the said line
arnud pass north of thesaid Tract, then such line shall be continued until ‘t strikes the western boundary of the Tract ceded
to the United States by the Treaty of Detroit in l80?, and from
the termination of the said line, following the boundaries of
former cessions, to the main branch of the Grand River of lake
Kichigan, should any of the said lines cross the said River, but
if none of the said lines should cross the said River,then to a
point due east of the source of the said main branch of the said
River, and from such point due west to the source of the said
principal branch, and from the crossing f the said River, or
from.the source thereof, as the case may be, down the said River,
on the north bank thereof, to the.mouth; thence following the
shore.of lake Richigan to the south bank of theE%id river St.
Joseph, at the mouth thereof, and thence with the said south bank
to the place of beginning.

(b) The Grand river from its mouth on Take Michigan to a point
where the westerly line of the Chippewa treaty of 1818, 7 Stat. 203.
(30308 ill), crosses the river, is a wide stream which diminishes in

Ldth or size until it reacheslansing, hichigan, from which place to its
source it is a relatively small stream. Compared with its tributaries,
the widest and most prominent section of the river is its western end
extending easterly to near Ionia, Michigan, and is the main branch of
the river. (Pet. Ex, 112 and Def. Ex._55O The source of the Grand
River was not known in 1821 to the Commissioners who negotiated the
treaty of August 29, 1821.

(c) Three treaties were negotiated by defendant prior to the l82l
cession. Such treaties and the lines of each insofar as applicable

here are as follows:

1. The Fort Heigs Treaty of September 29, l8l7, 7 Stat. l60.

The southern line of the l82l.cession strikes the west line of this cession (See Royce 88) and runs north to the northwest corner, thence east

J its northeast corner.

9

This corner is referred to in the 1891 cession as “The termination
of said line“ and strikes the west line of the 1807 cession.

2. The treaty of November 17, 1807, 7 Stat. 105, is
sometimes referred to as the Hull treaty; it ceded lands in southeast Hichigan, the western boundary of which (see Royce 66)extends
north of the 1817 cession and forms part of the eastern boundary of
the 1819 cessioh.

3. tBy the treaty of September 24, 1819, 7 Stat. 203

(Royce 111), the Chipper Indians ceded a large tract inIHichigan,

the south boundary of which starts on the west line of the 1807 cession (Royce 66) at a point six.mi1es south of the Michigan Base Line,
and extends west sixty'miles, thence northeasterly to the head of I
Thunder Bay River, crossing the mainlaranch of the Grand River about
two miles west of Saranac; Michigan.

By the plain description of the boundaries of the 1821 cession,
contained in article I oi that treaty and set forth in Finding 8 (a)
above, the eastern part of that cession is limited to the west line
of the 1807 cession from the northeast corner of the 1817 cession to

a point sixzmiles south of the Michigan Base line, the south line of

the 1819 cession, and the western line of said 1819 cession, from_it3

southwest corner to the Grand River, as shown above.
10. Taking into consideration the physical features of the rem
gion and the boundaries of land cessions made prior to 1821, aid applying the boundary description as set forth in Article 1 of due

6 A24

0

such description we find that by said treaty the Indian parties thereto, petitioners herein, ceded to defendant the lands within the following boundaries:

* * *Beginning at a point on the south bank of the

river St. Joseph of lake Eichiga., near the Pare aux
Vaches, due north from Rum‘s Village, and running thence
south to a line drawn due east from the southern extreme
of lake Michigan; then with said line east to the west
line of the tract ceded by the Potawatomies to the United
States by the Treaty of Fort Eeigs in 1817 (7 Stat. 160);
thence north on said line to the northwest corner of said
tract, thence east along the northern line thereof to the
northeast corner where it intersects the west line of the
treaty cession of hovember 17, 1807, 7 Stat. 105; thence
north on such west line to a point six.miles south of the
Michigan Base line; thence west from that point on a line
which is the south line of the territory ceded by the L
treaty ofiseptember 2A, 1819, 7 Stat. 203, a distance of
sixty miles; thence northeasterly on the western line of
the iol9 cession to where such line crosses the main
branch of the Grand river about two.miles west-of Saranac,
Michigan; thence along the north bank of the Grand river
to its mouth on lake Lichigan; thence following the shore :3
of lake Michigan souther1y'to the south bank of the said
St. Joseph river, and thence with such south bank up said

river to the place of beginning.
The area within.the boundaries last described comprises 4,198,810 acres

(Def. Ex. 6h).

11. (a) Five separate tracts, each surrounding a named village
"within the area above described, were reserved by the Indians under

Article 2 of the 1821 treaty. The Hang—ach-qua and Mich-he-sawebe

village tracts were each located on Goldwater river; the Prairie Ronde
village tract was on the Dowagiac river, a tributary of the St. Joseph
river, the Eatch—e—be-nash—she—wish village was on the Kalamazoo river

near the present town of Kalamazoo, Michigan. Each of these reservaO

tions'ues ceded to the United 3tates by “dispersed bands of the Peta»

I“!

'watomi Tkdixe" in the Treaty of September 19, l8i7, ; Stat. 305. The

61.25

fifth reservation at the Kota~wa—se~pa village along the St. Joseph
River was ceded to the United States by the Supplementary Articles
to the Treaty of September 27; 1833; 7 Stat. LL2, which were exr
ecuted by Michigan Indians who had been invited to attend a council held at Chicago during September, 1827, which was called to
procure from the United Nation of Chippewa, Ottawa, and Potawatomi
Indians of Wisconsin a cession of lands lying on the western side
of lake Michigan. (Fdgs. 17-21; Dkt. l5-J, A I.C.C. A87-A90)

These Michigan Indians are referred to in the l833 Council Journal
as "The Chiefs and headmen of the St. Joseph and Nottaawa-se—pe

bands of the United Tribes of Potawatomies, Ottawas, and Chippewa”.

/‘C>_-~+ ‘EM... 1! T‘n_.4. rm :1 ......a 1r 1'\ : E

('3 f‘
\- st‘-in n...a..4'u-0  ¢‘.p';';_§,p. ‘_L"“-3 Q,4;‘~g    LI 1.}

1;-yr-2
o 9 O ‘'+\-’

(0
(b) The third article of the treaty of l82l provided for a

number of land grants to named individuals. The area conveyed by

such grants and that included within the five reservations above referred to total 84,h8O acres. (Def. Exs. 6h, 65, Dkt. 146) The
United States acquired by the treaty of August 29, 1821, a total of
h,llh,33O acres.

12. (a) The areas occupied by the various bands or groups of
Indians in the southern.Michigan peninsula was not known to the
Government or its representatives in 1821. Governor Cass commented
on this fact when transmitting the treaty he had negotiated with the
Chippewa Indians of Saginaw on September 2;, l8l9, 7 Stat. 203. his
letter to the Secretary of Ear, dated September 30, l8l9, reads in

part:

The boundaries of the tract ceded may be easily traced upon any good map of the United States, but owing
to our ignorance of the topography of the interior of
this territory, it may be eventually found, when the
lines are run, that the southeastern corner of the
tract ceded is in the possession of the Grand River
Indians. If so, there will be no difficulty and very
little expense, in quieting their claims. (Def. Ex.

40, Dkt. 146)

(b) This situation is also evident from Mr. Sibley‘s coiment when writing Governor Cass from Mackinac following his appointment as one of the 1821 treaty commissioners. Having contacted Mr.
Godfroy, Sub-agent for the Potawatoni Indians, and F . Knaggs, Subagent for the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians (Def. Ex. l, p. l95, Dkt.

1&6), Mr. Sibley wrote:

The nat'ves who are the chief claimants are supposed
to be the Potewatimies and ttowas -- whether they
can be induced to part with their whole interest is
extremely doubtful - * * *. Messrs Godfrey and
Knaggs are I believe of opinion the Potawatimies will
be disposed to part with their land provided they are
‘well paid for it. what the Ottowas will do, is I
think doubtful. (Pet. Ex. 90, Dkt. lac)

(c) During the council at Chicago in August, 1821, Governor

i

Cass commented that the Potawatoni owned “all that country south of
the Grand river to the headwaters of the Haumee and the Wabash", and

in their official report to the Secretary of'Nar on August 29, 1821,

Messrs. Sibley and Cass wrote:

Your instructions directed us to treat for the extinction of Indian title within the Territory of Eichigan,
and if possible to procure a cession of all the aboriginal claims therein. But we soon found that so extensive a cession w uld be impracticable. The Indians who
occunv the Northwestern Corner of the peninsula, extendina from Ih"“de“ Eav to the north of Grand River

_,___,,__,,__ us!-J¢4 4 1'\.o-o Q

 

 
        

.-v           

 
 

 
 

   

        

‘ , -1 -._ _' _g_ ;_ _:_ ft - 1
am :1-nci.1::.i:'.r: .. 1; f .*-o'=.:-. .'_s;;_*-n.r.: se -.. -..l-3:“:-.en., o:-; .I..‘3ir-are
:1':"1‘  ° -II-Z—u-tr & . 1 g . .1 S j -j1nD—1 
"1"|Of‘I‘f"gfs  ,-\-'- g-.-L-;.."._-,‘ -'—‘ .1 p...-.--‘A-y-gr-‘| I,‘ 14; .1 f(.:''-.-;--_4-‘-u‘,-_‘
u- .,-...-. .......‘-\.«. I":._=.. :.:.i.-..;.-;;-.1 L; 2... .- *.-:::.:i c.:..-.. uO..»;l'1Cl..-.. .1._£.;.---‘._.L..;.,£'1
-gm-q.._ q....u...-..-nu- '- a--..-. —o .  ~. Q-I-I-us
I II
1‘ - ‘L - --I- -' "- 3 » r r- " ' " ‘I Iv g“ '* ‘I’ '5:
uafx !' T‘OI‘L..'."..C.f._~ ‘.'..‘_. . {E9 - 5.. '. ;-_f“_'..‘_"3'3 1'.-'3.-"'.'c; 'f."'?."".'.'fE-€’.I'}u: 373?. £3.53
S1.‘ ...—..g-1 --up-n—--—-a-u-—-n— -¢¢  1'
4- ‘-4 .. ‘I ' *.:—n»-- H’ -_ _-.'. .r- .:' Ft :. .... .
LahEi§_.’ .L.3.V:-)3 11’? C_..‘..;. *2‘.-f‘='.':"I'.'l'».. -I.:.'iE.’..f"'...€l"S Oi u1'1\3 UOL‘-.I‘i:.... jg‘ 1:0 TO‘
  ' 4. ‘ .9 - ' . _"‘ 4-‘ ‘ "” .. "* 2
Dos; tion .3. or  c.-.ou::trj; c-sssio.-:1 oi -.,:‘.3.s .Land coaic. be
'1 '-' ‘II- . ¢—:- 

     

made 1-.r:.tE'; ‘these. The ln=:3i;;r1s oi‘ the ::a.:::e tribe are di 

vided into various nolitieal cos:-mlnities. I-sit}:-; sere.rate

interests and separate rights. The inhabitants of one

Vlll-£1.-‘£3 are on-t.-.°il'?ir.:r to cede t.1e land of anether, and
-III-up

 

   

   

   

   

, than as zzaezzfoers oi‘ the same nation.
Def. Ex. 63, Diet. 11.6) Underscoring supplied.

de endent bodies

 

l3. The minutes of the treaty council are incomplete. The Seeretary, Henry  Schoolcraft, explained this ‘men z~.rriting the Secretary of War on September 18, l82l:

It 1.».ri]_l be perceived that the proceedings do not bring
the treaty to a close, or even settle the preliminary
points. These points were adjusted with the Chiefs,

after the council of the 23d of August, which was the
last public conference b.=_>+.m=..-=~n 1".}'Ica Tnqiisna 5:2?-H +*n5_. am.._ -u -— - -. — -— - -- ----o¢I-.- Q-.1:-|L4'd's in‘... Va’ ‘up A-'-o

missioners, and consequently the last, of which I was

required, in my official station, to preserve any record. (Def. 3);. 55, D1-zt. l1+6; Pet. Ex. 19, Dkt. 29--}{)
However, in an annual report as Acting Superintendent of Indian Affairs Within Michigan during l837, Schoolcraft identified the Indians signing the l82l treaty as Ottawas and Potter.-Iatornies of Michigan, south of Grand River, and referred to their relinquishment of
their reservations in the subsequent treaty of l833. (Pet. Ex. lO2,
Dkt. 11.6) 6

lit. The incomplete council minutes and the treaty of l82l disclose that the Potawatomi spe,a‘::ers who also signed the treaty were
I-ie-ta-a, chief from the headwaters of the Wabash River who. signed
as he-te-ay; To-pin-a-bee, who signed as To-pen—ne‘-bee and lived about

the St. Joseph River (Def.  l, p. l93, Diszt. 1&6), and Congee who

 

'!"| I“.

lived on the St. Joseph River and. who signed as Kongee (Def. nx. 

6

.L,2-‘Z

"N

O
Q
[La
13‘
0
HI
E-'
3
PO
‘.23
:3’
Ct
€ D
(.0
Q.
C
.‘.'5
0
('9
fa!
‘.35
O.
P
0
9’.
C _.
f (3
E
*1
(D
S:
"In
I
H
223
0
V-1
(D
U)
..-4
(11
H
(D
I
i-—
O
I-’
("I
{:3
('0
*1
I‘)
..J
-7
C1
(D
Q

the treaty. Kee-way~goush—can, first Chief of the Ottawa, livin: on

the Grand River, signed as Kawagoushcum, and Me—ta-wa, a Chippewa chief
from the “Prairies”, executed the treaty as a Chippewa named Het-tayawaw.
One Mitchell, referred to in.the council minutes as a speaker for the
Potawatomi, executed the treaty as an Ottawa Indian under the name of
Mich-el.

In all, eight Ottawa Indians signed the treaty of l82l, three of
whom.are identified as residing along the Grand River, and one as living on the Kalamazoo River; two Chippewa signed the treaty, but the only
one whose home is given is Me-taewa; of fifty—five Potawatomi Indians who
signed the treaty the homes of only seven may be identified with any

pgree of satisfaction, and these were all along the St. Joseph River.
(Def. Ex. 1, p. I96, 7 Stat. 218)

15. Traditionally the Michigan peninsula was occupied by Assegun
of Bone Indians and Huschodesh or Hushcodainug (possibly the Mascouten)
Indians. With the opening of historical times, about 1697, there were
Ottawa Indians in the northwest part of the southern peninsula and
Miami Indians were using thedt. Joseph River as a summer home. It is
uncertain what tribe, if any, inhabited the northeastern section of
the southern peninsula. A few years later Skokokis or Mohecans fnam
New England settled about the mouth of tlre 3.3. Joseph and Shawnee Indians settled near the St. Joseph—Kankakee River portage south of the

Indiana-Michigan State line. The Iroquois soon caused a complete

complete abandonment of

this countr“.

d

but after the French Canadian.s built a fort at the St.
Josep'h--Iianicakee portage in 1689, Iiiami, iuron, Fox. Iéohecans and

Potewatomi Indians settled nearby. Differences arising between them
concerning their loyalties to the French, led these several tribes
to abandon the area by l7l2, with the Potawatomi going to settle about
the French fort of Detroit, where they became knot-rn as the Pota.watom:I.

of the Huron.

The French reactivated their fort on the St. Joseph River in
I719 and , to secure their services as trappers and hunters, they
persuaded Potawatomi Indians from the islands in Green Bay, I—'Jis.c'.onsin,
and some A00 to 500  Indians from the _I-iaumee and Wabash river

valleys to settle on the St

I
Joseph B.:Lver 1-.-‘here

flmcnr 1.r¢:n-:3 cnnn "°:Q“?'n._
Q ta V-V-I-4 U

I-9+4.‘-I‘; Ii‘!-Pd. I-r M-vial -n-A4

ed by Sac _, Kickapoo and I-Eascouten Indians, and much later, by a small
group of Kaskaskia Indians from the Illinois river valley. After having been almost exterminated by surrounding tribes the Sac joined the
Fox in the southwest; the Mascouten went to the Kankakee River country
in 1763 (Trans. p. 250); and the -Kickapoo;—Kaskaskia and Miami gradually
withdrew toward the south. Although the Miami chief, Little Turtle,
claimed the southern portion of the southern peninsula as I~§.iami territory during the Greenville treaty council in 1795 (Def.  1.0), the
0171? docuxrsentary reference to the presence of I«L'Lami Indians within

Royce ll?‘ after 1760 is a I779 reference to a fe'=.=.r Igliami Indians l_iviz';g
at the ‘mouth of the Elkhart River, where the Potawatomi Indians ar

kno*.~.'n to have had a

village. (Trans. P. 257)

16. Old docunents originating during the period of English control

of the southern Richigan peninsula and during the period of early Unitedg
States sovereignty which began with the Treaty of Ghent in 1783, disclose
that L‘Arbre Croche was settled by Ottawa lndians from.Michilimackinac in
1742 and was a flo‘rishing Indian settlement until after 1721. The I3Arbre
Croche Indians maintained summer homes and raised their corn crops there
but hunted during the winter months far to the south. Gradually some hegan to summer along the Kalamazoo, Kuskegon and Grand rivers, and to hunt
south of Royce 117 in the area about Chicago. Taese southern Ottawa eventually became known as the Grand River Band of Ottawas and functioned as an
autonomous group;ini§endzt of the Iiarbre Croche residents or the

Eichilimackinac settlement to the north. (Def. Ex. Dkt. 146)

O 6
4.1,,‘ (14.4. .. .......,...:.'-':,.....-t—....,: 1.....- ._... .....-...-1..__..._-- ._n _..:J____.
     u...'.C ‘P u   4- Ned. ..£.v v I-r'~.ak.a nu.) \..I- a.¢u.u.u.I--r.L U4. \.«L\..I\/"’

uments. Frederick Hamburg wrote in his 1763 Journal that the IJArbre

Croche Ottawa wintered about the Grand and Kalamazoo rivers; John Coates,
a clerk in the Indian Department at Kichilimackinac which department had
supervision of the Ottawa; included in his list of a "number of Indians
Resorting to Michilimackinac“ on September 10, 1782, A00 Ottawa men with
families at L'Arbre Croche and 500 Ottawa.men and families on the “Grand
River &.Banks of lake Eichigan”, estimating their total number at 2,200
persons. (Def. Ex. 3, [fl782, p. egg? ) During 1790 Hugh Heward passed
down the Grand River on.his way to ke Michigan and noted in his Journal
that he passed two cabins of Ottawa Indians south of Cedar River and an
Ottawa village at the mouth of looking Glass River, met with a mixed Ottawa
nd otawatoni hand between those two places and reported passing two cabins

Of Chippewa Indians who had wintered near the mouth of Cedar Ri"er. (Def.

outside Royce ll7.

In 1779 one Samuel Robertson, a British 1::ile.,, f'oen.d an Ottawa
chief from IL‘!-xrbre Croche on the I-Euskogen River (Def. Ex. l, p. 3.27);
they were reported to claim the eastern shore of lake I-iichigan south
nearly to St. Joseph in 1786 (Def. E:>:.. 3% p. A85); in 1793 six canoe
loads of trade goods were delivered to them on the I-Eu.s’r;oge11 (Def. 
1, P- 155), and Jedidiah Moore, having travelled through‘ this country
on behalf of the Secretary of War, reported in 1820 that the L‘Arbre
Creche Ottawa claimed all the country east of lake I~d.chiga.n fmm the
Detour, 42 miles northwest of Iéackinac, south to the mouth of the
Black River which is about 25 miles north of the St. Joseph River.
(Def. Ex. l, p. 1'71’, 191; ‘Diet. 146)

An official Indian census taken at Chicago in 131? lists five

ttawa towns on the Kalamazoo River, six. Ottawa towns on the Grand
River, and located a small Potawatomi village near the mouth of the
St. Joseph River. (Def. Ex. I, p. 184, Dkt. 146) Reverend Isaac
I-IcCoy in l822 found Ottawa villages on the Kalamazoo River (Def . Ex.
1, P. 193, Dkt. M6); and referred to that river as the boundary’
line between the Ottawa and Potawatomi Indians.

l7. The Potawatoni Indians who had moved to the St. Joseph
country in 1’/l9‘, expended along that stream until in 1779 they had
at least six villages along it. (Pet. Ex. 34, D1/rt. ins). They
hunted in the country south of Royce ll? and maintained friendly rem

lations with the Potax-:ato:::'L of the Huron to the east, and the Otta‘.:;.

to the north, and during the l9th centu_ry had villages north of the

U.)

I\)

‘ I

St. Josejh River. John Kinsie. an lndian trader at Chicago and on the
St. Joseph River, on July 15, l8l§, 'isted Chipppwa, Potawatomi, Ottawa

of lJArbre Croche and Winnebago as the tribes “who inhabit the countrv

u-d
between the southern extremity‘ of lake Michigan and Hichilimackinac,
and whose chief residence is upon Grand and huskogen rivers”. (Def. *t.
51:  o 

The Reverend Isaac McCoy, having been charged with the establish_ment of the blacksmith shop promised the Ottawas under Article A of the

treaty of 1821, commented in his "History of Baptist Indian Missions":

In order, therefore, to secure a footing among them
without delay, we proposed to commence with'only the
smithery, on the line between them and the Putawato\f \.I

miss W W *. (Page 206)

'----'-u--—:--'.. I-94..--a..t

.;.,.,,q ,., \,_';,._,..3,........-‘;4.1...t... ....L......... .........

I‘ _ . - - ..... .-,_._s...;;.; 5...; '-...p.;.. ‘uh; Uvsn Ln I-I-scan!-!.cn..\.aJa4g— Haas I.) I—PJ.&\I:.l \J.§;

the Kekenmazoo (Kalamazoo) anong the Ottawas, * * %. (Page 21h)

* * *On the following day we had a visit from the
Ottawas, * * *. They also brought information that‘
the Ottawas % * had expressed a desire that we should
locate the smithery on the Grand river, in.a central
and more eligible place. This was the effect we had
hoped to produce when we put the smithery into operation upon their border * * *. (Page 227)

Our smithery for the Ottawas, as before stated, was

on the line between the Putawatomies and Ottawas, * *

(Page 2&8) Pet. Ex. 56, Dkt. 11.6)

18. The most detailed report of the location of Ottawa and Potawatomi villages appears in a letter to Governor Ninian Edwards, written by an Indian trader, John Hayes, on May 31, 1812. He located Potawatomi villages: one on the St. Joseph River 25 miles above its mouth;
the Terra Coupe village near the portage between the Kankakee and St.

Joseph rivers; a village 100 miles up the S‘. Joseph at the mouth of

Pivellee (Goldwater) River; a village on the Elkhart River 25 "iles

ix;-L

above its mouth; and one at the mouth of the Kalaeaacc River. Mr.
Hayes also located an Ottawa and Potawatoni village on the Kalamazoo
River 65 miles above its.month and four-Ottawa villages on the Grand
River; 8;.'37: I53 and 100 miles above its mouth, respectively. The

last site, he said was at the junction of the Grand and Riviere des
Plains or Maple rivers. He located other Ottawa villages in the country immediately north of Royce 117, one near the Perre Marquette River, one on.White River and two on the Muskogen River.

Dkt. 146).

(Pet. Ex. #1,

19. There are very few documentary references to Chippewa Indians within the country near Royce ll7, and none definitely identiu-It

ies the; as reside1ts'withi1 it. an *1onymcus jeuraalist in his
"Journal of the Siege of Fort Detroit” noted under date of May 21,

1763, that:

Cekaas, great chief of the Saulteurs of Grand river
had arrived, according to Pontiac's request,ynih

one hundred and twenty men of his tribe. (Def.IEx.
53 Dkt. 146)

and that same year George Crogan listed among the Indiaus attending a
council in Detroit three Chippewa chiefs and h9‘warriors ”from.their

different villages betwixt (Detroit) and St. Joseph“. Def. Ex. ll,
Dkt. 145) Two years later a trader of the Ohio-hississippi region;

wrote that "part of the Chippewa and the Pouteatamies left Fort St.

Josephs, in order to settle about the Illinois”.

1A6).

(Def. Ex. 11, Dkt.

Several years later in l778 another trader said that the Chippewa were on "the upper (northern) parts of lake.hichigan."

(Def. Ex.

1.‘ p‘   

6 #34

Official correspondence between Governor Henry Hamilton and General DePeyster, conducted during 1778, discloses thss 3h0Tt E3?s (Oitawa) and Ganteaux (Chippewa) from.Michilimackinac,'wintered near or
around the Grand River and later identifies the Chippewa more particularly as being “from Thunder Bay”. (Dsfo 33- 1: 9- ll9, 122)Other references to Chippewa Indians on the GrandRiver fail to place
them.in relation to Royce 117, with the exception of the Heward Journal of 1790 which refers to two cabins of Chippewa'wintering more than
25.miles northeast of Royce ll7. (Fdg- 15, supra)

20. Three noted anthropologists testified during the trial_of
these consolidated dockets. The defendant introduced the testimony
of Dr. Erminie Wheelef Voegeliny presently Professor of History at
the University of Indiana. and a Director of the Ohio Valley-Great
takes Research Project. Her detailed written report concerning lns.~
dian occupancy of Royce ll7 was introduced as defendant's Exhibit No.
l, Docket 146, and the historical supporting documents are in evidence.
The testimony of Dr. Anthony”Wallace; Research Associate Professor in
the Anthropology Department of the University of Pennsylvania, was presented by the Citizen Band of Potawatomi Indians, and the ptitioners

Chippena and Ottawa tribes introduced the testimony of Dr. Omer C.

Stewart, presently a Professor of Anthropology at the University of

of Colorado.

Dr. Voegelin testified that when the United States extended their
sovereignty over this country in l783 the Potawatomihxeere the only Indians residing along the St. Joseph River; that they maintained'their

VI

su.-“zzmer villages there and wintered and hunted south of Royce ll'7; that
the ttawa were then sumzering and raising corn at L‘Arbre Croche but
hunting along the Iéuskogen, Grand and Kalamazoo rivers. She stated
the historical documents of this period refer to Saulteur or Chippewa
Indians being about Saginaw Bay, and that reports of councils with the
ttawa and Potawatomi contain occasional references to an alliance between the three Indian groups.

From the accumulated date, the location of various villages, and

the topography of the country, which gave the Saginaw Bay Chipmwa easy‘

access by way of the Maple River to Royce ll7, Dr. Voegelin concluded
that from 1783 ,when occupancy within R-oyce ll‘? became crystallized,to
1823., the Ottawa of Grand River and the ?ota1-:atomi.
were separate, autonomous units; that the Ottawa occupied and used the
northern portion of Royce ll? and the Potawatomi occupied and used the
southern portion (Trans. p. 270), with an intermixture in the central
part. (Trans. pp. 280-L)

Dr. Wallace -described the Potawatomi as an Algonquin Indian group
which had been driven from Michigan early in the l7th century but returned between l72O and 1760 and had obtained exclusive possession of
the southern portion of Royce ll? by 1765. He located various Potawatomi villages within this area, one at the mouth of St. Joseph River,
one on the St. Joseph near the present town of Niles, one on the Ca.ss«—
Van Buren county line , one near Centeruille in St. Joseph County, one
in northwestern Hillsdale County, and one on the Kalamazoo River in

Jackson County. The last two towns Dr. Efallace considered Potawatomi

643

L

\__i

lthough he said some reference attributed them to a mixed 0t
and Potawatomi gathering.

Dr. Wallace was undecided whether the ttawa at IJArbre Croche
and the Grand River Ottawa were identical or separate groups. He believed the northern portion of Royce ll? was exclusively used and possessed by Ottawa indians after l750, and that Potawatomi Indians exclusively used and possessed the southern portion after l76S, although
»hippewa from Saginaw-Bay may'have come as far southwest as Lansing,
Michigan. Dr.'Wallace believed it was uncertain what Indians used and
occupied a doubtful area.described as the northern parts of Kalamazoo
and Calhoun counties, and the extreme northwest portion of Jackssn
County. (Trans. p._73)

Dr. 3tewart agreed generally with Dr. Wallace's occupational tee
.reas within Royce ll7. He said Ottawa and Potawatomi Indians had a
stable political structure of the independent village type when the
white man first caaeimmo this region. He testified the northernmost
village of the Grand River Ottawa was believed to be in Oceana County,
was not certain of its location, of the site of the "fort village” on
the Grand River, Prairie Village and Gull Prairie Village, (Trans. p. 9b)
but located and identifed as Ottawa eight village sites within Royce
ll7. He explained that his identification of village sites rested primarily upon Hinedale’s "Archeological History of Michigan" or the similarity between geographical band names appearing upon the l8hO and
1854 annuity rolls, which he projected back 19 and 33 years, respectively, to the treaty date of l82l.

Relying upon Hinsdale‘s report, Dr. Stewart identified a village

at the mouth of Grand River as Ottawa (Trans. p. 12A) and by reference

to Hinsdale and the annuity roll of l85h he identified a village at
Grand Rapids as Ottawa. (Trans. pp. l25, l2?) His location of a
site at the mouth of the Thornapple River rests upon the 185$ annuity
roll; the location of one on Goldwater River was based upon Hinsdale
but its identification as Ottawa rests upon the l85t annuity roll and
a report that in l863 an Ottawa chief resided there. -Two villages on
the Thornapple River, one immediately west of the boundary line'bétween Royce ll? and Royce lll, and one just east of that line, were
identified as Ottawa from the 1840 and 185A annuity rolls (Trans.
PP. 128, l37~8}. Dr. Stewart made an arbitrary cartographical location for these'two villages which he testified might have actually
been anywhere_along the Thornapple River. A village which Hinsdale
located in the general area of southeastern Ionia County and identified as mixed Ottawa and Chippewa, was pronounced Chippewa by Dr.
Stewart although ‘the annuity roll or 1851. indicates an Ottawa occupancy. "While Dr. Stewart located this village within Royce ll7§on
his map of the area (Pet. Ex. ll2, Dkt. l3-M), he testified it may
have actually stood at any fork of the Thornapple River. (Trans.
PF. 133-7) I

21. On August 29, 1821, a group of Ottawa Indians known as the
Grand River Band of Ottawa Indians resided in the southern Michigan
peninsula about the Grand River. Said group or band was wholly separate andagart from other bands or groups of Ottawa Indians occupying

E38

the country north of them, including the parent band at lJArbre Creche,
. functioned as an autonomous, independent unit, separately using,

occupying and possessing a definable area within Royce ll? as hereinafter described.

22. The mixed groups of Potawatomi, ttawa and Chippewa Indians
residing within the area referred to herein as Royce 117, and described in Find'ug No. l0 hereinabove, were groups or villages of the St.
Joseph Band of Potawatomi Indians who had affiliated or adopted meme
bers of Ottawa or Chippewa descent.

23. The evidence fails to establish the claim of the petitioners
in Docket l3~M, James Strong, et al., that Saginaw, Swan Creek and
Black River bands of Chippewa Indians, or either of them, on August
29, 1821, used or held and possessed as interest in the land ida1ti“ied as Royce 117 and described in Finding No. l0 hereinabove.

2A. On August 29, l82l, the Grand Rnrer Band of Ottawa Indians
exclusively used, occupied and possessed and had Indian title to a
tract of land bounded on the south by the Kalamazoo River from its
mouth on lake Michigan to a point six miles south of the Michigan
Base line where it intersects the south line of the territory ceded
by the treaty of September 2h, l8l9, 7 Stat. 2033 thence West al0ng
said boundary line to a point sixty miles west of the Michigan Eeridian, which point is the southwest corner of the territory ceded by
said treaty of l8l9; thence northeasterly along the western line of

the l8l9 cession to-where such line crosses the main branch of the

Grand River about two miles west of Saranac, Michigan; thence along

the north 'oan‘£~: oi‘ the Grand River to its mouth on lake I~I'_ichigan; thence
following the shore of Isl-.'.e Krlchigaz‘: southerly to the point of begining; and to a tract of land bounded by a line beginning at the source
of the Kalamazoo River in Section 30, T.-gm-znship 2+ South, Range l 1'.’ est

of the 1*‘-ichigan Meridian, and running thence due east to its intersection with the west line of the treaty cession of November l7, l807,
7 Stat. lO5; thence north on such nest line to a point six miles south
of the Michigan Base Line; thence west from that point on a line which
is the south line of the Territory ceded by the treaty of Septezfoer

21», 1819, 7 Stat. 203, to the Kalamazoo River; thence up said river to
its source, which is the place of beginning.

25. On A‘-acast 2‘), l82l, the St. Joseph Band of Pots.‘-satorai Indians exclusively used, occupied, possessed and held Indian title to
a tract of land bounded by-a line commencing at a point on the St.
Joseph River of lake I~2'i.chigan, near the Pare aux Vaches, due ncr th of
Rum‘s Village, and running ‘thence south to aline drawn due east
from the southern extreme of lake I-Eichigan; thence with said line‘
east to the west line of the tract ceded by the Potawatomi to the
United States by the Treaty of Fort I‘-Eeigs in 1817, 7 Stat. l60;
thence north on said line to the northwest corner of said tract;
;hence east along the ncrthern line thereof to the northeast corner

rhere it intersects the west line of the treaty cession of November

.7, l807, 7 Stat. lO5; thence north on such west line to a point due

ast of the source of the Kalamazoo River in Section 30, T-ow.-rnship L. South,

ange 1 west of the Iiichigan I-ieridian; and thence west on a straicht

“*ne to the source of the Kalamazoo River; thence down said Kalamazoo
diver to the point of intersection with a line running east and west
parallel to and six miles south of the Michigan Base line; thence
west along saidexst and west line to its intersection.with the Kalamazoo River; thence down said Kalamazoo River to its mouth; thence
southerly along the east shore of lake Michigan to the mouth of the
5t- J039Ph River; thence up the St. Joseph River, along the the south
bank thereof, to the place of beginning.

26. The persons who are entitled to participate in any award
‘whichzmay be hereafter rendered in.these consolidated dockets or
either of them, are limited to those individuals who were members
or whose ancestors were mebers of the Grand River Band of Ottawa
Indians as described in Finding of Fact No. 21 herein, or the St

;eph Band of Potawatomi Indians, as such memberships existed on

August 29, l82l.

 

Chief Commissioner

 

Associate Commissioner

 

Associate Commissioner

6

L. 

a-.3.-...

v

