48 Ink}. C3. Co;''.'.. 533BEFORE THE INEEAN CLAKMS COHNi§SlON
CCNTYDERLTBD TRIBES C? THE
UMATILLA INDIAN RESEEVAT-ON,

Petitioner,

v. Docket No. 264

UNITED STAIES OF AMERICA,

defendant.

\..u-’\..J'\-.-/\..../\./\...l"s...-4"b..../\..../\._/

Deéided: June 10, 1960
Appearances:

.Charles F.Luce, Donald C. Gormley,
and Wilkinson, Cragun & Barker,
Attorneys for Petitioner.

Walter A. Rochow, with whom was

associated iii. isssistatzt Attorney
.General, Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINIO§ OF THE C0§§;§SlON

 

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case was filed by the Confederated Tribes of the

I
o r

Umatilla Indian Reservation, Oregon. Petitioner ;. an identifiable group

of American Indians and includes descendants of the Umatilla, Cayuse, and

Walla Walla tribes, parties to the Treaty of June 9, 1855 (12 Stat. 945;

II Kapp. 694). The petitioner has adopted a constitution and by-laws, and

is authorized by the Secretary of Interior to bring this action in a repre540

sentative capacity on behalf of the Ematilla, CSYASO and Fella Walla Tribes.

4v

1

Under the terms of the above mentioneo

541.

and claim to “the country-claised by them” within certain boundaries. The
area ceded in the treaty is described in Finding 4. This treaty also set
aside a tract of land within the external boundaries of the ceded area as
a reservation for said Indians.

Petitioner denominates the claim for additional compensation for such
ceded lands as "Claim One,” excepting, of course, such area therefrom as was
reserved to them for purposes of establishing a reservation.

In "Claim Four" petitioner alleges claim for compensation for certain
additional.lands outside the area of lands ceded in said treaty.

A stipulation was filed by the parties herein on December 8, 1952, that
this Commission might order those parts of the petition enumerated "Claim.0ne"

and "Claim Four" consolidated for purposes of the trial, and that the issue

.of the petitioner"s "Original Indian title” to the lands therein involved,

.based upon alleged aboriginal posession, be separately tried and before other

issues in connection with said claims. This Commission issued such an Order on

;December 10, 1952, substantially as set forth in the stipulation of the parties.

.This case was consolidated with Docket No. 198, Confederated Tribes of

Warm.Springs, for purposes of hearing only by Order of this Commission issued

November 20, 1953; Claims Two and Three were severed from this case and assigned

.Docket Nos. 264-A and 264-3, respectively, by order of this Commission issued

January 15, 1959. The title issues in Claims One and Four came on for hearing

before the Commission in March, 1958.

Petitioner alleges that Claim One is based both upon oboriginal Indian

It

title and recognized title. Petitioner urges that petitioner's title to the
lands ceded in the Treaty of June 9, 1855, had been recognized by the United

States of America." (Amended Pet., par. 6; Pet. Br., p. ?5).

542

Defendtnt Jdmili p;tition=r, Coniodersted Tribes of the Umatilla Indian
Rcservstion, presently ronstitutes an identifiabfe group of American Indians
and therefore has the right (legal capacity) to prosecute this action.

Defendant further admits petitioner is "the representative of all descendants of the Umatilla, Cayuse, and Wells walla Indians who were members of the
::ibes, bands, or groups of Indians who were parties to the treaty with the
United States under date of June 9, l8S5, 12 Stat. 9&5; II Kapp. 694". (Def.
Req. Fdg. I).

The foregoing admissions go to petitioner"s legal and representative
capacity, but do not admit that petitioner is the successor in interest.

Petitioner‘s present Constitution and By-laws appear to have been adopted

1--II 3-tar a~.r‘..‘4- C-r!'\"-d'\§IOJ'I  4'1'\f\ I‘:-s-u£a-.aJr-o-I-II-I-.54!-«J 'T‘q—.:n.;-r- 4-C 0--I-1.-M  Q15 DQ¢"I.[','5?..
1 -—- —v$--0.-r hit. 1- CI-Ir ; - nun nu -Q.

-r
&) ‘"4-‘I--P U‘-w-F-b 1--at-i---.1-0 u—..4—- ----¢-.....q..q-pa--.t--q.--I.-cub ch. -u-....-.. -....-...-—b— . .. \ swab -I.Eztion, Oregon, on November 4, 1949, and approved by the Department of the
Interior on December 7, 1949 (Tribal Const., p. 6), but such adoption was
expressly not under the "wheeler-Howard Act” (Art. III, Tribal Const.), and
mcwbcrship shall consist of cnrollccs on the "official roll" (Art. IV). It
does not affirmatively appear in this record whether or not the 145 Paiutes
vho were listed on such reservation in the year 3945 (Report of House.Sub-(L
committee, H. Res. 66, p. 536, June 13, 1950) nrv part of such present membership of petitioner.

-u

The preamble of the cession treaty, Treaty of June 9, 1855 (12 Stat. 945,

31 K”?Ps 694). 5d0ntified the Indian treaty parties on follows:

'’l'"’'* the u:.-.'‘.; “.’-J.f’_E‘n :§ ( '1'." ;':__  ;‘_-_"_'-3:1‘-p ;;-.-_,-3 g‘ E; 5, 3: ‘-3
Of L}I=;‘: 13.31 1;‘-I-'—'—‘i1..:  3 {..‘._-,'I!.'::'.’. .1 .' ’:(T li,ri.' l _§ :1  T ‘s”f*.(';", ,
iilid IJ{Hl'.}3‘i ()5. :I'(,l_i..I:1.. 'L}CLlU}1'_‘,"}:'j‘;.g" 3,'iiir_E:; };,g:_': -j‘_ j}:
VC“]W‘7 IOU “"5 l””7 T? in (Wc:nn1'?srri1cv‘i»“

1'10, it?‘ ti!-' j-*.:T“*-.-»_~.‘_.._-;. of L];-j_-1 {\_.~;;{y, ,-*1 \ go. is.

J

-“CfI"5<*5 fr. ~'w~ r;1 iota HCt.inf1 frn‘ arm! I11 he“-elf of

1 '. . '_ 3 . .
t"‘-——‘3- 1" 5" ' I  t.:._-:-'.::« and L111.-«_-1, L-i."..':,‘ ?~.':*.-_¢; sh-.:3‘,'

543

authorized thereto; it being understood that superintendent I. 1. Stevens assumes to treat with that

portion of the above-named bands and tribes residing

within the Territory of Washington, and Superintendent
Palmer with those residing in Oregon.

Petitioner asserts it is successor in interest of the rights herein

claimed because:

.a. At the March 1958 hearing, petitioner proved and defendant did
not dispute, the political amalgamation of the Umatilla, walla Walla and‘
.Cayuse in a single tribe constituting the presently suing entity.

.b. The cession treaty recites the Umatilla, walla walla, and Cayuse
"*** are to be regarded as one nation acting for and in behalf of their
respective bands and tribes, they being duly authorized thereto; ***."

c. Defendant's allegation that petitioner "is not the successor in
.interest to all the aboriginal and historical tribes" which resided in and
claimed land ceded by petitioner to defendant failed entirely for want of

.p
proff (Pet. Br; pp. 147-148).

The above recited portion of the treaty preamble did not purport to
effect a permanent political merger into a single entity of the three
historic tribes of Umatilla, Walla Walla, and Cayuse, or for any-purpose
other than "purpose of the treaty." _

The presence of Paiute Indians residing on the Umatilla Reservation
in 1945, at least, suggests the possibility that all of petitioner's members
may not be descendants of said three historic tribes. It is not necessarily

incumbent upon the defendant to disprove successorship. Any conclusions of

petitioner's successorship in interest must be sst;n:ted by substantial

L

evidence tracing such presently identifiable green of encrican Indians to

544

zhc aboriginal land-using entity or entities, or to a merger or consolidation

(J tribes and hands before the treaty of cession, and that such merger be

recognized in the treaty. (Confederated Salish & Kootenai v. U. S., 8 Ind.

Cl. Comm. 40, 64-66)

The respective aboriginal tribes of Umatilla, walla Walla, and Cayuse
l1’ians were not politically amalgamated prior to the time of the treaty of
cession. The treaty did not create a single entity for purposes other than

those purposes of the treaty. Therefore, we think the.situation of petitioner

here is not unlike that of the petitioner in The Confcderated Tribes of the

 

gglville Reservation, et al V. U. S.

  ,

4 Ind. Cl. Comm. 151. The liability of

 

the government is for each area of land exclusively occupied by each tribe

repiesented by the petitioner confederation. Any judgment therefor must run
a petitioner, but only for the benefit of the respective descendants of each
tribe.

Other questions to be decided at this time are, as to Claim One, whether
subject Indians held any compensable interest in the area ceded by said treaty
(a) by such aboriginal possession as constituted Indian title, or (b) by
"recognized title." As to Claim Pour, the question is whether petitioner’s
aboriginal predecessors, the Umatilla and Cayuse Indians, had aboriginal
Indian title to the lands in Oregon outside the ceded area, which lands are
designated Parcels A, B, and C, on the map at page 96 of petitioner's brief,
and date of taking same by the United States (Pet. Br., p. 146; Def. Br., p. 2).

In support of petitioner's allegations of “recognized title" to the ceded
area for which compensation is sought in Claim One, our attention is directed
In

certain acts of Congress from 183$ down to the date of ratification of ob:
f.€

;“SSi°n treaty on March 8, 1859, by the U. S. Senate. In petitioner's Requested

545

Finding 39 is set forth a "Chronology of Relevant Laws and Acts of Congress"
alleged to constitute a recognition by the United States that petitioner had
valid title to all of the lands ceded in the Treaty of l855. We have carefully
examined petitioner's "Chronology of Relevant Laws and Acts of Congress." The

acts of Congress cited by petitioner do relate, at least in part, to the protection of Indians in the enjoyment of the lands of their native habitat, that

.is, the prohibition of white settlements on "any lands belonging, secured, or

granted by treaty with the United States to any Indian tribe," (4 Stat. 729,
Sec. ll; Pet. Req. Fdg. 39); and "that nothing in this (Territorial) Act (of
Oregon, 1848) shall be construed to impair the rights of person or property

now pertaining to Indians in said Territory," (9 Stat. 323; Pet. Req. Fdg. 39).

Similar provisions were contained in the Organic Act of the Congress establishing

the Territory of_Washington, 1853 (10 Stat. 172). In the Act of February 14,

,l8S3;,the.Donation C1aim.Act was extended to certain lands west of the Cascade

Mountains (10 Stat. 158), and in the Act of July 17, 1854, extending the preemption privilege to lands not claimed, entered or reserved under the Donation
Claim Act (10 Stat. 305, Sec. 3; Pet. Ex. 1, p. 1105). The provisions of the
-Preemption Act of 1841 with its preemption privilege were extended to certain
public lands where "Indian title had been extinguished." (5 Stat. 453, 455,
Sec. 10: Pet. Ex..129).

Thus, the Acts of Congress cited in Petitioner’s Requested Finding 39,
described as a "Chronology," treat upon a number of subjects, including the
establishment of territorial governments in Oregon and Eashington, surveys
of public lands, preemption privileges, regulation :3 H43
relationships of white settlers with Indians and Indian triads. In these

legislative acts Congress sought to open up certain pualit

S46

settlement, and incident thereto, the protection of Indians from.theft,
trespass or other encroachments upon their property by the white settlers.

But we are unable to find the requisite express intention, or even an implied

intention, of the Congress in said Acts to recognize title to any definable
tract of land in any named band or tribe of Indians. (§g§;§i£;:2E_;Egia§§ v.

U. S., 348 U. S. 272, 279 (1955); ua aw Tribe v. U. 5., l Ind. Cl. Comm. 469,

 

479-481 (1951), aff'd. l28 C Cls. 45 (1954); Miami Tribe v. U. S., 5 Ind.

Cl. Comm. 180, 294 (1957); Iowa Tribe v. U. S., 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 464, 498 (1958).

The Treaty of June'9, 1855, expressly provided in Article 1 that "the above
named bands of Indians (the Umatilla, Cayuse and Walla.Walla) cede to the United

States all their right, title and clain.to all.and every part of the country

claimed b" them within the following boundaries ***" (19 Stat. 9553 TT VapoSun!

394). The unmistakable import pf this language was to extinguish Indian title.

It did not affirm, grant, convey, acknowledge or recognize any title to these
.Indians; rather it took everything, their rights and claims of rights in said
lands, from them, thereby extinguishin same, save and except the reservation

lands set apart for the Indians, which is not a part.Of petitioner's Claim.One

and.Claim four.

Since the record does not support petitioner's claim of “recognized title"
to the ceded area, Claim One, it is therefore necessary to consider whether
Claim One is supported by petitioner's allegations of "Indian title" to same

hy reason of alleged aboriginal possession.

The first recorded white contacts with subject Indians, the Umatilla,
Cayuse and walla Walla, were rade by the Lewis and Clark Expedition in 18051806 (Finding 12a). After their reports and in the next thirty year period

are the reports of various fur traders of Aster 2 Fur Company, Pacific Fur

547

Company, Northwest Fur Company and Hudson's Bay Company. The cumulative
evidence contained in all of these reports establishes little more than the
presence of petitioner's antecedent tribes along the Columbia River and the
Umatilla, Walla Walla Rivers, Grande Ronde and Powder River Valleys, and the
Blue Mountains. (See Findings 12b, W. P Hunt; 12c, David Thompson; 12d,
Alexander Ross; l2e Robert Stuart; l2f, Sir George Simpson; 12g, Nathaniel
.Wyeth).

.These scant reports by members of the fur trading enterprises were
followed by reports from missionaries, soldiers, explorers, and government
agents during the twenty year period preceding the cession treaty of 1855.
Captain Benjamin Bonneville reported in 1834 thelprairies of the Grand Rondo
"are resorted to by small bands of Skyuses" (Finding 12h). Missionary Reverend
-Samuel Parker in 1835 reported more than two thousand Cayuses west of the Nez

Perces and included the fertile Grans Ronde in their country and that about
five hundred Walla Wallas were south of the Columbia and their river (Finding
121). Missionary Marcus Whitman established Whitman Mission in the Walla Walla
Valley among the Cayuse and Walla Walla Indians inal836- flheasame year his .L
associate, Missionary H. H. Bpalding established Spalding's Mission, situated
in Clearwater River Valley anong the Nez Perce Indians. Spalding referred to
the "Grand Round" as "in the.Chuyoos country" (Finding l2j)

Philologist Horatio Hale shows in his ethnographical map (1841) that the
Snake Indians were in the Powder Rive" Valley and the "Walla Walla or Cayuse"
north of the Grande Ronda River (Fi.;ing 12k; Pet. Ex. 32). However, Hale'sl
map appears to be general in nature and not of sufficient detail to base a

4

finding of any boundary.

548

Two years after Hale's 1841 map the journal of the John C; Fremont
Expedition (1843) mentions a Cayuse hunting party at the mouth of the Burnt
River returning from a buffalo hunt. Their position was apparently more than
eighty miles southwest from the nearest limits of their territory as indicated
by the Haiilatpu (or Cayuse} boundary shown on Hale‘s map, a line drawn north
oi the Grande Ronde River.

Charles Preuss, cartographer with the Fremont Expedition, drew a map of
Oregon and Upper California (Pet. Ex. 23) wherein freuss shows the Cayuse west
of the Burnt River area, rather than north, as indicated by Hale's map
(Finding 12L).

Joel Palmer‘s journal of his trip over the Oregon Trail, year 1845, mentioned a visit from the Caaguas (Cayuse) Chief "Aliquot" in the Powder River

Tdfalley. Palmer's journal further described the Cnyuse as inhabiting "Grand

Ronda, Blue Mountains and bordering on the north to the Walla Walla River and
its tributaries."

Governor Isaac 1. Stevens‘ distribution map showstthe Umatillas as part
of the Walla Walla tribe. Stevens had conducted the Northern Pacific Railroad

Exploration in 1853-l8S4 from.St. Paul, Minnesota to Vancouver, Washington, and

was familiar with the Columbia River area prior to becoming the Governor of the
Territory of Washington (Finding 120). George Gibbs, ethnologist, who accomr

'\
pained the Northern Pacific Exploration, described the Walla Wailas as a number

of bands living on the south side of the Columbia and camping in winter on the

T north side of the river. An early record of the location of " tillas"‘(Umatillas)

is mentioned as the ”Utila River" in Dr. Henry Schoolcraft's Tables of Indian
Population shown in his 1855 publication “Indian Tribes of the United States,"

also Umatillas were of course mentioned as a party to the treaty cession but

549

without delineation of any separate tribal boundaries set out in the cession

treaty. (Findings 4 and l2p).

Edward G. Swindell of the Bureau of Indian Affairs in 1941 undertook
a survey or study of the "usual and accustomed fishing stations" secured to

the Indian parties by terms of the Treaty of June 9, 1855. The Swindell report

.included also camping sites, hunting, and other subsistence areas regularly

used by the Umatilla, Cayuse, and Walla Walla Indians in aboriginal times.

(Finding 13f).
Defendant.de1imits the aboriginal.lands of petitioner's antecedents in

its brief (p. 66) and urges that "as to Umatilla Indians the evidence shows

that the only lands exclusively used and occupied by them were lands within

rthe.immediate vicinity of their villages on both shores of the Columbia River

.from above the mouth of Willow Creek upstream to the mouth of the Umatilla

River.and.aIong the lower course of the Umatilla River about as far upstream

as Echo, Oregon."

As.to the Walla Walla Indians, the defendant contends "the evidence shows

the only lands exclusively used and occupied by them.were lands in the immediate

I vicinity of their villages along the.Columbia and the Walla Walla rivers at or

near the mouth of the Walla Waller? (Defendant's Requested Finding 16).
As.to the Cayuse, defendant urges "the only lands exclusively used and

occupied by them.were lands along the rivers between the Blue Mountains in

.northeastern Oregon and southeastern Washington from Butter Creek on the west

to about where Walla Walla, Washington, now stands“ and that all of the aforesaid
villages are clearly shown on Suphan's maps *Def. Ex. l8~A and 18-C).

Thus, the issue of Indian title in Claim One is primarily made only as to

village areas to have been Fran amp :21-pas "tn :.':_nv raring to ¢_==j-'1‘-1r_'\1'_t the-tn?"

550

non-village areas Outside of the village areas defendant contends the
evicence is insufficient to prove exclusive use and occupancy because (a)
petitioner had no existence as an entity prior to the cession treaty, (b)
therefore, petitioner must prove the separate boundaries of each tribe, and
(c) the testimony of Dr. Verne F. Ray and Mr. Robert Suphan is contradictory
and that Dr. Ray's "permissive use” View is insupportable. Dr. Ray explains
the non-village areas were occupied and used by permissive use granted by the
Cayuse in the eastern portion of Claims One and Four to the other two tribes,
and the western portion by permissive use granted by the Umatilla; of the
north central portions permissive use was granted by the Walla Wallas to the

Cayuse and Umatillas. (d) To the contrary, Mr. Suphan defines these non-—.n-.-—

I

f(e) therefore, none of such land was in fact "exclusively used and occupied"

by any one tribe in the manner essential to establish Indian title (Def. Br.,
pp. 67-71).

On the law of “exclusive use" defendant cites the holding of this Comr
mission in the Colville case (DKI. 181, Fdg. 22, 4 Ind. C1. Comm., at p. 167)

for the proposition that "each and every tribe, band or group of Indians should

be required to show its separate boundaries, or specific areas, of aboriginal

use and occupancy." And, "failure or inability so to do does not justify a
Judgment by this Commission against defendant based upon probability, conjecture
Or speculation of the area they may have occupied.“ (Def. Br., p 70). Moreover,
defendant contends Dr. Ray's permissive use explanation is not corroborated
elsewhere in the documentary evidence and defendant urges it must be rejected

5? this Commission.

551

Dr. Leslie Spier, a well known authority on the Indians of the
Northwest, in l936 succinctly described the*?Vid9nti$YY.Sid€ 0f.th3 Pr0b1Cm
confronted in this case. Spier, with specific reference to the Sahaptin
Indians, of which petitioner's predecessors were a part, stated:

*** For the Sahaptin region (the southeastern quarter)
we have received next to no information from recent field
workers.

.While it is usually possible to set down roughly the
general locus of a tribe, it is by no means easy to fix
‘the precise boundaries of its territory. tynpfact, it is
dountful if a single one of the Washington tribes thought
in terms of boundaries. Our information usually includes
some statement of their well settled sites, to which they
returned year after year, and in some instances data on
the areas they normally traversed in seasonal wandering.
We have two alternatives: to map only the permanent sites
or to assign boundaries. I have preferred the latter,
though fully aware the procedure is not wholly valid.
Except where explicit information on boundaries were on

. record, I haveibeenfobliged to assume that_the.boundaries

followed the divides between the drainage systems.
(Def. Ex. 62, p. 6).

-It has been established by the great weight of the evidence that the
aboriginal bands of Umatilla, Cayuse, and Walla Walla Indians came out from
their separate winter villages in the springtime and joined together in

subsistence gathering groups almost indiscriminately as among tribal members

of these three tribes and proceeded to move about over wide expanses of land
to fish, hunt, dig roots, gather berries, and graze their herds of horses.
Only in winter did they return to their separate villages. (Finding 10).
There were wide expanses of land within the ceded area which were necessarily
used and occupied in Indian fashion by said bands traveling over it in a
seasonal pattern more or less togethe". (See Suphan‘s map of village and

Subsistence Areas, Def. Ex. 18A).

552 '

The main problems here in determining the aboriginal boundaries of
non-village areas are the proper application of the well established rule
in claims of Indian title that such aboriginal use and occupancy from which
Indian title arises must be "exclusive" in nature. (See Defendant‘s Req.
Fdgs. 14 through 20). ‘The guiding precept in deciding this issue was most

recently stated by the Court of Claims in Upper Chehalis, et al v. United

States, 140 C. Cls. I92, 196 (1957). The opinion stated that it.must be shown

that the occupant had the possession to the exclusion of other tribes, but the
opinion cited the decisions of this Commission in the Noohsack case, 1 Ind. Cl.
Comm. 333, and 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 479 and this Commission's decision in the"

Muckleshoot case, 2 Ind. Cl. Com, 424, and 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 658, 667, as a

9011115 3113 rnannnshlp annrnarh 1'0 Fha nfnlwlnmc (‘VF (info?-malnina sakn-I-1'3-{H91 I'\n111'sr'ln'r-17
_b. __ _,_ __.__ ‘___________,_ __ .__._..._._._..9_.... .-., ,_...  ._..-_-~ lines of exclusive use areas of village tribes. The instant claim is based on

alleged Indian title of Indians aboriginally occupying villages situated on
contiguous fishing streams, of identical or very similar culture, language,

ethnic classification, and political and economic history. This is a fact

situation similar to the Muckleshoot and Nooksack of village Indians,
except here the government took Indian lands by a treaty of cession and trom
all occupants or claimants as "one nation "

The rule Of "exclusive use and occupancy" must be reasonably applied.’
The term "exclusive" is usually defined as excluding or having the power to
exclude, limiting or limited to possession, control, or use by a single
i”diVidU31 or organization, and as applied to use and occupancy of land by
aboriginal Indians involves considerations of the ”land—using entity."

Exogamy between all of the Umatilla, Cayuse and Walla Walla villages

553

was a common practice. These intermarriages led to a natural tendency to
search for food together and to share with each other (Finding 10). The
.Cayuse had a1mOSt entirely abandoned their own dialect of the Sahaptin
language by the l840’s and spoke Walla Walla. The Umatilla were often
confused for Walla Walla Indians because of the difficulty in determining
any linguistic difference between them (Finding 11). The three tribes each
had the same plateau culture, each spoke a common language and were treated
with by the United States as a single entity in the cession treaty of 1855,

and were placed upon the same reservation under the provisions of said treaty.

.Each of the tribes was assigned in the early years on the reservation separate

portions thereof (Pet. BX. 487, pp. 8-9).
In the outlying subsistence areas of fishing stations, grazing lands,
hunting grounds, berry picking and root gathering spots, their Indian use

of these areas was shared by such tribe with members of one or both of the

other tribes. Thus, the aboriginal tribes whose descendants are represented

II

by petitioner, outside of their respective village areas, used the contiguous
and surrounding areas jointly and in common under a system,of permissive use.
(Ray, Tr. 631). This being true, it becomes a problem to determine separate
boundaries of the three tribes as to areas they exclusively used and occupied
as separatetribes. The government treated with them as an entity of "one
nation" in the taking of their rights and claims to such lands (Preamble, Treaty
of June 9, l855; 12 Stat. 945, II Kapp. 694) because Governor Stevens and Superintendent Palmer recognized these close relationships to each other and to their
subsistence area lands, but did not effect a permanent merger of them in treaty

times.

The defendant's expert, Mr. Robert Suphan, has indicated the subsistence

S54

areas and village locations of the Umatilla, Cayuse and Walla Walla Indians
by color symbols on his map (Def. Ex. l8~A). These symbols cover almost all
of the area ceded to the United States by petitioner's ancestors as far as
lies within the present State of Oregon but only a relatively small part of
the ceded area north of the Oregon—Washington boundary line is shown to have
been used and Occupied by petitioner's antecedent tribes on said map.

The Nez Perce in Docket 175-A claim a small overlap within the eastern
portion of the cession boundary, Petitioner's Claim.0ne. In a memoranda
response filed herein on September 14, 1959, this overlap question with the
Eez Perce was herein raised.

Consistent with our findings in the Nez Perce case, Docket 175-A, we
have herein defined this boundary, which varies from the session boundary in

it our findings fix the boundary as intersecting the Grande Ronde River near
the present townsite of Elgin, Oregon.

The early reports, not only of this area but extending northward to the
Columbia River, clearly indicate the Northern Paiute (Snake) Indians roamed
over this region in the early nineteenth century, Lewis and Clark reported
a total absence of Sahaptin Indians on the south bank of the Columbia River
from the Snake River junction westward. A Walla Walla Chief perhaps reflected
the Sahaptin attitude when he advised David Thompson in 1811 that his people

would soon drive "the Straw Tent Tribes" back over the Blue Mountains (see

Def. Br., pp. 19-20). It is admitted by defendant that "By 1830 or 1840,
however, these Sahaptins had moved into the valleys of the various forks of

the John Day River when the subsistence areas of that region were being utilized

at least by the Umatillas and Cayuse." (Def. Req. Fdg. 22, bottom of page 20;
so Def. Req. Fdgs. SO, 51, 52, and 53).

555

Parcel "B" was not included in the cession treaty of June 9, 1855,
with petitioner's antecedents but was included first in the cession treaty
of June 25, 1855, with the Confederated Tribes of Middle Oregon (12 Stat.
€63, II Kapp. 714), and was again included some ten years later in the cession

treaty of August 12, l865, with the Woll-pah~pe Tribe of Snake Indians (14 Stat.

,683, II Kapp. 876). The date of the latter treaty was several years after the

removal of many Oregon Indians onto reservations, thus changing their aboriginal

.habitat to a considerable extent. (See Treaty with Middle Oregon Tribes, 1865,

14.Stat. 751, 11 Kapp. 908). s

The evidence that petitioner's aboriginal antecendents exclusively used

.Parcel "A", the area west of Willow Creek (north) and south of the Columbia

River, is insufficient to establish exclusive aboriginal use and occupancy of
Same (Finding 16); Likewise, the evidence is insufficient to establish exclusive aboriginal use and occupancy both of Parcel "B", the area south of the

, Blue Mountains.a1ong the Upper John Day River, and of Parcel "C:, the area of

.Willow Creek (south) and Lower Burnt River (see Findings 17 and 18).

Inaconsidering this problem of determining the_southern limit of each

historic.Sahaptin Tribe, here represented by petitioner, it could not be found

.from the record of evidence that Umatilla and Cayuse Indians maintained

"exclusive use and occupancy" of the broad expanse of lands south of the.Blue
‘Mountains. The early reports frequently mentioned the presence of "Sho-sho-nees"
along the forks of the Upper John Day River. Moreover, all of the Sahaptin
ermanent villages appear to have been situated to the north of the Blue

‘Mountains along the region of the Columbia Basin._ The southernmost limits of

the Cayuse bands are repeatedly described in pre-treaty reports as extending

"to the.footib5‘the Blue Mountains;V

556

Dr. Verne F. Ray, petitioner's expert, testified Northern Paiute
wintcred in the near vicinity of the Upper John Day River, near the south
fork (Tr. 628). Ray's publications describe the Paiute northern boundary

as encompassing this region (Pet. Exs. S9 and 61). The frequency of the

" or the

use of this.area by the "Sho-sho-nees,” the "Straw Tent Tribes,
"Snake," Indians cannot be explained, in our opinion, merely as "raids" of
Cayuse or Umatilla lands by Paiutes. We conclude this area was non-exclusively
used by Paiute and Sahaptin Indians (Fdgs. 16 through 19, inclusive).

In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that as of the date of
the ratification of the Treaty of June 9, 1855, namely, March 8, 1859, the
three historic tribes represented here by petitioner held Indian title only
to the lands.described in Finding 20 as occupied and used by each tribe. T

The case.wi11 now proceed to the trial of the questions of consideration
paid the respective tribes represented by petitioner therefor, acreage, value
of said lands as of the date of taking of same byadefendant, together with the
amount of offsets, if.any, to which defendant may be entitled under the Indian

C1aims.Comnission Act.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring:

Hm M. Holt

 
Associate Commissioner

C0mmissioncr Watkins took no
part in the consideration and
1 .. ,

uccision of this case.

