7 Ind. c1. Com. 526 55>

BEFORE THE INDIAN cLAIns_connIssIoN

UNITED senses or AMERICA,

Defendant.

THE SNAKE CR PIUTE INDIAKS CF )
THE FORMER MALHEUR RESERVATION, ) '
IN OREGON, )
' )
Petitioners, )
) ’ vs. ) Docket No. I?
)
3
I >
_)

Decided: April 15, 1959i

Appearances:

Mr. C. B. McConnell, with whom
was Mr. Bernard J. Long,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

Messrs. Ralph A. Barney and
Leland L. Yost, withawhom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General—
Perry-M. Morton,

O "Attorneys for Defendant..

OPINION OE TIT‘. CO1-3-EESSION
Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

,.In our decision, filed December 28, 1956, Ch Ind. Cl. Com. 571a)

, we found that the petitioners’ ancestors, the Snake or Piute Dands or

Tribe who were parties to the unratified treaty of December 10, 1868,
held original Indian title as of January, 1879, to an area of land con;

sisting of the former Malheur Indian Reservation in Oregon as it was

defined and described in the Executive Order of January 28, 1876. The

.._.—...-.-—-.»- 

fl‘
1
J

U

boundaries of tre tract have been described in Finding No. 3 and in the
amended Interlocutory Order of this Commission, dated February h, 1957.
This case is now before the Qgmmission for determination of the acreage
of the described tract and the value thereof as of January, 1879.

The parties have stipulated that after deducting l20,0l9.h3 acres
in wagon road grants, l7,5hl.96 acreswin allotments to Indians after
1879, and 10,000 acres because of the question raised by defendant as
to the proper location of the southern boundary of the tract, the correct
net acreage to be valued is l,hh9,305.77 acres.

Petitioners contend that the land in the subject tract had a value
in January, 1879, of $3,000,000.taIt'was defendant‘s contention that said
land inJanuary, 1879, had a value of $390,076.95.

The evidence, as outlined in our findings of fact, discloses that

the subject tract is located largely (approximately 75%) in what is now,”

Harney County in southeastern Oregon. tThe tract extends on its easternrgp

border some 12 miles into Malheur County and on its northern boundary
an area in the shape of a triangle extends about 19 miles north into

Grant 0ounty. 8The tract extends in its greatest dimensions east and,

‘west about 60 miles and north and south approximately 65 miles.

The northern portion of the tract is largely mountainous and
covered with timber. Along the northern border the Blue Mountains are
at an elevation of 6,000 to 7,000 feet with Strawberry Butte at the
northern tip reaching an eleyation of more than 9,000 feet. At the.
present time an estimated 353,976 acres in the northern portion of the

tract lie within the boundaries of the halheur National Forest.

The southeastern portion of the tract is in the eastern part of
Harney Basin which is an area of nearly level land between the foothills
on the north and the Malheur Lake at the southwestern corner of the
tract. The Silvies River flows southerly from the high lands through
the center of Harney Basin and empties into Malheur Lake. Neither
Malheur Lake nor Harney Lake, which adjoins it to the west and outside
the tract, has an outlet, both lakes being saline, extremely shallow,
and subject to a wide fluctuation in size from year to year. There are
also several small streams to the east of Silvies River which flow from
the highlands in the north into Harney Basin.

The remainder of the tract was, for the most part, open range
land consisting of'wide valleys and rolling hills on which the growth
was largely bunch grass interspersed with sagebrush. Both the North
and Middle Forks of the Malheur River head in the mountains on the
north and flow south and easterly through the easternportion of the
tract to join the main Halheur River at the eastern border, with the
south fork of the Malheur River forming the southeastern boundary.

The climate of the area is arid, particularly in the non-timbered

portion. 'The area has a short growing season. ,At least half the annuals

precipitation, which ranges from.lO to 12 inches on the lower portion

to 12 to 15 inches on the higher elevations, occurs as snow during the

.m0HfhS of November through February; The rapid spring run-off from

snow tends to prevent most of the land from receiving the maximum benefit of precipitation with the possible exception of Harney Basin.

7 Ind. C1. Com. 526 553

‘White settlement of the area did not commence until l86O with
Camp Steele, later renamed Fort Harney, being set up in 1866. The
first post office was established in Harney County at Fort Jarney in

1876. The area was sparsely populated in 1879 with most of the settlers

_ engaging in ranch operations.

 

As of the valuation date, transportation facilities were virtually
non-existent.; The nearest railroad facilities were at Winnemucca, Nevada,
250 miles to the southeast. The early settlers made their way to the
territory by overland trails. It was 1916 before the Oregon Short line
extended a branch railroad line to Crane, near the southern border within
the tract, and in l92h that line was extended to Burns on the western
edge of the tract. 8

Both parties agree that in l879 the highest and best use for the
subject tract was for cattle ranches.

luThe evidence establishes that by 1879 there were a number of cattlehymen who had become permanent settlers in the general area, and stock

raising was_well under way toward becoming a substantial industry in
the area.l By 1879 the ranchers had become aware of the growing com»
petition for choice range areas, and there was an active demand for
lands which contained stock water or were sources for winter feed for I
the cattle. Therefore, the areas consisting of swamp, flood and overflow lands, the sub-irrigated natural meadow regions and small amounts
of land susceptible to use through irrigation were in demand for*winter'
feed, and the areas along the streams and about the few springs were

sought after as sources of water.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 526 559

In 1879 the prinCiple_of the ”free range” was well established.
Under this practice an individual, partnership, or corporation could

0‘.

run privately owned cattle on the public domain without cost. This
principle of the "free range” was recognized by no less an authority
than the Supreme Court of the United States, which said in Buford v._

Houtz (1890) l33 U.S. 320, 326, "We are of opinion that there is an

H

implied license, growing out of the custom.of nearly a hundred years,

that the public lands of the United States, especially those in which

the native grasses are adapted to the growth and fattening of domestic
animals, shall be free to the people who seek to use them, where they

are left open and uninclosed, and no act of government forbids this _
use."h In.the early days of the cattle industry it was not only the
practice of ranchers to graze their herds on the public domain but also

to permit them to run at large over unenclosed grazing areas which might
be owned by private individuals. Thus it was the practice of the cattlemen to acquire sources of stock water and lands for winter feed and thereby to gain control of the large surrounding areas of grazing land, under
the "tree range” practice.
The winters were mild enough to permit the herds to survive with  

little or no shelter and requiring but small amounts of winter feed.

The bottom.lands of the area were ideally suited for raising winter

feed while the vast areas of bunch grass provided excellent summer grazing..

The stockmen in l8?9 found.ready markets for their cattle in the
immediate area at the mining camps, military outposts and small settlements. large herds were also driven over the open prairies to markets

nu-I‘.-1:.-o

7 Ind. c1. Com. S26 ' S60

in the Pacific Northwest and California as well as to eastern markets.
The lack of immediately available transportation was of not too great
an importance to the cattle industry.

The expert appraisers for both the petitioners and defendant have
classified the land within the subject tract in substantially the same
proportions. Petitioners‘ expert appraiser, Henry T. Murray, broke the
best bottom land down into two categories consisting of the irrigable,
(90,000 acres) and the non-irrigable (39,l2S.0h) acres, resulting in a

total of l29,l25.0h acres of bottom land. Defendant's expert appraiser,

,C. Marc Miller, placed ll6,20h acres in his bottom land category. From

these figures we have concluded that the sought after bottom land compprised between 8 and 9 percent of the total acreage of the subject tract.

A much larger percentage of the area was in_timbered lands of which the

,,ponderosa pine was the predominant tree. Petitioners’ expert forester

, reported that 228,201 acres oi the tract contained timber, but his estimate appeared to be based more upon a consideration of the acreage which
contained timber of a commercial value. Defendant?s_expertpappraiserp
,fQund 3h6,903 acres of the subject tract to be forest land. Petitioners‘
expert appraiser included the timbered land in his category entitled,
“Mountainous and Timbered Grazing” for which he assigned hS0,000 acres.
Since the ponderosa forests of the area were of an open nature and were
generally at the higher elevations, the snow in the area mlted later in
the spring and, as a result, there was a fine growth of forage grass which
made excellent summer grazing. The remainder of the tract was grazing or

range land, estimated by petitioners‘ expert to be 870,179.73 acres and

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 526 561

by defendant‘s expert to be 986,198 acres. The grazing land was the
generally dry area which was covered with excellent bunch grass suitable
for grazing cattle.

Most of the forested portions of the subject tract contained timber
which today has a very high commercial value. Approximately 91 percent
of the forest was ponderosa pine and it constituted an excellent stand
of timber both as to quantity and quality. However, in 1879, there was
a very limited local market for timber products and consequently little
demand for land to be used for logging purposes.

The saw mills in the area during the period immediately before and

for some time after the evaluation date were generally portable mills set

sup for the purpose of cutting lumber and shingles to be used for local

' 2construction and in some instances to cut timbers for the local mines.

Since there was no available transportation it would have been impossible

8iin‘l879‘to7profitably'export any lumber products to outside markets. iAs

ixpetitioners'*timber expert testified, no records'were found that the

earl§5mi11s owned or purchased any timber or timber lands. They cut‘

=3timber off public lands. The development of the lumber industry did not

begin until railroads were constructed in the area, and it has not until
the 193ots that the timber industry began to take on the important position it presently maintains in the area.

The petitioners have submitted much evidence concerning the timber
volume by counties and by species, as well as evidence concerning the
”operations of the famous Edward Hines Lumber Company. Based on these

figures the petitioners argue that there was a substantial "potential

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. S26 562

value“ for the imbered areas which should be reflected in the value
placed on the subject tract as of l879. The Commission considers it
unnecessary to make detailed findings of fact concerning the lumber
volumes and stumpage values for the subject tract in View of the fact ,.
that in 1879 it could not be foreseen that the timber on the~tract
would have any great commercial value, Any potential value of land is
important only to the extent that it may affect the fair market value
on the date the property is being valued.
The Commission has found that the subsequent development of the
lumber industry, which did not occur until about the 1930's, was far
too remote in time from the valuation date in this case to be considered
as any basis for computing an 1879 value for timber lands as such.
Accordingly, the Commission has found that the forested areas in the
subject tract were valuable primarily as a fine summer grazing area
for stock, and the timber in itself had a value only to the extent that
lumber was required in local construction. This very limited demand for
lumber did not give any appreciable value to the forested areas in 1879
by virtue of the timber_on itr 8
 8There more no known minerals in the subject tract in l879. The
choice bottom land was used for raising winter feed for the cattle and
for raising subsistence crops for the ranch homes in the area. iThe
growing season limited the type of crops which could be produced, and
there was no evidence of any commercial farming in the area.
As detailed in our Finding 56, individuals could, in 1879, acquire

federally owned land_under the Preemption Act, the Homestead Act, the

Timber and Stone Act of l878, and the Desert Land Act of 1877. State
owned land was also sold to individuals as common school land, university and agricultural college grant land, swamp land, and internal
improvement lands.

While today less than 28% of the subject tract is privately owned,
it must be remembered that 353,976 acres of the tract lie within the
boundaries of a National Forest. From the evidence which has been submitted it appears that there were no sales in the surrounding area at or
prior to January, l8?9, of a tract comparable to the subject area. However, evidence was introduced of a number of sales, and the ¢ommission’s
findings with respect to those sales are detailed in our Findings 58, S9
and 60. 8 iii 8 8

It appears that most of the early ranch operators acquired choice
range lands from.Oregon under the state's"Swamp Act.“ Under thatAct
swamp landcould be acquired ior $1.00 an acre with $0.20 paid at the
time ot selection and the remaining $0.80 within l0 years and after
proofofreclamation. There were sales of school landin tracts up to
6&0 acres at prices averaging $1.25 to $l.8?% per acre. 8

The parties also introduced evidence of a number of private sales

in the general area. However, a great majority of the sales were made

subsequent to the valuation date in this case; virtually all were small

tracts and.many included improvements. 8 8 8
Two of the largest private sales of land close to the subject tract

‘were made in 1883 and l88h to Riley & Hardin, the owners of the large

Double-O Ranch, which was located just northwest of Harney Lake about

-«J
H
:3
CL
C‘)
[..J
C)
O
“I
0
\n
l\)
O\
m
P‘

20 miles from.the subject tract. ‘while a discrepancy occurs Concerning
the exact acreage of he first sale, it was, in any event, about 7,7QO
acres and the second tract contained 2,hSO.9O acres. They sold for
average per acre prices of €2.50 and $2.h9, respectively. Both tracts
8 were watered by the Silver Creek, and the land extended between Silver
Creek and Harney Lake. It is quite obvious that the land was especially
valuable to a cattleman because it provided the much sought after water
for the stock and, having control of the water, permitted the Double-O
stock to graze upon the adjacent open range.
8 There were two sales in 1879, involving tracts of 320 acres each,
sold to rancher W. B. Todhunter. The adjoining tracts were adjacent to
the Silvies River, were less than four miles south of Burns, Oregon,

and involved land of the same classification as the best bottom land in

 

the subject tract. The average per acre price for each of the tractswas about $1.78 per acre.
iiDefendant‘s expert appraiser has tabulated some 3h private sale
transactions in Harney County covering a period from 1879 through 1888.
Most of the sales were to ranch operators (13 sales were to'WL B. Todhunter   sales were to Riley & Hardin) . Most of sales were of
the choice locations and involved bottom land or land controlling sources
of water. ‘The average per acre price for the 3h transactions was $2.23%
per acre.
Mr. Murray, petitioners’ expert appraiser, has tabulated a far greater

number of private sales and, it appears, placed most, if not all, his

conclusions of value on his tabulations of the private sales. As detailed

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 526 p 565

in Our Findings 59 and 60, Mr. Hurray's categorizing and tabulations of
the private sales are in many instances misleading and are questionable
as a basis upon which to compute mathematically the fair market value
for the subject tract as of January, l8?9.

While it appears that there were wo sales in 1879 of tracts of
320 acres each, less than four miles from the subject tract, it does
not appear that Mr. Murray has included the sales in his tabulation of
Harney County "bottom land sales" although he includes a total of 2b
sales, none of which involved more than l6l.S3 acres and 10 of which

occurred in 1886, seven years after the evaluation date. Mr. Murray

also included in his tabulation of 79 transactions involving Harney

County, "grazing land,” l0 sales of tract located within the subject

tract involving lands which he classified botton lands. As detailed .

in Finding 60(b) there were an additional 19 sales of soecalled grazing

land which it appears involved tracts which were well watered and could

not be considered typical of the 870,000 acres classified by Mr. Murray

, as non-timbered grazing land. Further, many of these sales adjoined or

were in the immediate vicinity of other sales which Mr. Murray includedghpp

in his “bottom land” sales computation.‘ In checking the location of the
Harney County sales which Mr. Murray has placed in either the bottom.land
or grazing land category, it would appear that his classification was
based more on the average per acre consideration paid for the tract than
on its actual location and the obvious factors such as improvements and

availability to water which would have affected the prices paid.

 

7 End. Cl. Com. 526 0 555

Petitioners‘ expert appraiser, Mr. Hurray, has set forth in his
detailed report the various factors which he stated must be considered
in arriving at the fair market value of the subject tract as of January,
1879. Mr. Murray has stated that "the problem in this appraisal is to
estimate a price which the hypothetical investor would be justified in
paying, after having acquired full knowledge of the property and of the
market as a one-unit or'“wholesale' transaction taking the entire property in one purchase.“ (Pet. Ex; $1, p. 86). ‘While the Commission
agrees that this is a fair statement of the proper approach to an appraisal of this type, it appears that Mr. Murray, while detailing most
of the factors which the hypothetical investor would have considered,
has paid little attention to them, preferring to rely on factors arrived
at bv averaging his tabulations of various private sales and adjusting
these figures by certain factors based on assumption and speculation.

The Commission has found that, in addition to the questionable?
process by which the various per acre figures were computed, Mr. Murray's
analysis of the averages and his mathematical adjustments of the figures

render his ultimate conclusions of little value in assisting the Com.

imission in its determination of the fair market value of said lands in

1879. Mr. Murray has reported that all sales of $10.00 per acre or

more cannot fairly be considered as representing the price for the land
alone since there was a strong possibility that such sales included imr
provements, However, he did not exclude such sales but rather included
them with a 20% adjustment which he claims represents the average ratio

of improvements as reflected in some tax assessment records which he has

7 Ind. Cl. Com. S26 567

not tabulated or otherwise referred to. ‘While such an adjustment is
entirely speculative, as applied to any specific sales in his report,

it most also be recognized that evidence of tax assessments on real
estate fail to provide any true indication of the property's actual
worth, and they are judicially non-acceptable as evidence of the market
value of property. If the table of Harney County bottom land sales,
consisting of some 2h transactions of small tracts; all but two of which
occurred subsequent to the valuation date, had excluded those sales which
were for more than $10.00 per acre, the resulting per acre average of the
légremaining sales would have been about $5.72 as compared to the $6.76
computed by Mr. Murray. Further, had Mr. Murray included in his bottom
land table the Harney County "grazing land sales" which it appears from

petitioners‘ own land classification were in fact bottom land sales (see

Finding 60(a)); the average per acre figure for the Harney County bottom

land sales would be further reduced to $h.ll per acre.r
‘"hr; Hurray has then taken the average per acre prices from his
tabulations and applied certain adjustments which he claims will convert

the so-called "retail sales" values of the small sales to a ¥wholesale

.afigd;é;n” His adjustments are based on his assumption that a buyer uould
be able to dispose of the entire tract in 10 years and would be satisg
fied to recover his capital investment plus a return oi but 6% on his
investment, after deduction of taxes, which he estimates were $0.0l per
acre per year. Therefore, Mr. Murray has multipliedall his average per

acre tabulation figures by .5588 (the value ofpa dollar to be returned

. with 6% interest in l0 years} and subtracting therefrom.$0.l0 (the taxes

7 Ind. 01. Com. S26 568

per acre for 10 years). Applying this factor to the $h.ll per acre
figure referred to above, the result would have been $2.19 per acre.

A similar adjustment could also be made with respect to the Barney
County grazing land sales and would have resulted in a lower figure
than the one upon which Mr. Murray has based his conclusion. Having
computed his average per acre price for bottom land and grazing land,
Mr. Murray was faced with the problem of placing an average per acre
value on the mountainous and timbered land. Since he was unable to
find any evidence of any similar sales of such land, he has resorted
to a different method of computing this value. He has detailed reasons
why the mountainous and timbered land was valuable for summer grazing

and has arbitrarily concluded that such land had a cattle carrying

capacity of twice that of the non-timbered grazing areas. Assuming

 

that, therefore, timbered and mountainous grazing land must have been
twice as valuable as nonetimbered grazing land, he has doubled the
grazing land price to reach the timbered and mountainous grazing land
price. In so doing, however, he has increased the $2.11 per acre
grazing land price to $h.S0 per acre for the mountainous and timbered
grazing land, an amount which is $0.28 more than twice the $2.11 grazing
land figure. And.uhen his figures are further adjusted to “wholesale
figures," the mountainous and timbered grazing land appears as $0.21
more than twice the grazing land figure. This completely unexplained
$0.21 difference times the hS0,000 acres of mountainous and timbered

grazing land adds $9h,500.00 to his appraisal.

Ind. Cl. Com. S26 . 569

‘C 1'}

To further boost his estimate Mr. Murray has added another «$00,000
f0? “timber potential." On the basis of his estimate of timber land
acreage of 228,201 acres, this would be an additional $2.19 per acre

for the timbered area. This figure added to the $2.hl for timbered

grazing land results in a $h.6O average per acre value for the tinbered

acreage. Of course, the addition of the $500,000 for “timber potential,"
‘while not justified by the facts. is not in accordance with legally

approved standards for appraising land. In U. S. v. l3.L0 Acres of

 

Land, etc., 56 F. Supp. 535, the court stated that "the separate

'5

valuation of timber or rock attached to land, or valuations arrived at

I

by process of multiplying the number of cubic feet or yards by'a given
Price per unit, are not approved bases for evaluation.”. The method of
proving separately the values of various uses to which the land is
adapted and then adding the separate items of value to find the value
of the land was rejected in Morton Butler Timber Company, et al., v.
E_.___S_., 91 Fed. 2d 8814,.

The Commission has found that the addition of $100,000 to the
V3138 by virtue of the value of so-called existing ercess water of the
Malheur River has no basis in law or fact.f

In summary; Mr. 4urray's final conclusion of value is no more than

a mathematical computation based on tabulation of small land sales adijusted by assumption and speculation and applied to his acreage classifications of the subject tract. Such mathematical processes cannot

provide a judicially acceptable basis for arriving at the fair market

value of the subject tract. Ascertainment of value in cases of this

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 526 570

type cannot be made by such art'ficial rules. The problem of evaluating

land on the frontier of the United States in 1879 is not subject to solu-1 .
.3.

tion by app ication of formulas and equations.

Defendant's expert appraiser, Mr. C. Marc Miller, has submitted a
detailed report from which he has based his ultimate_conclusion of the
value of the subject tract in January, 1879. The Commission has found

Mr. Miller*s report and his conclusion.to be, in general, a realistic,

and fair appraisal of the area involved. In his summary Mr. Miller has

stated:

“After a careful consideration of all the factors
affecting the value of the lands of the Snake-Piute Tract
here being valued, it is my opinion that a well-informed
hypothetical purchaser of these lands of January 1879,
would have recognized that for the swamp, overflow, flood,
natural meadow, and potentiall' irrigable lands of the
Tract there existed a substantial demand and a brisk market.
That for the dry range land there existed no demand and no 8
market, but that this range land was vital to the livestock
economy of the region and had a very high use‘value.i That
the forest lands of the region had an equally high use value
for grazing purposes but that for the timber growing thereon no market existed and no present nor foreseeable future
demand existed. The purchaser would have felt that he could
dispose of the swamp, overflow, flood, natural meadow, and
potentially irrigable land without undue delay, and that he
icould probably dispose of the dry range land, inclusive of
the forest area, with the hay and sub-irrigated pasture lands
in a package deal. But he would also have realized that the
additional sum which he could hope to secure for the grazing
lands (inclusive of the forest area) would be small. To the
value of the forested land as a range area, he could have
afforded to add nothing more than a nominal sum by reason of
the timber growing thereon. % % %"

 

The Commission considers that Mr. Miller has included in his report
the factors which a well-informed hypothetical buyer would have considered,
and we are in substantial agreement with the above quoted statement by

Mr. Miller of his opinion of the market value of the tract.

7 Inc‘-. c1. com. 526 573.

The Commission does feel, however, that hr. Miller’s conclusion

that there existed no demand and no market for the dry range land was

an overstatement of the true situation. It appears that there were a
number of sales of tracts within the large area classified as dry
grazing land indicating that there was a demand, particularly for those
areas within the dry range land which included springs or small creeks.
It further appears that in 1879 and thereafter the cattlemen experienced
difficulty in acquiring legal title to areas large enough upon which to
operate a successful ranch. There was an active competition for lands
and in the 1880's there were numerous legal and physical fights over
land rights in the area. In fact, the owner of one of the largest

ranch operations in the area, John S. Devine, had many of his patents

to swamp land declared illegal by the State of Oregon and he suffered

a great loss when he had to rebuy then fromland speculators. The Coma
missionbelieves that, had large tracts been available in the area, the
cattlemen would have been willing to purchase a large area which would
have included the variety of lands necessary for a successful ranch
operation,fincluding choice bottom land, open grazing land and timbered
grazing land. However, a.buyer would not have been able to pay wery
much for the grazing land and remain in competition with the other livestock men who were grazing their herds on the free open range.

In their brief, petitioners‘ attorneys have argued that hr. Miller’s

report and testimony has erroneously shown fair market value as of
January, l879, when he should have considered the land's inherent and

potential value as of January, l879. t is the opinion of this

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 525 579

Commission that such terms as inherent and potential as applied to the
value of land can only be considered to the extent that they affect the
fair market value. This Commission has considered potential value in
cases where it appeared that a prospective purchaser of land would have
been willing to pay a price in anticipation of a potential use for the
land to which it could have-been put within the foreseeable future. As
the courts and this Commission have stated upon numerous occasions, the
test for valuation of land is the fair market value of the land._

After considering all of the evidence of record and the various

factors as outlined in our findings of fact, the Commission has concluded that the Snake-Piute tract, cénsisting of l,hh9,305«7? acres

had a value as of January, 1879 of $579,722.00 or an average per acre
value of $O.hO per acre.

As the lands were taken by defendant without payment to petitioners‘

ancestors of any compensation therefor, the petitioners are entitled I

under Clause h of Section 2iof the Indian Claims Commission Act to an

award in the sum of $579,722.00 less such offsets as may be allowable

under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

I concur:

Edga E . Witt

1-j?- 

Chief Commissioner

