 THE INDIAN CLA_IE"5 COI-‘FILES ON

THE MIAHI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA, also
known as THE MIAMI TRIBE, ET AL.,
Petitioners,

IRA S'fL’\/‘ESTER GODFRO1’, NI.LLI.-AM
ALLOLLA C-ODFROY, JOHN A. OWENS,
on.relation of THE MIAMI INDIAN
TRI BE and IEEAI-‘II TRI BE OF INDIANA,
and each on behalf of others

similarly situated and on behalf of

THE MIAHI INDIAN"TRIBE and various
bands and groups of each of them,

comprising the MIAMI TRIBE AND NATION,

Plaintiffs,

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOMA and AMOS ROBINSON SKIE

on behalf of the WEA NATION,
Petitioners,

THE POTTANATOMIE TRIBE OF INDIANS,

TIC-D jggunnnqjnju

lam :nAIni; BAND OF THE POTTAHATOMIE

TRIBE or ::~a3m9.s, et 2.1.,
Plaintiffs,

THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF KANSAS,

THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA,

THE‘. IECKAPOO NATION, ET AL.,
Petitioners,’

CITIZEN BAND OF POTAWATOZ‘-E INDIANS

OF OKLAHOMA, and POTAWATONI NATION,
represented by CITIZEN BAND OF POTAe
'HATONI INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA, ET AL.,

Petitioners,

F_A.NNA:—WILLB‘ INDIAN c OM‘-IU?~EZ'.T.“I, Nils on,

Michigan, FOREST COUNTY POTAHATCMI

COHHUNITI, Crandon,'Nisconsin, POTA‘E.-:'AT o':«:;. TRIBE or  ON or Im3I.n_z~:s ,
ET AL . , I

Plaintiffs,

UNITED STATES OF AHBRICA,
Defendant.

I

)
)
D
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
2
)
i
)
)
)
3
)
)
D
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
3 .
)

June h, 1957

Docket No. 253

Docket No. 131

Docket No. 31h

Docket No. 15-3

D'ocP.et No. 317

Docket No. 307

Docket No. 29-F

'....J

C!)

Decided: June 54, l9S7

Appearances:

EC1WaI"d P. Morse, Edwin A. O. R. McGuire, Robert Stone,
Rothschild and Louis L. and Robert S. Johnson,
Rochmes, Attorneys for Peti- Attorneys for Plaintiffs,
tiomrs, Dkt. No. 253 D1-Ct. No. 15-}!

"alter H. Maloney and ' Allan Hull, Attorney for
James N. Been,’ At-gem-Eys for Petitioners, Dkt. No. 317
Plaintiffs, Dkt. Nos. 131 and 29-? A

A. Abraham Ziedman and Howard D. Moses, Attorney
Arthur Lazarus, Jr.’ ttoz-mys for Petitioner, Didi. 307

for Petitioners, Dkt. No. 311:

Francis J. Clary and Ralph H.
Barney, with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry 7:1’. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF TEIE CO1-‘SESSION

0‘I'1arr, Commissioner, deliveredthe opinion of the Commission.

The claims here presented for our determination are for additional
compensation for three tracts of land ceded by two treaties later described. For convenience we will generally refer to these cessiors by
the tract numbers used by Royce on his Indiana map of Indicn land cessions
published in the 18th Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology
for 1896-1897.

Each of the claimants in the seven dockets shown above claimed rights
to all or parts of the lands ceded; they were therefore consolidated for 1

trial, but by an order entered January 18, 1955, the initial hearin" nos

limited to the question whether the tribal claimanté OI‘ 811? Of them had
"recognized title" to the lands ceded by the treaties upon which the
claims are thought to arise.

The treaties involved are these:

The treaty of Aug 3st 212 1805 (7 stat. 912 2 Rant. 77}, by which

the Delaware, Pottawatond, I-Iiami, Eel River and Wes. ceded R0709 8393 55:

al.. more plainly shown on the map, Exhibit L, in Docket 253- This treat?
is generally known as the Grouseland Treaty.

The treaty of September 30 1809. (7 Stat. 1.13 2 Keene 101), ‘Which
is generally known as the Treaty of Fort Wayne, and by which the Delaware:
Potawatomi, Miami and Eel River Miami ceded Royce areas 71, 72 erld 73, but
more plainly sl'1cW.T1 on the map, Exhibit 1; in Docket .253.

As to area 73, by the order of Jamzary l8, l9S§, said area was excluded from consideration in this proceeding and may be disposed of in
another or separate hearing.

And as to area 71, as shown in said E}-chibit 11,, it was agreed by the
petitioners in Dockets 253, 131, 311;, and the defendant 21:1 each, that the
I-Iea Tribe, at or about the "tim of cessions of 1805 and 1809, exclusively
dominated or controlled that part of area 71 lying west of the blue line
appearing in‘Exhibit 83 in Docket 253, and that the acreage of such part
of area 71 is 949,081 ares.

(Sti__ul~tion filed November 18, 1951:).

The Parties

 

Each of the parties clairrarrt, set forth in the title, rode claim to

all or part of the lands ceded by the ‘l8OS and 1809 treaties. He deerred

it necessary therefore to conscliate the seven cases for trial on the

S 200

uestion of rights or interests of the respective claimants in the

lands ceded. This was dom by an order dated April 21, 1953.

However,
51139 ‘"339 1953 order was made changes in the claims of sore of the
claimants have occurred. The present status of the several parties is
as follows:

The Citizen Band of Potawatomi and the Potawatomi Nation, Docket
307, have amended their mtition and elminated all claim to lands ceded
by the 1805 and 1809 treaties, so these claimants will not be further
considered and will be dismissed from the consolidation.

The Kickapoo Tribe of Kansas et al., Docket 317, offered no proof,
it having been stated in opening hearing before the Commission on
March 7, l9S§ (pp. 27-28 Transcript). that these claimants are interested

\

only in tract 73, which has been elimir.-ated from consideration. (See
order of January 18, 1955). So they will not be further considered herein and will be dismissed from the consolidation.

The Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma for the Wea, Docket 3lh, at the hearing
Of March 7, 1955, (Transcript, p. 27) announced that no more evidence
would be offered by such claivnants. IE0 brief or proposed findings have
been submitted. 'I"nese claimants will, therefore, be further considered
in the disposition of this consolidated case in connection Wibh the Miami.
claims.

The Hannahv-i_U.e Indian Corrrzunity, et al., Docket 29-1?‘, offered no
No further considerproof herein on this clairn and submitted no brief.

rtion 1-1&1 be given this consolidated claim and it will E dismissed.

';}';5‘: I

The Potawatomie Piation and Prairie Band of the Potawatomie Nation,
Doc ‘net IS-I-I, offered proof and submitted findings of fact and brief on
then claim.

The Miami Tribe of Oklahoma and the Miami Tribe, Docbt 253, offered
proof and submitted fi. ‘ings of fact and brief on their claim.

The Miami Indian Tribe and Miami Tribe of Indiana, Docket 131, have
submitted evidence and filed proposed findings of fact and brief on their
claim. Tmse petitioners and the petitioner in Docket No. 253 represent
all Miami Indians, including the Eel River Miami.

The Issues

 

It is understandable from the point of view of the claiiiants in the

,<".':nr¢:-n-I-23'} ‘ _ " -3-‘ 4...: .I.'........:. ;1.......... ...':........'1.3 .J......:..__- J—.. :~.-.._....:.
.. . .-..-_.. docket: chain 2:; ...:':.c c:::::...._.cn, ULAJU .....e_, :..u.;LM..A..L.\.L u.c:D.1_Lc we ..L..i...Lu‘..'DU

limit their submission to the question whether their right to the lands,
which are the subject of the several claims, was recognized by the United
States through Congressional action; if it was, the tinze-consumizg, difficult and expensive task of proving Indian title would be obviated. The
defendant would libwise be relieved of lengthy and expensive research on

the question of Indian aboriginal rights if recognized title be proved.

It was in recognition of these problems we, bv the order of April 2l,

:9

l9S3, consolidated all the cases for trial and limited the issues to the
questions of law and fact as to whether the government :~.'_u its deal__* ings

with the northwest trims signator;,r'to the Greenville Treaty of August '3.

J

1795, recognized the title of the chzlmant Indians to tracts S6, 71 and

73, shown on the map, Exhibit 34, Dict. 253 and Rogrceis Flop l of Indian

A further consideration of the question of recogmed title is

deemed appropriate by reason of the fact that since our decision

(March 21.-., 19st) in the Miami case, Doclcet 67, 2 Ind. 015. Comm. 617,
635, involving a tract (Royce 99) in Indiana, adjoining the tracts here
under consideration, there have been decisions by the Court of Claizrzs
and the Supreme Court, which the Government contends have a bearing on
the question of recognized title. They are: Tee-Hit-Ton V-. United
States, l28 C. Cls. 82, decided April 6, l9§L~., which was a.f‘i‘irmed by the
Supreme Court (3118 U, s, 272) on Feb;-ug;-_.; 7, 1955, and Otoe and Hissouria

v. United States, 131 C. Cls. 593.

Since it is the nat1n°e of the petitiomrs‘ interest in the land

in -1-1-..-., -nu-3“ .-u-.--1-51-~14-uvw -.-u...-...-u-,-.-.-.-¥-¢..v-'3
-..n.-n...-.-u. I-IJ Inn-¢\-ur .a..\.J\J/' 9-an-A -I-\-r‘-1;’ \-IA\--¢3v‘-I-I-~--vI-J ;. r.-..\.;

QL¢h:§\i *3 U-sbhp lll‘.uI-uh ‘I6-xv-root ‘talc: to-I'll-in--I-III’ H-V"-Pb

'\u

for our determination, we proceed to examine that interest.

We discussed the general problen of tribal red. promrty rights in
Crow Tribe v. United States (i9su), Docket sh, 3p.Ind. Cls. Comm. 155, 157,
and stated that Irxiiantribes held lands in two ways:

(1) 33' aboriginal possession, which is the prztmary source of Indian
title, and is based upon immemorial use and occupancy. This intemst is
generally known as “original Indian title” or “unrecognized Indian title.”
This type of Indian rights in land is not involved here, for, as we have
said above, we are only to decide whether the petitioners ceded by said

treaties their recognized title or rights.

 

We mention original Indian
title primarily to distinguish it from the kind of tribal interest the

claimants here maintain they had when they ceded their lands to defendant.

5 203

-,-1 s r. ..t.'I,‘.‘. 51;‘ ‘.,-_5,ul(2) T1... other eey in which  held land was by "recognized
title ," that is, where the Indians’ right to permanently occupy and use
land has been confirmed or recognized by Congressional action. Thb kind
of tribal right is variously referred to in court decisions as “treaty”
or “reservation” title, “recognized“ title and "acknowledged" title.

To create such an interest in Indian tribes Congressional action 3
necessary. This is so, for as stated in Hms v. GI-mes, 337 U. S. 86,
103, 93 L. ed. 1231, 12147:

Since Congress, under the Constitution, Sec. 3 of Art. LL,

has power to dispose of the lands of the United States, it may

convey to or recognize such rights in the Indians, even a title

equal to fee simple, as in its judgment is just. Northwestern

Bands of Shoshone Indians V’. United States, 321:. U. S. 335, 339,

3140, 89 L. Ed. 385, 990, 991. (Italics edded).

And in Sioux v. United States, 316 U. S. 31?, 326, the Supreine Court held
that the disposal of public lands rests "exclusively in Congress.“

Congressional recognition may be by direct legislative action or by
ratifying a treaty or agreement with an Indmn tribe. And, as stated in
Tee-Hit-Ton Indians v. Unimd States, 31:8 U. S. 272, 278:“.

There is no particular form for congressional recognition

oi‘ Indian right of permanent occupamy. It may be established

in a variety oi‘ ways but there must be the definite intention

by conjessional action or authority to accord legal rights,

not merely permissive occupation. Citing Hynes v. Grime
Packing Co., supra.

S 203;

The petitioners in these consolidated cases do not rely upon proof of “Indian title“ to sustain their position, but upon the proposition that by

the Treaty of Greenville of Angst 3, 1795', 7 Stat. 129, between twelve

G h

Indian tribes, including the petitioners in these consolidated cases, tne

defendant recognized the title of these petitioners in the lan ceded

in 1805 and 1809, such lands being tracts 5'6, 71 ani 72, all of which
were within the boundaries oi‘ the lands relinquished (Art. IVj by the
United States in the Greenville Treaty of 1795.

Although the provisions of the Greenville Treaty are perhaps
sufficient in themelves to show the intention of the United States as
to tribal rights relinquished by it, we believe the dealings of the
Government through its authorized representatives show beyond doubt what
was irrtended with respect to recognition of such rights. We are not to
be understood, however, as saying that the adminbtrative oificers or

representatives of the Govermnt can "recognize" Indian title for, as

shown above, only Congress can do that, but such officers could and did

— a... o .n.s—..¢.... v\.. ----\..;t -44» am‘! .|.4I-J 1-d"~ul..n-..L.\.r..l....\.-5) as \.r&JI-J1.r\-no an-v.a...&.l..5 -I-‘Ann-.1-.(.n-LA -I-.CJ-454.‘-5 U4. U-L.\-pa.) GA--an-A J--M--4.4.. Hausa-v
t

\

Congress acted in pursuance thereof it: is permissible, and sometimes

necessary, to consider them as indicating Congressional intention in ratiifying treaties negotiatedby such officers. This is 'especia.ll;y”tr*ue when

the instructions given the treaty commissioners and the treaty proceedings are before the Senate when considering ratification.

We glean from the mass of material offered in this case that Government offic ials and representatives considered the lands "relinquished"
by Article 1: of the Greenville Treaty belonged to the twelve tribes as

the aboriginal possessors thereof.

for by the Fort Harzrar Treaty" of January 9, 1789, 7 Stat. 28, with the

There was a sound basis for this belief;

«fiandot, et al., a line was established "as a division line between the lands

of the United St~tes of America, and the lands of said nations, forever.”

These signatory tribes released, uitclc-1:.':ed, relinquished and ceded to

J-‘o--$

L-‘c'--luv

United States all their land east, south and west of said line. The
east part, and the south part of said 1% from near Fort Lawrence
(Laurens) to the portage near Loromie’s store in western Ohio, are the
same lines as those in the Greenville-Treaty, but from Loromie’s store
the 1789 treat: line continued northerly, northwesterly and then northeasterly to Lake Erie and thence to the place of beginning. And as to
the lands within that boundary the United States did "relinquish and

quitclaim“ to the signatory trims all such lands, reserving the exclusive right to purchase the same. This treaty was proclaimed by the
President on September 29, 1789, and in connection with his proclamation

stated that he did so “by and with the advice and consent of the Senate.”

/I-9 -Fin o ,u.('\ 4.‘...
kt tat. 40, )4}.

At the sameptime and place -- January 9, 1789, '7 Stat. 33, at Fort
Harrrar -- a treaty was consummated with the Six Nations in which a
division line between those nations and the United States was also established and it was therein provided (Article 2) that the United States
"confirm" and "relinquish and quit claim" to the Six Nations the lands
lying east and north of the division line fixed by that treaty. This

treaty seems not to have been ratified or proclaimed, although it was

frequently mentioned and discussed in connection with the other treaty

I

of Fort Harmer, referred to above, at treaty coumils held with the Northwestern tribes at which the Treaty Commissioners and tribal spokesmen

-3
Hwr
a—JJL.C

seerzed to assume that it w as operative. (See

8 of Dkt. 253 and Vol. Li,

PP. 31.10-361 of American State Papers, and Ex. 91; of said docket, which is

S 206

an excerpt from the instructions to the Treaty Commissioners who were
unsuccessful in malalng a treaiar with the so-called Northwestern tribes

in 1793) .

The two Fort Earrar treaties are of consequence because they evidence a plain purpose and intent to make a division between the lands
of the signatory tribes and the lands oi‘ the United States, and to consumnate such separation of territory each gartyr elinquismd its rights
to  lands retaimd by the other. Plainly, by the use of the language
quoted above the United States intended to accord the tribes legal rights ,
that is, the rights of perpetual occupancy to use as..;.they saw fit the
lands the Government zrelinquished to the India parties by those treaties.

The Fort Harmar treaties have another important bearing on the Greenville Treaty of 1795' for, in addition to the fact that some of the same

tribes that consunmaated the first of the Fort Harmar treaties were parties

to the Greeuville Treaty, and the first treaty counnissioners appointed‘ to
negotiate with the Northwestern tribes - the hostile tribes northwest of
the Ohio River -- were instructed to be guided by the Fort Harmar treaties
which were, according to the instructions, “regarded as having been formed
on solid grounds." The commissioners {were also directed to endeavor to
induce the tribes to confirm the boundary established by the Fort Harmer
Treaty and to offer the Indians: "The guarantee of the United States of
the rigxt of soil, to all remaining lands in that quarter, against the :
citizens. or inhabitants oi‘ the United States.” (Finding 1;, and for full

instructions see 1; A::'erican State Papers 3 3&0-31:2}. Th...s-e

im truct-ions

M’.

were issued on April 26, 1793, but the commissioners were unable to
negotiate a treaty and abandoned their efforts in August 1793. (L; American Stote Pagrs 

The Government, after the unsuccessful efforts of l793 to negotiate
with the hostile tribes of the Northwest, renewed its efforts in 17911
and on April 1.1, l79h, sent instructiors to General Wayne (Def. Ex. 19,
D3-ct. 253) for his ‘guidance in negotiating with the Indians. These instructiors, insofar as they relate to land disposition, are identical to
those given the commissioners in 1793 in that they emphasized the plan

of dividing the terri tory between the United States and the Indians

followed in the I-Iarmar Treaty ‘with the '*'iandots, et al., and authorized

W3 C3

Tbéf ‘I! i

an offer of cum-.-.m-I-.ee 9+‘ -Hue :13 4.3. gr .<:n-31 -1-..~ the I__.«_-1-_=__;=_ 1331913,

1893.: irstructionsp remained the basis for the negotiations at the Greenville Treaty Council which began on June 16 and was concluded on August lo,

1795 (Pet. k. 8, Dkt. 253), for in the instructions of April 8, 1795

(Def. Ex. 15, p. 9, Dkt. 253) General Wayne was admonished:

on the subject of a treaty with the western Indians, given at the War Office

on the fourth day of April, 1791:, are still to "be attended to, and to aid

and in_f'luence your negotiations in all matters not varied by the present

instructions ° * -1%“

, though proof of it is not

Moreover, it is a fact,
in evidence, that President Washington submitted the above mentioned I-Eayne
instructions and the treaty proceedings to the Senate in a corrzznunication,
dated December 9, 1795, laying befxe that body -the Greenville Treaty,

O - .
in which he wrote:

F0

(3

"The instructions

I lay before you, for your consideration, a treaty of

peace which has been negotiated by General I-I*yr.e, on behalf

of the United States, with the late hostile tribes of Indians,

ncrthwest of the river Ohio; together with the instructions

which were given to General Wayne, and the proceedings at the

place of treaty." (h Ar.-;erican State Papers, 562).

General if ne followed his instructions implicitly with one exception.

357 .. 3 .

He was first directed to de:'."ne the boundaries of the separate tribes
(Der. Ex. 19 . 6 Inn... 253) but in the later instructions of April 8

3 ) 3 .. J
1795, the difficulties of such a plan were recognized and Wayne was
authorized to make a simle treaty‘ for all, which he did. (See Finding 6
and Def. Ex. 15, p. S, Dkt. 253).

Aside from the establishment of peace, the main object to be accomplished by the Greenville Treaty was the settlement of territorial rights
as between the Gorvernnent and the Indian tribes. This was done by the
establishnerrt of a “general boundary line between lands oi‘ the United

tates, and lands of said Indian tribes % -3% J‘ This line is described in
Article III and shown in Ro-y.::e's maps of Ohio and Indiana and it plainly
marks the territorial divb ion between the United States and the tribes.
The Indians collectively ceded to defendant all lands they claimed lying
eastwardly and sout wardly of said boundary line plus some sixteen mall
tracts in the a'ea relinquished by defendant, however, the sr:;a....l tracts
are not in corrtroverszr. And the United States, in turn, relinquished its
claims to lands not ceded by the Indians or specifically reserved by it.

The relinquistmnt " the United States. is in these words (Art. IV

. J

F1‘-niii‘-"° 5(a)):

‘D

\_ ‘I. p

In consideration of the peace now established and of the
cessions and relinquishnents of lands made in the preceding
article by the said tribes of Indians, and to manifest the
l_'Lberali«....y of the United States, as the great means of
rendering this peace strong and perpetual; the United States
relinquish their claims to all other Indian lands northward
of the river Ohio, eastward of the Mississippi, and westE-I«'ard and southward of the Great Labs and the waaters uniting
them, according to the boundary lire agreed on by the United

tates and the king of Great-‘Britain, in the treaty of peace
made between them in the year 1783. But from this relinquishment by the United States, the follo:-ring tracts of land, are
explicitly excepted. 1st. The tract of one hundred and
fifty thousand acres near the rapids of the river Ohio, which
has been assigned to General Clark, for the use of himself
and his warriors. 2d.'_ The post of St. Vincennes on the river
Wabash, and the lands adjacent, of which the Indian title has
been extinguished. 3d. The lands at all other places in
-possession‘ of the French people and other white settlers

among them, of which the Indian title has been extinguished
as nantioned in the 3d article; and hth. The post of fort
Hassac towards the mouth of the Ohio. To which several paroolo of land so excepted, the said tribes x-el.':’_nqu5_sh all the
title and clam which they or any of them may have. ‘

The real questionin these cases is uhether the above la@age constitutes
"recognition" ofttribal rights, as said term has been defired by the courts,
éupra, in  territory described -in Article IV quoted above, embracirg,
according to defendant,’ 156,000,000 acres of land, ming all the present
states oi‘ Michigan, Wisconsin and Illinois, most of.‘ Indiana and parts of
Ohio and Mime sot J.

In arriving at" the intent of the Government in the relinquishment of
its claims to the lands to the Indianiribes, it is well to look at the
problems confronting the net? natio-n_at this early period of its existence.
The war w'th the northwest tribes had continued for a number of years

and was a_ great burden on the struggling nation and the people were weary

of its cost in men and material resources. Furthermore, at this particular

5211

time we were threatemd with the possibility of becoming involved in a
gem:-al war with European nations. This critical situation is summed
up in the following instructiors to General Wayne by the Secretary of War:

- This commission will require the exercise of all your
talents and all your judgnent. The delicacy of it ought not
in the least degree to be concealed from your view. You are
well aware of the extreme dislike of the great portion of the

- people ofthe United States to the war, and how gladly they
would embrace the occasion of terminating it upon tolerable
terms. If therefore a treaty should take place and be frustratedxthorough clear and inequivical evidence will be required
by the public that the agents of the United States had taken
‘every precaution and used every proper exertion to produce a
contrary issue. And as you are the commanding Genera this

_ evidence would be more necessary on your part than it would on

-- pl the part of a citizen not be@ a military man.

‘In addition to all the motives which have previously existed
1'01‘. finishing this war, the present state of European affairs

‘IIQIIII ‘H

-~.~..—.«-- v-..;~.-. n.a.uu. uus...‘: _\..uunucL‘Uc: Uf "v3.1.3.5: COLl£l:.:.L‘_y L‘1}.:'.'t9'c?.;.:t:ll.i_Ilg\'l':O
involve us in the gereral war require in the most forcible
manner that we. should if possible make peace with the I$iar:.s
in order 'to prevent such an undue portion of our strength and
wealth from being appropriated to an ob;}ect of less importance
than some other which may probably occur.

So peace was irnperative, but not 'a mere cessation of hostilities. A reading ofitheo irstructionsito (‘I-eneral Wayne, as well as those to the treaty
commissioners of 'l793, plainly shows that agpermenent peace was desired
and that thet-overnzaent considered a settlement oi‘ territorial‘ rights
essential to a. lasting peace. Indian spokesmen at the Greem2.i.'l.le ‘Treaty
shared this xdew, in fact, the discussions at that treaty council related
lérgely  territorial interests as between the Unitedstates and the
Indian tribes. as  the character of such rights the comnissioner was
authorized to offer the Indians: "The guarantee of the United States of.

the right of soil to all the remaining Indian lands in that quarter

against the citizens and inhabitants of the United States."

kc 19). A ain in referring to the r*'*- r-“ht of the United States to pur’ G b

jaub
chase the Indian lands, the General was instructed: "But in describing

these rights to the Indians you will impress them with the idea that we

concede to them fully the right and possession of the soil as long as ti ey

desire to occupy the same, but when they choose to sell any portion of the

country it must be sold only to the United States who will protect the

Indians against all imposition." (p. 7, Def. E. l9).

Hence, when the words of relinquishment contained in Article IV of the

(p. 1;, Def.

Greenville Treaty were read in the light of the directions to the Commissioner,

their import becoms clear and discloses an intent to give substance to the

aboriginal right of possession of the soil until the Indians choose to sell

\

it

time of the treaty, had original Indian title -- a right of occupancy

based upon immemorial possession -- to the lands relinquished by dei'end'ant,

but this was a natural right that required no governmental action to create;

it has been described by the Supreme Court in these words:

“The Indian nations had always been considered as distin: t,
independent political communities, retaining their original a
natural rights, as the undisputed possessors of the soil from
time immemorial "«~‘ -39.“ Iorcester v. Georgia, 31 L. Ed. 1x83 , 500.

Article V of the treaty is more explicit as to the relinquish .ent by

the United States in that ‘t is there declared that:

The Indian tribes who have the right to those lands [the
lands relinquished by the C~cvern::=.ent/ are quietly to enioy
them, hunting, planting, and dwelling thereon so long as

they please, without any molestation from the United States;
a -::O

, that is, in perpetuity. It is true of course that the Indians, at the

And the defendant further promised that until the lands of the signatory
‘tribes were sold to the United States , it would protect them "in the quiet
enjoyment of ther lands against“ all white persons, including citizens
of the United States.

It is certain therefore that in incorporating in the treaty the words
of Articles Iv and v, quoted above, defendant was not granting the tribes
Indian title to lands in the Northwest territory, for, as before stated,
those tribes then had Indian t°tle thereto, a title which amounted to a
mere right of occupancy that could be terminated by the Government at any

time and without compensation; it was a right the Government would protect

against third parties, but its tenure depemed upon the will of the Governooq.-:-vaum V I-an-inc.-An

yvv-5+-1!-5 1&1: +':vn -Ir-F-=~na-nq-:an3~~%a\vw-‘- 1-IIr9.v~“'I "'~.“1r-Is wv:-S
at ‘

Quinn-1.: coda:--—n&\u--um. ’ aoa\uv in-.—.\.l--In I.-.q.I.An ml...-.... Nu! h ‘Ivan-u-|v'¢-£J..‘D\.nn.-l-on-I-5-tuna»!-uII¢...\uf \d-In quitunnhul-— VI‘-I—¥l-iii I
o

\

not a subject of judicial concern. Tee-I-lit-Ton case, supag Beecher v.
d9 ’*3€i‘bY; 95 U. S. 517, and Urited States v. Santa Fe Pacific, 311.1 U. St.
339} €31.17; Buttz v. Northern Pacific, 3.19 U. S. 66. i Manifestly, when the
defendant relinquished its claims ‘to the tribal lands in the Northwest
territory and solemnly agreed that the tribes might enjoy those lands as
they pleased without molestation from the United States, it was L granting
each oi‘ the twelve signatory tribes the right of exclusive permanent
Occupancy of the lands each respectively possessed until they were disPosed to sell them. The tribes were thus each granted a right they did
not 93.503?‘ before C-reenville, but one plainly within the judicial concept
of “recognized Indian title."

However, in the Greenville Treaty no division of the territories of

the respective tribes was made. The lrdians desired such a division and,

W ‘W.
4

um-.1"'_'

52

as has been mentioned above, Ge.r1eralI-Jayne was by his first instructions
(Def. Ex. 19, p. 6) urged to make separate contracts with the tribes, but
these instructions were changed to permit a single treaty with all (Def.
Ex. 15, p. S) and General W3/ne informed the In ians at  Greenville
Council of the impropriety and impossibility of dividing the lands between
the respective tribes. (Finding 6). But the failure of the treaty to
specify the lands of the respective tribes does not in our opinion militate against the Government‘s recognition of the right of each tribe to

use and occupy its lands until it was dbposed to sell them to the United’
States. The instructions to Wayne (Def. Exa. 19, lh, Dkt. 253), his statements to the assembled Indians (‘Finding 6) and the statements of the Indians

at the Creenville Treaty (Pet. Ex. 8, D151’--. 953) coinclusivel':,=' shoe’ that
insof as tribal lands were concerned the Government was dealing with each
tribe independently of the others. In other words, it was understood by
the Government‘s representatives and the Indians that each tribe had
separate lands; that there was no 'conrmum'.tv of interest in the lands of the
Northwest territory. So the recognition accorded  the Creenville Treaty

was that of each tribe. To be sure, the separate tribal lands had to be

identified whenever identification became necessary and that could be done

by agreements between the tribes and the United States.

While the areas occupied and used by the Piiami, Tilea and Eel river
Indians were never defimd prior to the treaties here involved, they,
being parties to the Greenville Treaty, had recognized title to such lands_

as were occupied by th  i the Hcrthsest wrritory. Our problem is to

%

I
ah

L

&

determine what the boundaries were or, more specifically, whether they
were the recognized permanent occupants of the lands within the boundaries
described in the l8OS and l809 treaties. None of the petitioners rests
its rights to such lands upon proof of actual occupancy, and no such proof
has been offered. They rely upon those two treaties as specifically
identifying the lands of such petitioners, the permanent occupancy of which
was recognized by the United States in the Greenville Treaty.

The principle of recognized Indian title has been applied to cases
arising from the talc‘-ng of Indian lands without paying therefor and in
those cases a defined area was involved and compensation was allowed.

United States v. Creek, 295 U. S’. 103; Shoshone v. United States, 299 U. S.

on O

3176; United States v. Klamath, 302; U. S. 358. But-the principle of recognition establishes a right of the Indians “to hold lands permanently," as
distinguished from Indian title -- permissive possession. Aside from
creating a compensable interest in Indian lands, the princ'ple relieved
Indian claimants of proving actual occupancy of the area recognized. No
doubt the recognition must go to particular Indian lands and if those
lands can be identztfied as belonging to a tribal entity dealt with and are
within the area which is the subject of the dealings between the Government and the Indians, they are recognized lands under the rule.

After t e Greenville Treaty of Peace in l'?9§, conditions in the

northwest became stabilized. Indiana became a territory in 1800. 

Henry Harrison became its Governor and Superintendent of Indian. J-LffaiI's,

also sole treaty cczznissioner. With the actual and anticipated migration

 ‘I

of the whites to the northwest it became necessary’ to obtain relinquishments of title to Indian lands in the new Indiana Territory, but the
problem confronting the Government and its representatives was to determine
the occupancy of the lands to be freed of Indian occupancy.

Governor Harrison began his study of Indian territorial claims early

in 1801, under instructions of the President to make efforts for the

S2

extinguishment of Indian claims upon the Ohio river below the mouth of the '

Kentucky river. (Finding 7}. He approached the undertaking by rejeotirg

the idea that the Gcreemille Treaty created a community of interests of

the signatory tribes in the Northwest territory and began negotiations only

with tribes claiming rights in a particula area with the result that con.-‘. .-.

' ' .: .. .. : _- 1 -f13l“+''-‘--1’'3S C19.‘ .L".:.‘:a .1. L w.L.L..L. nu G4.‘ ..L

O
-13-.-at

171 1,7315 wars:-r-.1-u-wt-ya: 1-u--an d'-----2--L
tour-u-up u..-n-an-‘Nd-.I\.p\.n -JJ U4-L; 1.!

"L3"';}.‘u-L.-:5‘ .11; an area

\

were made parties. He also adopted the policy

(Pet. a. 21, 31¢. 253).
of giving tribes without legitir:-.ate claims a part of the consideration in
order to facilitate future boundary settlements.

On June 7, 1803, 7 ste-:2. 1, Harrison negotiated a treaty with nine
of the Creenvi_'1_le tribal signatories, mcluding the Mimi, Eel river and
Wee, by which the boundary of the Viucennes tract (reserved by Article IV
of.‘ the Greenville treaty) was definitely} fued. And on August l8 , 1801.1,

7 Stat. 81, the Governor concluded a treaty with the Delawares in which
whey ceded lands between the Ohio and White rivers in Indiana and included

lands claimed by the E-Eiami, Eel river and Wea groups. Whateverjthe merits

O
*1
O
}..J
9.
L;

of the Miami, Eel river and ‘.-Fea te~_-;~i-1-, I ,5, they were aci-«cnowledged

we ...c Eel-':a;-“es, the Pota*atoni and defendant in the Grouse-land Treaty

14

-—p\_I

of August 21, 1805, 7 seat. 91, which fixed the boundaries of the Miami, A
Eel river and Wea (Royce tract 56) and the boundaries of the Delaware
(Royce ract L19) lands in the Ohio.I«E‘nite rivers area. Here then is joint
action by all interested parties, including the Government, settling the
boundaries of the Miami, Eel river and Wea tribes and thereby identifying

the lands of the last named tribes which were recognized by the Greenville

‘Treaty .

The Fort Wayne Treaty of September 30, 1809, 7 Stat. 113, is the other
treaty involved in these cases by which the Miami and Eel river tribes,
with the Delawares and Potawatomi tribes “as that allies ,“ ceded two

tracts of Indiana and (Royce 71-and 72) to defendant. By Article 5, the

Conmhii 07? the We-'4. to the cessi on of the tract first de-‘=r:ri.‘hed. in .-art-i.cle l

(Royce 71) of the treaty was necessary to complete the title. This consent

was obtained by a. separate treaty with the wee concluded on October 26,

l809, 7 Stat. llé. The Kickapoo were mentioned in the ninth article concerning lands (Royce 73) not here involved.

Here againpall parties having or claiming an interest in said tracts
71 and 72 (described in Finding 11) joined in a. cession thereof which
identified by plain boundaries the lands of the Miami, Eel river and Wee,

the title to which was recognized by defendant in the Creenville Treaty.

Pot watcmie Nation and Prairie Band of Potawatomie Indians,
Docket no. 1 -11

 

The Potawatcmie Nation and the Prairie Band of Potawatomies in their
Pelliti-011 (Docket lS-H) allege they were the owners of one"-third of the land

(ROYCE! 71, 72) ceded by the Fort Waym Treaty of September 30, 1809. For

‘ff':;:  2.
H-?:t£i’;’¢"

the purpose of this inquiry we shall consider the Prairie Ban
of the Potawatomi Nation.

The only proof offered by the plaintiffs in Docket No. lS-H consists
of its Exhibit l, showing annuity payments to the Potawatomi (Prarie
Band) under the l809 treaty, which were commuted in 1909, and Exhibit 2
which shows six $500 annuity pants to “Pottawatomie I$ians“ under the
1809 treaty for the years 1813 through 14818.

The plaintiffs in Docket 15'-H have offered no proof as to their
identity or capacity to prosecute their claim; however, since plaintiffs
of the same name as those appearing here have submitted to the Corrzmission

other claims and proved their capacity to prosecute them, we will assume,

for the purposes of +h'?<= case ........ ca...‘-. and c...1'-§-wn-F +3-Irscwo-u -\'I—-t—-8--:'-v‘-"-£"- «:--Iv Iuvad---cur ‘I-vi-l'\uf

, v-and-u at Miami xi:-than-an--J-‘Ill-—-H--nu-In-I C-5

\

titled to assert the clai.m pleaded in Docket 15-3.

The Potawatomi base that claim of interest in the land ceded by the
Fort Wayne Treaty upon the fact that they were a party to that treaty and
that they or, their hands -- the Prairie and Citizen -- received the annuity

Of 3500 provided for the Potawatomi by the Fort kayne Treaty until it was

comzrzuted.

It is an undisputed fact that the.Pctawatomi were a party to the Fort
Wayne Treaty and that an annuity was movided for and paid them for their
relinquishraent, but those _facts cannot be accepted as conclusive proof of
tribal rights in thy area ceded (Tracts 71 and 72) in view of the undisputed evidence a peering in this record and the total absence of proof by
the Pota*.:ato:r:i that th*y used or occupied any part of the area, although

the?‘ were afforded even: opportunity to do so.

‘Journal, p. 15, Pet.  15 in Dkt. 253):

It will be noticed that the Potawatomi are referred to in the treaty

83 53-11 813-? of the Miami. and Eel river. t is perhaps true, as the Potawatomi‘s counsel state, that Indians could be “joint owners of property
and allies at the same time." But we know of no treaty or other dealings
with Indian tribes that gave the term "allies" the connotation of joint

ownership. The uncommon use of the term in the Fort Wayne Treaty would

indicate it was inserted advisedly and was intended to convey a meaning

other than property ownership or interest. This idea is borne out by a

statement made in the Treaty Journal of the Treaty of Fort Wayne (Treaty
“t e Putawatomies 8.: Deliwares

would be considered as participating in the advantages of the treaty [IBO27

.. .3 IO

.- _\.:.:. .1. H _ _,
..:.c.1..l1\.lo

:3 3.'.:.5:.:. u um’;

OJ.‘
U116

3-—-—--p-h Ira-I ‘i ‘. Hath! db in-J-u‘-Ltllqi-C D

it-5

.1ii U

__ ms _ 1'1 _! _
:14: and Lowdwatomi were a partpof the Indian confederacy which carried on the war
against the United States prior to 1795, as were the Miami and many’ other
of the tribes who signed the Greenville Treaty, hence,‘ were allied with the
Miami, Eel river and Weas (Pet.  21, Dkt. 253), but Harrison never con-,
sidered the Potawatomi as having any valid claim to the lands ceded by the
Miami in 1809, nor has any such interest been shown. Moreover, it appears
(Def. BX. -111, Did‘... 253) that it was expedient to include the Potawatomi

as a party to the 1809 treaty in order to satisfy the Miami who were
friendly with the Potawatomi who were then in an impoverished condition
and needed assistance.

..L
St;

Then thereis the treaty between the Potawatcmi and the United ates

dated October 2, 1818, 7 Stat. 185', by which the Pojzawatomi ceded an area

Of land (Royce 98) lying ‘north of the ‘:3'abash River in the then new
tate of Indiana and Territory of Illinois. This treaty contains these
plain provisions: “The Potawatomies also cede to the United States all
their claim to the country south of the Wabash river." There can "x no
doubt but that these provisions quitclamed whatever rights the Potawatomi had in theihiami, Eel river and wed lands ceded in 1809, for all
such lands lie south of the Wabash River.

though the Potawatomi have offered no proof of ownership or interest
in the lands ceded by the 1809 treaty, we have examined the evidence
offered by all the other paties .to this consolidated hearing but have

found no evidence that would justify a findi that the Potawatomi, or

«E

:q.gILvab

4.2.3 ac: <3 3

"' £..£.\-A c:I.L.&J J..;.5.'.a..v 9.1.4..

.3.
95.! -.5 G:-I-u-——n. 1.0-; _;Q~“q_~, 9

p treaty of l809. Their petition in said Docket No. lS-.-H must be dismissed.

Defendant‘s Contentions and Evidence

 

Defendant‘s counsel has emended much energr and devoted much space
in its brief to the meaning and effect of recognized title and seems to

reach the conclusion that unless a fee title was created by the C-reenv:L_le

Treaty there was no “recognized title“ .in the lands ceded by the 1805 and
1809 treaties. The effect of the concept of “recognized title" is to
change the status of the Indians‘ natural rights to the soil (original

Indian title) and to confirrn their ri hts to the exclusive perrnazerrt use

and occupancy of a particular territo:-y. It is not necessa. that hey
be vested with a fee simple title, and no such title was created by the

GI‘een'=-ille Treaty, nor is any such title c.'Lai_-ed by any of the petitioners.

f\)

f\)

C)

as we have said before, the Greenville ‘IE-eaty gave each of the

named tribes the right of the use and occupancy of its lands in the
Northwest territom (described in Article IV) until they were disposed

to sell them to the United States. Such use and occupancy was not to
=‘1PP3-Y to all the lands in said temitory, but, as ezcplic itly decla.red in
Article V, only to “the Indian tribes who have the right to those lands

’-9 93?.“ This language, especially when considered in connection with
General Waryne‘s statement (Finding 6) that it was impossible to divide

the lands as between the signatory tribes, signifies that it was only the
lands that the respective tribes had a right to in the Northwest territory
that were relinquished by defendant. It must be remembered that the
General was dealing with groups of hostile Indians: t:rhn.<'-:4: ‘i‘.t='r'rj' 'i'.n3~'i 21 -_r-:igh+..s=
were unknown and could not be ascertained, so he fixed over-all boundaries
within which the signatory tribes would be protected as to the separate
lands eachohad a right to. Such arrangement would not seem to change or
affect the aboriginal rights of nonsignator; tribes within the Northwest
territory, but that is a question to ‘be settled when needed for its determination arises .

Defendant offered much evidence (see Appendix to its brief) relating to the British colonial policy respecting Indians during its sovereignty of the American colonies but we have found none of it that changes

the conclusions we have reached above. The Tlreaty of Peace of 1783 ‘be<‘- O I Q . c . 1 V -I I 9
men» of all British territo-r;.='* rig..ts to the la. cs in the United States

unl-I-I.21

1 ..-'-''i.‘r:.‘'‘.—'‘f;'''.'‘
.- . .'..l_!-;l‘,.f5.

east of the Mississippi River. No provision designed to protect Indian
property rights appears in the treaty, so it is difficult to see how
British policy in regard to aich rights has any relevancy to the question
we are considering here. We as not controlled in any. degree by the
colonial policy of Great Britain as to Indian property interests. The
concept of "recognized Indian title“ is the creature of our O1-II1 laws and
Policies arid @parently had no counterpart in British policy. On the
other hand, we note from the opinion in St. Catherine's Milling and Lumber
Co. v. Ontario (Def. Ex. ll; Eng. L.R. Q App. Case 146): “The Crown has
all along had a present proprietary estate in the land, upon which the
Indian title was a mere burden."

This conforms to our laws respecting

original Indian title, about 1-‘.'niC."1 there is and can be no dispute. The

main thesis of the_defendant's argument seems to be that since the Indians
had nothing but an “usufructuaryright, dependent upon the good w:z_l_l' of
the Sovereign,“ such right cannot by sovereign action be changed to one of

permanent tenure. We cannot accept such a contention.

Congress may recognize even a fee simple title in the Indians (Hyres v. Grimes, supra) and
it could, as it did‘by the GreenviDe Treaty, create a right of permanent
occupancy which would not seem to be contrary to British policy even E we
were governed by it, which we ‘re not.

We conclude, therefore, from a consideration of the evidence in this

udic ielly notic ed:

Jo

record, and that we have

(1

1. That defendant by the Treaty of Greenville recognized the rights

"1:

01 the Miami, Eel River and T:-Zea tribes to the lands identified and described

to

2

in the Grouseland Treaty of August 21, l8OS (Finding 9) and the Fort
‘Wayne Treaty of September 30, l809 (Finding ll), and that the petitioners
in Dockets Nos 253, l3l, 3lh are authorized to prosecute the claims for
such lands.

2. That the petition in Docket No. lS;H, and the petition in Docket

Nb» 29-F, to the extent that each.asserts a claim based on.the treaty of

1809, shallibe dismissed.

30

That Dockets Nos. 307 and 317 shall be removed.from.their consolidation.with the other cases herein and shall not be prejudiced by such
consolidation. &

It will be so ordered.

Louis J. 'O*Ma:-r

Associate Eommissioner

'We concur:

Edgar E. ’.-Ii-dc.
Chief Commissioner

 

“.‘Tm I M no H  .
Associate Commissioner

5 223

