8 Ind. (:1. com. 111 111? d

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COEHISSION

THE Queenie: TRIBE or Ian FORT YUMA
RESERVAETOH, CALIFORNIA,

Petitioner,
v. Docket No. 319

THE mm smwrs or AMERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: September 30, 1959.

FINDINGS gg FACT

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact: ‘
1. (a) This case was consolidated with “Indians of California" cases,
Dockets Nos. 31 and 3?, et al., for the purposes of trial by order of this

Commission dated November 19, 1953. Pursuant to such order, hearings wereheld but a separate record was made in this case with the stipulation that

evidence:in.Dockets Nos. 31 and 3? should be considered evidence in this
case, Docket No. 319 (R. 82). Thereafter, on October 6, 1958, this case
among others was severed from the California consolidated cases and permitted
to proceed separately;

(b) Petitioner has filed a separate petition in.Docket No. 320
whi&h.asserts a claim.based upon an 1893 cession to defendant of certain
alleged."reservation lands" situated within the land areas for'which compensation herein is sought. For a description of such reservation lands
claimed by this petition in said separate claim reference is made to
Section.? of the Act of August 15, 189k (28 Stat. 286; 332). Such "reser- I
vation lands" are excepted from the claim herein made (Pet. Req. Fdgs. lh,

TS and 16; Def. Req. Fdg. 26).

CD
5*"!
'21
Q
L")
1...... I
C‘)
O
3
I-’
I-‘
P-’
....J
1...

2. Petitioner filed its original "Petition Relating to Lands in

the States of California and Arizona" on August 10, 1951, and filed

In

an amendment to the original paragraph numbered ll on December 21, 1953,

"5

“In order to more accurately describe the land claimed,” which description as amended reads as follows;

Beginning at a point midstream of the Colorado River,
near Pilot Knob, and constituting the most easterly point
of the international boundary line be,seen the State of
California and the Republic of Mexico; thence east along
said line to a point about ten miles west of the present
town of Mexicali, Mexico; thence on a curred line, approximately parallel to the hen River, and about ten miles
distant therefrom, to the Superstition Mountains; thence
northeasterly on a line through the present towns of
'Westmoreland and Calipatria, and continuing to the southernmost extension of the Chuckwalla Mountains and west of the

westernmost extension of the Chocolate Mountains located on

41- ‘n-"I-1-_-.--.-._ .._.- .-s. _r-- 1.1. , r1-'I-_._ 3.. 1"s..'.._.... .11 .-_ .—_-. .1‘---—"L—_
Laud Uc=s...I...:...x.u4au..ca. £..».z.uc. U; uuc uu..i..'u4.c2u.u" £z....:..vc.'.r'. 3 t.-;u.:.ux.»c uva. L.r11CL..Z.J

through the Chuckralla Mountains; thence northeasterly to the
McCoy'Hountains; thence north to the Little Maria Mountains;
thence northeasterly to the Riverside Mountains; thence east
along the line of 3h° north latitude to the Colorado River;
thence south along the channel of said river to a point opposite the northern boundary of the town of Blythe; thence
easterly to the crest of the Dome Rock Mountains; thence
southerly along the crest of said Done Rock Range, and continuino south to the Chocolate Mountains located on the
Arizona side of the Colorado River; thence southwesterly’
along the crest of said Chocolate'Mountains to a point about
five miles from the Colorado River, at the place where the
river turns south after having flowed east from Picacho;;
thence in a southeasterly direction to the Huggins Hountains;
thence northeasterly on a line in approxiratel" the same direction as the channel of the Gila Ei'er and about ten miles
above said river, to a point on a northerly projection of the
line of the Mohawk Nountains; thence souiheasterly alone the
line of said.Eohawh hountains to a point abort ten miles
below the Gila River; thence southwesterly on a line about
ten miles from said river to the Gila Kountains; thence
southeasterly along the crest of said Gila Kountains to the
Hexican border; thence northeesterly aloe. said border to
the Colorado Riv r; thence north along sa’d river to the
Point of beginning.
-nli . in e- ghts and appu tcnances tncreunto

1‘

-Jr
— ‘Ii Q-up-'|-in s rs 3 ax‘:-u worn —'.. _ ..u. -. -: a-—‘—_—:- A-.3..:. :.;..1.1'l{3'.L"::'...L “id 1:‘.-CE. -.«-:_:'.i .i"..'-£._i;..u‘:-.

9

‘ 9 1-. Q o
""“"""""-7"‘. ""1 "*."‘. 'U'\rn *":v-urn 1~r-1--. V-(I-up
c‘.:":"~-- ‘-"—&4—L.L.....'.;__1; 4.11-.-=-...--.....'_;.-.(-3,

’I'Oe:~_«:'n:rr2  ":1: #2 1»;
E.

8 Ind. 01. Com. 111 113

3. Petitioner, The Quechan Tribe of the Fort Yuma Reservation,
California, has a tribal organization and a Constitution of the tribe
dated December 18, 1936. The Constitution has been approved by the
Secretary of Interior (Cl. Ex. 8) under the provisions of the Indian
Reorganization Act of June 18, 193k (H8 Sta . ?8h3 33 amended H9 Stat37a; 25 U.S.C.A. n76).  

ho (a) The "Yuma" historical Indian name is ¥Kwatca'n" (or
Quechan) as they have called themselves from earliest record. The
name FYnma" is the English equivalent of the Indian name "Quechan."
(Fords, Ethnog. of Yuma Indians, pp.-88-893 Dkt. N05. 295 and 283,
(Consolidated Mohave Cases), 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219, 250~25l3 Dr- A- LKroeber, R, 61; Dr. H. E. Driver, R. 173 at lines 20-26, and R. 173

.~,{at lines l-7).

‘T; (b) The Yuma Indians were a part of the Yuman linguistic
family; This linguistic family also includes the Mohave, Kamia,
Diegueno, Cocopa, Maricopa, Halchidhoma, walapai, Kohuana, and Havasupai.
Culturally the Yuma (or Quechan) were more closely related to the Mohave,
although linguistically they were related closely to the Maricopa, Kamia,
and Diegueno.

(c) When first encountered by Spanish explorers and missionaries
they were said to be, together with other members of their linguistic
family, occupying the bottom lands of the lower Colorado from Needles,
California, to the Gulf of California. The aboriginal population of

this region, exclusive of the higher cultures of Middle America, were
probably as dense as any in.theiNew'World.

This concentration depended,

however, on no great elaboration of material civilization, but upon the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll - r i llh

crude agriculture and collection of wild fruits fertilized by the silt
deposits of the annual river floods.

(d}“A general description of the more prominent physical features
in this region, centering generally on the lower Colorado and Gila Rivers,
in what is now part of the States of Arizona and California,'will serve to
explain their aboriginal culture, especially as concerns subsistence
methods and land usage.

The Colorado River emerges from its narrow gorges about sixty miles
south of the great bend which forms the Arizona~Nevada boundary and flows
into its lower course through a longitudinal oasis created by the annually"
flooding river and is flanked on either side by'barren ranges whose festoons
or curves segment the valley into a series of broad flood plains some twentyfive miles in width, connected by narrow canyons. A few miles'below the
final constriction at Yuma where the river has cut a narrow gorge through a
low conglomerate spur the muddy waters forsake a single channel and spread
out over the great alluvial fan which extends sixty miles from.Yuma to the
Gulf of California.

Bluffs some fifty to a hundred feet in height and varying in distance
from a few hundred yards to several miles from the river border the valley“
and mark the flood plain. The Colorado River is situated in and below a
dr3i“38€ area ofla quarter million square miles of much semi—arid land.

It is fed little by its lower affluents. The river does not rise appreciably apart from 0CCaSi0nal Spring floods from the Gila until May or reach

3 mitimu - - & .
e— m before late June. The silt load 1S very'heavy, mar higher than

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll

In aboriginal times the river plain and upper delta was normally
flooded every year. Precipitation is almost negligible and the flooded
land is of great contrast to the sandy and stony deserts above the bluffs
on‘the mesa." _The vegetation of the lowlands was luxuriant and often
approached jungle density. Dense groves of cottonwood, willow, mesquite
Impenetrable thickets of arrowand sycamore covered the uncleared land.

weed confronted early'travelers and necessitated guides from village to

C village. This weed occupied the greater part of the flood plain and grew

., _.
‘ :\u“-,1-3.!“

in thickets six or eight feet high.

The winters are usually quite mild with little frost and the summers
reach maximums up to 120° F.in the shade. The nights are cool only a few
hours before dawn and temperatures generally rise rapidly at sun-up in
the Yuma region (Forde's Ethnog. pp. 89-92).

The confluence of the Gila River with the Colorado River is immediately
northeast of the present site of Yuma, Arizona. Twenty miles to the north
the Chocolate Mountains form a hundred mile angle or are separated into two
segments by the channel and valley of the Colorado River. The west segment
of the Chocolate Mountains (or hills) is on the.California side, and the
east segment on the Arizona side of the Colorado River.

About ten miles west of this Gila-Colorado confluence is Pilot Knob. '

Sand dunes extend northwest from Pilot Knob for a distance of about
forty'miles long and are about three to fivermiles wide. These dunes
have in modern times been popular sites for shooting movies of “Sahara”

desert scenes.

The Trigo Mountains on the Arizona side of the Colorado River form

pan irregular cluster pattern and extend generally north and some east

8 Ind. Cl. Con. lll ll6

from an elbow bend in the Colorado near Picacho, California.i About seven
miles east of the Trigo are the "arizona” Chocolates extending in a
generally north-south direction and the longer range of Castle Dome exé
tends ten or fifteen miles farther south and about ten miles east and
somewhat parallel to the “Arizona” Chocolate Mountains. The elevation

of Castle Dome Peak is 3793 feet and is one of the highest points in

this region of the Colorado River.

' ' _ .

The "Great Colorado Valley" at the north end of the claimed territory extends far up the Colorado from Picacho, California, to Parker,
Arizona.

The International Boundary on the south with Mexico traverses a flat
sandy desert type land both on the California and Arizona sides of the
Colorado.

5. The Commission finds that this petitioner is the successor in
interest to the historic Yuma or Quechan tribe.

The Quechan Indians were first identified in 1700 by Father Kino, a
Jesuit priest and explorer. They were found by him in the Gila River

V3113? and at the confluence of the Gila and Colorado Rivers, which hast

been the center of their territory ever since, and where they now have a

_PeServation (Forde, Ethnog. of the'Yuma Indians, Ex. R. H. No. 68, Dkts.

31 and-37. p. 88; R. 6n and R. 93; Cl.  10, pp. 1-3).

Father Font, a Jesuit Priest, in.his diary of his second journey'to
California in 1775-1775 vividly describes the Yuma Indians on the bottom
land of the Colorado River (Forde, Ethnog. of lame lndians, pp. 9h-9?,
Cit. id.). Fray Francisco Garces made a lone visit in l?7l and the

records of the two expeditions to California under the leadership of

8 Ind. Cl. Corn. 111 117

Anza in 177k and 1775 also affords some detailed information of the
Yuma. The Yuma figure prominently in the diaries of these journeys
in fording the Colorado and the establishment of a mission at Puerto
de la Concepci’on (later Fort Yuma) and another mission at a southern
Yuma village near Pilot Knob on the present International Boundary.+_

The Spaniard Pages covered part of the Yuma territory in 1781-82
in a punitive expedition after the destruction of these missions. Fages
indicated that Yuma villages at that time extended some ten miles up the
Gila above the confluence.

Don Jose Cortez in a manuscript report of 1799 stated about three

ithousand Yuma were on the west bank of the river and extended as far

south as 330 (Forde, Ethnog. of Yuma Indians, p. 102, cit. id.).

Captain (later Major) Heintzelman, in charge of the U. S. garrison,

‘Fort Yuma, reported in 1853 on the Yuma “or Cuchan Indians" on the Colorado

and Gila Rivers. Heintzelman referred to a separate group of Indians, the
Kamya, as the "Yum.? The name invites confusion and has been dropped by

modern‘writers.

_Ives who nayigated the Colorado from.the gulf to the Mohave country
in 1857-58 attempted to delimit the Yuma tribal territory (Forde, Ethnog.
of the Yuma Indians, pp. 102-103, Cit. id.). I

These aboue mentioned accountr rompiled by C. Daryll Forde, anthro- ,
pology professor, University of London, upon completion of his field work
and library research in his “Ethnography of Yuma Indians” (1931) establishes that the Quechan Indians of Fort Yuma Reservation, corporate petitioner herein, have been identified from aboriginal times.

0

“go. Cl. Com. 111   118

6. The date of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, l8h8, was the date

::en the United States first acquired sovereienty'to any of the land in
creation by virtue of said treaty made at the oonclusion of the Mexican
7»-i{9 Stat. 922). Some of the land as herein claimed by petitioner
.each of the Gila River and east of the Colorado River was obtained by
the United States from'Nexico in the Gadsden Purchase Treaty of 1853

(10 Stat. 1031).

The defendant urges (see Defendant's Requested Findings numbered

3 through l0) that all of the lands herein claimed were once under
Spanish rule, and the Eumas being wild and irreconcilable Indians "had
no rights whatever to the soil," since they were not part of a mission
or a civilized community.

Whatever may have been the rights and legal status of the'Yuma

Indians under Spain and.Mexico, their'Indian rights of occupancy as

irecognized by'the United States continued after the sovereigntp of the

United States attached to the lands in question and became legally‘

recognizable under the long established Indian policy of the United _

States. See U. S. v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Companx, 31h U. S. 339,
31.6. ‘S h

7. The population of the Yuma Indians in l8b8'was about the same
as in Spanish times and is generally estimated at 3000 (Driver, R. 222;
C1. Ex. 10, p. 13 and p. 28; Kroeber, R. 82).

3- The Yuma and other tribes along the lower Colorado and Gila
RiV9r3 practiced a crude form of agriculture. Annual floods occurred

as a rule. After*the floods subsided the Indians would plant seeds and

8 Ind. c1. Com. 111 119

E the moisture from the flooding lasted long enough for them to grow crops

of corn, beans, pumpkins and melons. Another staple article of diet was
the mesquite bean harvested from the trees which E?€W along the mesa and
generally within about 5 miles of the river, but some mesquite grew as
far as the foot of the mountains (Forde, p. 107, 83 seq»; Driver, Re 155168, and R. 209, lines l6—2S).

The two sources of both food and nonefood needs of the Yuma tribe

dwere the river and the desert. Dr. A. L. Kroeber, former head Of the

Department of Anthropology at the University of California, petitioner's
expert, and Dr. Harold E. Driver, associate professor of anthropology,

University of Indiana, defendantis expert, both estimated the Yuma obtained

about one—half their food from the above described methods of agriculture

p3(Dr. Kroeber, R. 82, 83; Dr. Driver, R. 175). Dr. Driver's estimate was

hO% plus 16% dependence on "semikcultivated" plants which grew wild but
‘were also sown (R. 17?), especially the screw bean.

The prime source of wild plant life food was the mesquite bean
gathered from the mesquite trees which grew back from the flood plain
with roots which extended S0 to 70 feet into the ground (R. 16?). *

Construction of modern dams have greatly modified flood conditions
of the lower Colorado River country; In aboriginal times Anza reported
inundation was very extensive and the waters at flood stage spread over
a distance of half a league (about 1.32 miles) on either side of the main
stream (Forde's Ethnow. of the YuL- I iians, p. 10?). Forde also states

a few deer strayed along the cott ..od groves near the river and rabbits

burrowed in its sandy banks but that game, both large and small, were

8 Ind. Cl. Com. l"7 120

relatively scarce in this arid country of the lower Colorado and Gila
River bottoms.

Special Agent J. Ross Browne of the Interior Department wrote to
Conmissioner‘william P, Dole of Indian Affairs from Fort Yuma, Colorado
River, December 27, l863, and is quoted as follows (Pet. Ex. 10, p. 27)
with reference to Yuma subsistence on rats, frogs, mice and lizards:

Under ordinary circumstances, when the usual overflow
of the Colorado takes place, they cultivate the lowlands
in their rude way, and generally succeed in raising considerable crops of grain and vegetables. Ehese bottomlands
are light, rich and easily worked, and afford ample means
of subsistence to tribes bordering on the River. During
the past year, however, there has been no overflow and
consequently no crops have been put in by the Indians. Tb
add to their misfortune, it has been a season of such unusual
drought that the mesquite beans, berries and other wild crops
upon which they are accustomed to depend in seasons of scarcity,
have entirely failed so that they are left utterly destitute.
Their seed, wheat and beans stored for planting have long since
‘given out; and for sometime past, they have been compelled to C
subsist on rats, mice, frog§:“lizards as they can gather onnthe
deserts and the banhs of theJRifer?"-“'-'"”""'__—"""-"*_H""*__

 

   

 

9. Dr. Driver, defendant's expert, quoted the earliest report on the
Yuma Indians (Kino‘s Journey, 1699 or 1700, R. 213) as encountering their
"first Yumas at San Pedro of San Pablo, 27 leagues below San Matias. From

here to the junction of the Colorado was about 18 leagues" (h7.3l miles).

However,'before the middle of the nineteenth century, when the United States
acquired Sovereignty, their farming efforts were confined to that portion_
of the Colorado River known as the flood plains,'which extended only tent
or fifteen miles up the Gila River (Kroeber, R. 2383 Driver, R. 16h). The
defendant admits the luma occupied portions of the area claimed, at least

31938 the flood plains on the Gila and the Colorado Rivers. (See Def. Req.
Fags’ 11: 12: 13; eh and l3).

.,.».2.='-' ‘

l2l
l0. The “Great Colorado Valley“ which includes Parker Valley, Cibola
Valley and Palo Verde Valley (B. l5) was so named by Lieutenant Ives. It
runs from about Parker, Arizona, to near Picacho, California.

Lieutenant .13.. W. Wrzipple, on a Government exploration and survey
journey to the west coast reached the Colorado River from the east by
Bill Wil_l.iams Fork in 1894. While in the Chemehuevi Valley, the chief or
headman of the Chemehuevi sketched a map of the tribes on the Colorado River.
Upstream from the Gila confluence he showed the Yuma on the east side most of
the way from the Gila River to Bill wi'.l.liams Fork and on the west side opposite
the mouth of the Gila; the Chemehuevi above the Bill Williams Fork and Mohave
above the Chemehuevi. Another map sketched on the ground bjv a Yuma chief and

copied by Whipple showed, from the mouth of the Gila upstream on the Colorado,

the following tribes: The Yuma around the mouth of the Gila; then the Yavapai

 above the Yuma; the Emma again in the Great Colorado Valley; then in the same

valley above Yuma the Mohave and the Chemehuevi before reaching Bill Williams

Fork .

11. Dr. A. L. Ih~oeb€{'2 Petitioner's ezmert“; related that the Dieguena
Indians of San Diego Mission crossed over the mountains and into the great
desert south of the Salton Sea (now referred to as the Imperial Valley). The M
Kamia spoke Diegueno and the Yuma and Mohave distinguished the Dieguena and

the foreign, remote, or alien Kamia, who were those attached to the mission

or high up in the mountains. Dr. Kroeber testified his informathi was based.

upon a monograph of Kamia studies made by his colleague, Edward Gifford (R. ,

pp. 18-21).

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll D . l22

The Kamia lived in some areas of what is now the Imperial Valley
which are described in 33- 1-1. Gi.i‘i’ord‘s publication "The Kamia” (1931)
published by'the Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin 97:(l) On New
River around Indian'Nells, (2) On Alamo Slough around Brawleyg (3) At
Hatopet on the east-west course of the Alamo River ten miles south of

the Sandhills, ten miles from the Colorado River, and also at Espayan

‘opposite San Luis. Gifford pointed out that these “streams” of the

Imperial Valley; New River and Alama Slough intermittently dried up and
the Kamia habitat was “at times the west bank of the Colorado in Yuma
territory; e-a %'when they were on the Colorado they lived on the west

bank near Algodones. The Yuma held the opposite bank and were evidentky‘

 

owners of the west bank" (Cl. Ex. h, p. 12).

v12. Fray Francisco darces in l776 found the Halchadhoma (or Halchidhoma)
Indians on the Colorado River from below Palo Verde to Parker. Garces sought
to effect peace between the Halchadhoma and their enemies, the Yuma and Mohave.

Dr. Leslie Spier of the University of New Mexico in his book on the Yuman
tribes reported that sometime between 1825 and 1830 the Mohave virtually annihilated the Halchidhoma and the remnant fled and emerged with the Maricopa up the
Gila River after a sojourn in 0ld.Mexico for a few years. Dr. Kroeber placed
the probable date of the battle removing the Halchadhomas from the Colorado as
the Year l828. The exact battle location is disputed but was reported by‘
3PiOr as two miles south of Blythe (Kroeber, B. 26-30). .

Dr. Kroeber reported the Chemehuevis were a problem to anthropologists
31300 “they had some miserable land,“ were prolific and always searching for

r . _ ‘
lood. Their contacts were primarily with the Mohave. he states they‘were

8 Ind. c1. Com. :11 I 123

emigrant aliens in the area above.Blythe on the Colorado and were of no
particular concern or consequence to the Yuma (Dr- Kr0€b€T: TT- P- 55)This habitat was north of "the Yuma country."

13. Dr. Kroeber‘s map of the Indians on the Colorado River shows the
north line of the Yuma lands (Pet. Exs. 5 and 6) as identical'nith the
larger map in the Mohave case, Docket Nos. 295 and 283 COnS0lidat€d; marked
“Claimants' Exhibit No. 2" and shown thereon as "Area hC.“ The legend of
this map introduced in the Mohave cases (Dkt. Nos. 295 and 283) identifies
“Area hC" as "mainly Yuma after lB28 but containing resident Mohave and
increasing number of Chemehuevi.”

‘We conclude here, as in the Mohave cases (Dkts. 295 and 283, Fdg. 19,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219), that the above mentioned map in the Mohave cases,

; consistent with Yuma map (Pet. Ex. 3), reflects the situation.of the north

Yuma boundary. ‘We conclude here, as in the Mohave cases, that the evidence
in.this case_establishes there was beyond question some use and occupancy
of the southern part of the "Great Colorado Valley“ by the Inna Tribe.

The document entitled "Entries on MS Map of Colorado River? and allied
papers, consisting of 26 pages, marked ”Claimant‘s Exhibit'No. h" contains
brief extracts of statements of explorers and Governnent.men as to the lands
areas occupied by the Yuma Indians as “the documentary" of Dr. Kroeber's map
(d.57; Cl. Ex. h) and is concluded with a bibliography.

Agent Leihy in a letter dated October 2, l866, to Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, stated as follows (Cl. Ex. h, p. l9): .

Yumas --- (occupy) left bank of the Colorado, from
the southern boundary of the territory to about 30 miles

a above Ft. Yuma, but are concentrated mostly at Arizona
City (Yuma City), thence crossing to Ft. Inna.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 111 -_ 12h

Dr. Kroeber in his “comment” appended to this extract noted the Great
Colorado Valley began about 30 air miles or 60 miles by river from Yuma
and there is more evidence of its occupation by the Yhma in the l8SO's above
the entrance to the valley around 330 lb‘ ... than the stretch below. Six‘
miles south of La Paz by air is nearly to Ehrenberg on level with Blythe, or'
by the river perhaps halfway between the two. There are no recorded Mohave
settlements below this line though there are definite records of Yuma villages
above it in 1851 and 1856 (see Map, 01. Ex. 3}.

‘With reference to Yuma occupancy in the north portion of the claimed area

in the Great Colorado'Valley, Lieutenant Ives on his trip'by the steamer Explorer
in 1858, reported (Cl. E:. h, p. 6):
(p- 53)

b "The Yumas cultivate the better portions“ of the Great Colorado Valley %%% '
The Yumas have been consistently encountered since we
have been in this valley. They collect in knots upon the
bank to watch us pass. Their fields and villages have not
been seen from the river~a%%. Huch.bottom land, thick
growth of trees /This was written at Camp 2h, lat. 33° h8',
129 m. by river above Yuma, on l/23/S7 -- viz. 6 days or
69 m. above entry of the "Great Valley;”7

(p- Sh)

"The Yumas present a sorry appearance” with their
cast-off white clothing.

Camp 2h;r33° b8’, base of Halfway (Maria) Mts. "A
_small party‘... of Chemehuevis came into camp this evening.
ThGY'llve 1n the valley'adjoining that which we are now
traversing, but are altogether different ...

(p. 55-56) Camp 32, Beaver Isl. 1/31/S7, (about 3h° o9*?), 18 m,
below mouth of Bill'Williams Fork: "h2 m. of navigation
4131309 Cam? 2h Of 1/93/577 ... have brought us to the head
Sf the Great Colorado Valley ... The Yumas are no longer
§E0n- Our sharp—witted friends, the Chemehuevis, seen to

-Ve exclusive possession of the upper end of the valley.

“,5 attack of these "Iumas" and proceeded down river to Fort Yuma (Cl. Ex. M,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 111 1”?’

1h. Following the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (9 Stat. 922) in l8h8

by which California was ceded to the United States, large numbers of people

from the east began

the long overland journey to California. One of the

_migrant routes took the travelers over the Colorado River at Gila Junction.
Because of Indian hostilities Fort Yuma was established at this point in l85l
and reoccupied in l852 by Major Samuel P. Heintzelman. Peaceful relations
were eventually restored within the next few years with the Yuma tribe and the
Cocopah Indians who were located downstream toward the mouth of the Colorado.
In 1858 and 1859 the officials of the United States desired to open the
Colorado River to navigation. Captain Sitgreaves of the United States Engineers lead a party into the Great Colorado Valley from Zuni (New Mexico)

‘where he contacted the Mohave and at Parker reported a large but recent:

settlement of Indians represented to be Yumas. His soldiers repulsed an


-:2

H‘PP-o I-L‘-5):

Sitgreaves saw nothing of the Halchidhoma (who Garces reported

occupied a brackish, long "lake or slough at the edge of mts.,'N. of Colorado

R., a day‘s long walk; 'near‘", i. e., more than halfway to Yuma). This

H would be Laguna Palo Verde near Palo Verde according to Dr. Kroeber, (C1.

113:. 11,, p. 1.). The Halchidhoma had been driven-out in about 1828 by the

Yuma and.Mbhave.
In 18b9, two years earlier than the Ives trip, Lieutenant A. E} Whipple,

on a Government exploration and survey journey to the'Eest Coast, reached the

Colorado River from.the east by Bi1l'Uilliams Fork. The mountains opposite

.1.

the mouth of this fork were named ”Hhipple:Mountains“ “or this explorer.

Lieutenant Hhipple copied a Chemehuevi map scratched in the sand (Finding 10

-V... . .......,._,. _.._.._ ..

8 End. Cl. Corn. 111 126

Dr. Kroeber‘s Mohave informant, Tokuatha, narrating “0live Oatman's

 

Return" sets out an 1855 itinerary from.near Needles to Ft. Yuma and that
On "5ih day - to Asakuatai on W. side,_§u§a living there, gave food” (Near
Ehrenberg - Blythe 33° 30*, + or -),

15. "The Yuma Tribe occupied areas along the Colorado River in the
vicinity of Blythe and Ehrenberg at least at the time of its acquisition
by the United States.

The-Yavapai‘s occupancy or use of lands on the Colorado in the
vicinity of Picacho was only as "permissive users." The Iavapai did not
cultivate food plants and their farming of that river bottom was limited

to the invitation, seeds, and assistance of the Yuma. Then these "desert

people" went'back to their mountains after mescal, at LaPaz, Moon Mountain,.

Quartzite, Castle Dome Mountains and Khfa Mountains (Gifford, Cl. Ex. h,
p- 11:). "L

Dr, Kroeber testified that-Picacho, situated thirty air miles north
of Yuma or sixty miles up river.from Yuma, was an old established Yuma
site. He stated that Gifford in his studies of the Yavapai published a
map which brought the Yavapai down to the river on the east in this general
section. But to ascribe ownership or use and occupancy by'the Yavapai to
this area would be an erroneous conclusion because the Yavapai "when they
8°t °°mD1etely‘starved.up here (in the desert area of Arizona) they would
come down and visit their Yuma friends and get a few square meals of corn
and Pumpkins, and sometimes would say"Give us some seeds and we‘ll do a
little P1anting.'" Moreover, the Yavapai had no knouiedge of farming

save as they were sometimes shown by the Yuma. After planting these

8 Ind. 01. Com. 111 127

borrowed seeds the individual Yavapai “would then return to their mesa

and hills to hunt quail, rabbits, or whatever it was." The Yavapai visits
were only of those who individually'had friends among the Yuma (Kroe er,
R. 2h~2S).

As in their relations with the Yavapai, the Yuma likewise in
"intermittent dry'years” permitted the Kamia some usage of the Lower
Colorado below Blythe. Also the Kamia (or Dieguenos) frequented an area
to the south in the same manner at Dieguenos in Lower CM€XiC3n) C81if0Tniav
However, the weight of the evidence shows the Yuma were not only the recognized owners of the river lands between Blythe and.Fort'Yuma by all
Indians involved but actually did use and exercised exclusive control
over such lands.

16. Dr. C. Daryll Forde summarizes records of Diaz and.Alcoran

eu§(Forde's Ethnog. of Yhm Indians, p. 101) to the effect that during thee
floods of April and May the Yuma move away from the river to escape inunidation and that while these accounts did not agree in details they "indicate
the instability of occupation of any particular site."

Forde also listed the following Yuma village sites:i

(1) The site of Palma's village, one of their main settlements until
recent times about two miles northeast of Fort Yuma.

(2) The second large village, immediately south of Pilot Knob, north
of the confiuence of the Alamo stream with the Colorado across the present
International.Bounda:y.

(3) Another settlement of considerable size at the present site of

Laguna Dam on the California side.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. ii. V ' I - 128

(h) Another village, whose name is for-ggott-en, a little east of the
present 5 ts of Picacho at the foot of the Chocolate Mountains.

For-de points out that while Lieutenant Ives reported the Yuma were
concentrated in the country ten to :£‘i_‘E‘teen miles to the north and to the
south of Fort Yuma, that Yuma viHages were found at intervals all the
"..9a;.r up to Half Way Mountain, about 135 miles north of the Yuma confluence
"but that from Ehrenberg to Parker was occupied exclusively by Chemehuevi."

Forde, in apparent comparison of Ives l8S8 reports to the 18th and

19th century reports of the Spaniards that the Yuma were situated near the

Gila confluence remarked:

These accounts do not necessarily maggerate the
territory then occupied by the Yuma, for a shift of
population had occurred in the preceding years. The
remnants of two tribes (Kohuana and Halchidhoma) occupying the valley around and north of the present site
ofliiirenberg moved east to join the Maricopa -2«:--::-:::-. After
being harried many years by Yuma and Mohave raiding parties
they moved off eastward the Halchidhoma going first, before
the arrival of the American ezmlorers. v This evacuation of
the wide valley south of Bill ‘afilliams Fork was apparently

503-lowed by a considerable north:-Iard extension of Yuma
settlements. ‘

One-'oi' these northern villages I-13.3 called avi‘kuotapai.
It was some distance south of Parker on the California side.

Steven }(g,'lle3r's father lived there (p. 103, Forde's Ethnog.
of Yuma Indians). ~ — ..

17. Forde also relates in his Ethnography of Ymna Indians (p. ll? )

. " ° ‘ o In 0 ' I
that tobacco was obtainable in small quantities where it grew wild near

the mesa edge" but that the imported tobacco of the Kam3,r’a and Akwa’ala

was preferred.

Defendant‘s expert, Dr. Harold Driver, upon the possibility of the

C 1 r. . H J.
3 Comucho hountains as a tobacco source, sta ted as follows (R. l?2,

1135 23 to P. 173, line 3):

8 Ind. Cl. Corn. 113. 729

-L.

I read everything I eould find on the Yuma, 30 some
references, and I found no specific localities mentioned
west of the river other than the Calccmucho 2~1ounteins
which are about 10 or at most 15 miles from Fort Yuma,
northwest, where Castetter and Bell say they may have
gathered wild tobacco because the species they smoke is
found there. So it is not a firm statement but it seems
likely and it is close enough.

el8. Dr. A. L. Kroeber, pe.itioner’s expert, upon exarrdnation of
Gifford and other sources, concluded that the Imperial Valley was "actually

used and occupied by the Kamai“ (R. 102, line 25).

ID

19. Dr. Driver‘ stated that he was not aware of any evidence to the

effect the Yumas ever used the Chocolate Mountains (R. 23h).



This witness further stated he was aware of no evidence of Yuma occupancy of the sand dunes in the United States portions (R. 231;). Forde lists

an aboriginal settlement a little east of Picacho "at the foot of the (Arizona)

 v__‘Chocolate Mountains" (p. 102, Forde's Ethn. of Yuma Indians). Also Kroeber's

 description of the Chemehuevi Chiefs‘ map shows this area as Yuma lands (Pet.

Ex. 1:. 1:. 2h).

20. There is no substantial evidence in the record to show that the

Yuma occupied, farmed or otherzvise used any of that land on the Gila River
farther than about fifteen miles above its confluence with the Colorado River,

save and except periodic trips made by armed bands of Yuma Indians to Metate

Mountain or Antelope Hill "to break out" slabs for -grinding stones (R. 161;165).

This activity constituted a use of such land and was a necessary and

essential part of Yuma life.

Dr. Kmeber conceded that along the Lower Gila there was always danger
of a raid from the Maricopa and the Kavel-chadom (1-Ialchidhoma) so that when

the Yuma went to Antelope Hill for slab to use as gr;2.nd:1_ng stone that it

. ...-...-..4..-.-.«.-up-u ....-v¢-- - 8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll 130
‘was necessary to travel as an armed band (B. 2h§). He further stated
“there is no question that in the first half of the 19th century there
was a more oriless depopulated stretch along the lower Gila. I don't
mean it was not owned but nobody lived there.”

Since the only evidence of any use of the Gila area above the farm
land at the confluence was the use of metate slab from Antelope Hill, we
have defined the Yuma boundary short of the Mohawk Range; iThe fact that
an armed party was essential for protection against their enemies does not
alter or negate the fact that such usage oi Antelope Hill was made by the
Yuma Tribe (Drivet, Re 16h; D8POSition Stephen Kelly, Pet. Ex. 9, p. l3),

21;" The Commission finds, based on the findings of fact herein made

‘and the record as a whole, that petitioner, The Quechan Tribe of the Fort

Yuma heserration of California, at the time said lands were acquired bg
the United States by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in l8h8 and in the
Gadsden Purchase of 1853, aboriginally used and occupied the following‘
described land: '

Beginning at a point midstream of the Colorado River,
near Pilot Knob, and constituting the most easterly point
of the International Boundary Line between the State of
California and the Republic of Mexico; thence west along
said line to the point of its intersection with the east
edge of the Sand dunes; thence north along the western edge
of the Calcomucho'Mountains; thence northwest across the
mesa and the Chocolate Mountains to the point on Arroyo
Seco where several tributaries join the main channel; thence
east by northeast, to the northwest point of the Palo Verde
Mountains; thence northeast to a poing eight miles north of
glythe, California (along the Yuma boundary shown on map,
‘Plf. #5", drawn in red pencil by Dr. Kroeber to the point
of Maria Mountains); thence southeast to the short turn
in the river about three miles northwest of Blythe; thence
due east, to the crest of Dome Rock Mountains; thence generally'south to southeast along the crest of Trige Mountains;

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll . 131

thence generally souuiwest along the crest of the Chocolate
Mountains of.Arizona along a curved line to a point about
five miles east of where the river bends south downstream.
from Picachiog thence southeast to Muggins Mountains; thence
east by southeast to the mouth of that Arroyo, located about
6 miles east of Antelope Hill on the Gila River; thence
southeast and upstream along the channel of said Arroyo for
a distance of ten miles from the Gila River; thence west by
southwest along a slightly curved line on the crest of the
Gila Mountains to the point of intersection of the ArizonaMexiean Boundary with the Colorado River; thence generally
northward, along the Colorado River to place of beginning.

The_acreage as contained within the above described
boundary shal1.be reduced in the amount of acreage, if any,
as may'be determined "reservation lands" of this petitioner
in its claim, Docket No. 320.

(Reference, for convenience, is made to the map marked
"Plf. #5.” The above defined boundary varies with the Yuma
boundary as drawn in red pencil on said.map by'Dr. Kroeber
in two areas. The west'boundary varies from.Dr. Kroeber's
between the southern end oi the Sand.Hill5 to the Palo Verde"
Mountains. The southeastern boundary varies from Huggins‘
Mountains to the Arroyo channel's intersection with the Yuma

south boundary, some 12 miles southeast of Antelope Hill).g

22. (a) No treaty was made'between the United States and the Yuma tribe
for the purpose of'extinguishing the Indian title in said tribe to the lands
it exclusively used and occupied. The lands found herein to have been exclusively used and occupied by the Yuma were located in what-are new the

2.‘!

States of California and Arizona.

. (b) California was admitted to the Union.by the.Act of September 9,
1850 (9 Stat. hS2). On.March 3, 1851, the Congress passed "an Act to Ascertain
and Settle the Private Land Claims in the State of California" (9 Stat. 631).

Section 8 of the Act provided::

... hat each and every'person claiming lands in
California by'virtue of any right or title derived from

the Spanish.or Mexican Government, shall present the
same to the said Commissioners, sitting as a board are

8 1nd. Cl. Com. lll ’ ' 132

Section l3 of this Act further provided:
..e all lands, the claims to which shall not have been

presented to the said commissioners within two years after

the date of this Act, shall be deemed, held, and considered

as a part of the public domain of the United States; %%%w

The claim here asserted is for lands aboriginally used and occupied

by petitioner's predecessors in interest. It is not a claim based upon

any right or chain of title derived from the Spanish or Mexican governments,

and therefore, was not required'by such act to be presented to the com-,
missioners for confirmation.

Nevertheless, this 1851 Act, by virtue of the provisions of said
Section 13, declared such California land, including that portion which

is described in Finding 21 above, to be "public domain of the United States‘;

effective March 3, 1853. The effect of this provision constituted anaoffis _

cial taking of that portion of Yuma lands situated on the California side
of the'Colorado river and the Indian title to same was thereby extinguished
bF’the 1351 Act of Congress.

23- The Indian title to lands of the Yuma Tribe on the Arizona side
of the Colorado River, as are described and found by this Commission to
have been exclusively used.and occupied by the Yuma Tribe, were not extinguished.unti1 after the Yuma lands in California were declared public
domain effective March 3, 1853.

An Act of July 22, 1851; (lo stat. 308) established the Office of ‘
Surveyor General of New Mexico, and required him.to make a report of all
claims °ri8inating under laws of Spain and Mexico to lands in the territ°KY Of New Mexico. (The territory of Arizona was separated from that

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll - 133

pof New Mexico February h, 1863, 12 Stat. 66h). This l8Sh Act merehy

required the Surveyor General "to report” to Congress and did not
constitute a method for extinguishment of Indian title, as distinguished
from the 1851 Act concerning California lands (see U. S. v. Santa Fe Pao.

R. R. Co., 318 U. S. 339 at pp. 351, 352).

8As recited in footnote 7, page 352 of said opinion, Superintendent

' Poston of Arizona Territory held a council in 186k attended'hy the principal chiefs and.headmen of the Yumas, Mohaves, Yapapais, Hualapais and

Chemehuevis. Superintendent Post proposed to this Council that a reservation for the Colorado River Tribes be made by means of a petition to

to Congress.

Congress established the Colorado River Reservation.by.Act of March 3,

p;“gl86§ (13 Stat. 559). Many of the Mohave Indians accepted this offer of the

8dg§%overnment, and.moved onto the reservation (see Fdgs. 15 and 2S(c), Docket

Nos. 283 and 295 Consolidated Mohave cases v. U. S., 7 Ind. Cls. Com. 219).

   

However, the Yuma refused to accept this offer of the Government to_
share in such reservation, as reported.by'the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
1871. sThe Annual.Repo8t of 1871 contained a letter to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs dated.August 22, l871, from.Superintendent Bendell, who noted
(pp. 3h8, 351) their refusal as follows:

Tis tribe (Yuma) range in and about Arizona City. The
' Government of late years has given little or no attention to
ltheir condition. I have frequently invited their chief
(Pascual) to visit me, but he has declined in every instance.
The bulk of the tribe remain in their rancheros, and gain a 8
subsistence by planting and cutting wood for the steamers
plying on the Colorado River %%%. They will not go to the

Colorado reserve and are satisfied where they are. (Pet. nx. 10,
is p. 31; underscoring supplied).

8 ind» Clo  111 I - I II ‘I 

The Annual Report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the
following year, 1872, recited the same doleful state of “the Ynmas." i"’
They consistently refused to move onto the reservation occupied by some
500 of the Mohaves_and remained in dwindling numbers, gaining a scanty"
snbsistence'hy planting, chopping wood for steamers on the river andg
performing menial tasks for whites. “They had no treaty with the
Government and received but little assistance from the Government" (Pet.
Exf:l0, p. 32). The Government waited thirty years to assign any reservation lands in “the Yuma country“ for petitioner tribe.

.'2h; In September l8Sh Special Agent Harvey had advised "that a Reservation (for the Etna) be made at once and surveyed" (Pet. Ex. 10, p. 2b).
However, during the next thirtyjrears following Harvey’s letter there was
no acceptance by, or "removal of, the Emma Tribe to any reservation. ‘

The intrusion of whites in large numbers through the heart of “the'
’Yhma country” had.begun soon after the Treaty'of Guadalupe Hidalgo in l8h8,
which was the same year gold was discovered in the Sacramento Valley; A
IHincipal.wagan trail to California crossed the Colorado River near Fort
lhma. A ferry was established across the Colorado hiver in March l8h9 and
conducted an iznmediate thriving business over the active resistance of the
Yuma (Pet. en. 10, p. 12, ‘Arizona Archives_.,.$Doo. No. 58,925’).

The Yuma “have killed at least one hundred Americans since l8h9“ wrote
3Pccial AgentiHarvey'in.his letter of September l8§h forwarded by Colonel
Thomas I. Henley3 Superintendent of Indian Affairs to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs. Harvey described “frequent distarbances with the emigrants,

the stock of the emigrants getting into their {Yams} fields" (Cl. Ex. 10,

p. 2b).

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll , 135

.Although the “chiefs and headmen of Yuma” attended the conference

of Superintendent Poston in l86h of the Colorado River tribes, which
conference resulted in the establishment of the Colorado Indian Reservation by Act of Congress the following March, 1855 (see Fdg. 23 above),
it seemed apparent to George‘N. Leihy, Superintendent of Indian Affairs,
Arizona Territory, that the Yuma Tribe would not remove themselves

from their flood plains on to such reservation situated miles up river
from their ancestral lands.

Superintendent Leihy, in a letter addressed to D. N Cooley, Commissioner of Indian Affairs and dated January 2h, l866, urgently propounded the question of the deteriorating status of the‘Iuma Tribe in
their rights to their historic lands and'whether the Government intended
to abandon protection of the Yuma Tribe to their lands. The concluding

part of Leihy‘s letter reads as follows (Pet, Ex. 10, p. 29):

%*%-Tb obviate difficulties, to protect the rights
of the Indians, and for the satisfaction of the settlers,
I‘would most respectfully'submit to the department the
following question. Does the department regard the unceded
lands, those to which.Indian title has not been+extinguished

i*aevfIndian country?" If Yes, what are the instructions of

the department concerning its government, etc.?

I A decision.upon this point is growing daily more impor- S.

tant, as settlers are rapidlx locating the few spots suitable

for cultivation, and upon which the Indians for centuries

have depended for subsistence.‘

The westward movement of American.emigrants through Yuma lands at

first constituted only a trespass or interference with the Yuma Indians

J

8 Ind. Cl. Com. lll‘ *l36

in the enjoyment and use of their lands. These trespasses we're" soon
followed by actual disposses sion of the Yuma from their best subsistence
land on the flood plains by white settlers".

On January'9, l88h, President Ch€Sb€T A. Arthur by executive order
cancelled a similar order of the preceding -year and on the ‘California
side of the Colorado provided for a "reserve for Yumas" now known as
"Fort Yuma ‘Reservation of California" (Royce , p. 9110.

25. Defendant maintains that H "the record fails to disclose one
scintilla of- ‘evidence of any ‘taking’ of lands from petitioner by
defendant" (Der. Br., p. 310.

-'11'ne petitioner contends "the times when and the transactions in
which said lands‘ were taken are urlknotrm to the petitioner but ‘known. to
the defendant, and have not yet been determined or agreed upon" (Pet.
B:-., p. 10; Reg. Fdg. 13).

The Yuma Tribe had lost the possession of much of its more

valuable agricultural -tracts of land in Arizona to the land-hungry

L settlers long before their Indian title was extinguished in Arizona

by any official act of the United States (see extract of Superintendent
Leihy's letter, Finding 21;).

26. The removal of the l'uma'Tribe to the reservation set aside

Q

for them in President Arthur's exeeuti':«"e order of January 9, l88h (Royce,
P- 911:) is found to be a relinquislment as of that date of tribal rights

in lands outside that reserve» In View of the long standing attempt to

‘ ;-=.
1:?» "3 I I.l«‘.f
“tf§y§;?éI‘

8 Inc}... Cl. Com. ll. 137

settle the Yuma problem by placing them on a reservation, their acceptance
of the reserve established in 188i; is the equivalent to alrelease of any
tribal &ghts in lands outside the reservation. The United States extinguished In5._ian% title to the l'uma lands in _a:::.zena in the establishment

of this reservation, and by removal of the Yuma Tribe to same.

EDGAR E; WI TT who
Chief Commissioner

WI“. M. HOLT
Associate Commis sioner

Associate Commissioner Arthur V. Watkins
takes no part in making the above Findings
of Fact because the has only recently
become a member of this Commission.

