BEFORE TEE II-TDI.%.N CL-E11-‘IS CO1-.‘?:E[SSION

THE ICW-‘. TRIBE or TEE IO.~I.i‘-. azasaav;-:31 01»:
IN 1<.::.Ns.z=.s mo NEBP.-QSKA , TEE IO.-IA TRIBE
or me Icm Hssaavn :::o:.~: IN oKL:=.aoa=._ , et
al. , THE sac nap FOX TRIBE or I:-tom:

01? oxxaaoz-a , THE sac no) FOX 'r:-1133 or
MISSOURI, AND sac .5;I\.‘*D FOX TREE or
I-IISSISSIPPIIN IOAIA, et al. ,

Petitioners, Docket No, l3 5

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF Al-ZERICA,

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
Defendant. )
Decided: July 2, l9_58
Appearances:

Elroy 0. Jones and Brian Sullivan,

Attorneys for Iowa Tribe, Kansas
and Nebraska

Stanford Clinton, Attorney for
Sac and Fox Tribe, I-‘Iissouri

Nicholas C. English and Godfrey K.

Preiser, Jr., Attorneys for Iowa
Tribe , Oklahoma

Lawrence C. Mills, Attorney for
Sac and Fox of the I-‘Iississippi

George B. Pletsch, Attorney for

Curtis C. Shears, with whom ‘was
Sac and Fox Tribe, Oklahoma

Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant.
OPINION OF THE CO1‘-El-E[SSIOIxT

Witt. Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petitioner, the Iowa Tribe or Nation of Indians and the member

petitioners thereof, and the petitioner, the Sac and Fox Nation and the

member petitioners thereof, seek additional compensation for their

interests in those lands which each petitioner ceded to the defendant,

United States, under separate but substantially identical treaties.
Both treaties were concluded on August 1+, 1821'. in the City of
Washington, D. C. , and under each treaty the defendant took a cession with one exception of all the right, title, and interest of the
respective petitioners to the same, lands located in north central and
northeastern Missouri. (7 Stat. 229, 231) Officially these lands are
designated Royce 69 and l20, a more complete description of which is
set out in Commission's Finding 4.

The exception referred to above is found in that treaty concluded with the Sac and Fox Nation ( 7 Stat. 229) , whereby the United
States reserved to the Sac and Fox Nation for the use and benefit of
the Sac and Fox half -breeds the entire area included within Cession

20. This relatively small area is generally referred to as the “Halfbreed" tract, and will be discussed in more detail in disposing of the
petitioner Sac and Fox claims.

Of prime concern at this stage of the hearing are the respective
claims of the petitioners that each had perfected aboriginal Indian
title and/ or recognized title to all the lands involved herein, or at
least to defined portions thereof. The capacity Of each 05 the Petitioner claimants is also in issue. The Commission looks upon the
petition filed herein as one stating separate and distinct claims,
since the petitioner's predecessors ceded their lands under separate
treaties, and each petitioner has chosen to establish its title to
separate portions thereof.

We shall first consider the claims of recognized title, noting

ehat each petitioner bases his claim on a different theory.

Prior decisions of the courts and this Commission have established the principle that Congress is the sole source of “recognized”
or reservation title, so that when Congress acts whether by treaty,
statute or agreement, it accords legal rights to those Indians who

previously held their lands under permissive occupation. (Tee—Hit—

Ton Indians of Alaska v, United States, 3&8 U.5. 272; Hzges V. Grimes

Packing cemeagg, 337 13.8. 86; The Miami Tribe, get 2.1. v. United States
5 Ind. Cls. Comm. 180)  

Since recognized or reservation title is a legislative product,
the answer to the present question calls for a legal determination as
contrasted with proof of aboriginal title which involves primarily
a question of fact. In.any event, should petitioners‘ claims of
recognition prevail, it would dispose of the present controversy over
title and dispense with the question of aboriginal use and occupanqy.

The Commission has thoroughly considered the respective claims
of recognized title as ably presented by the Iowa and Sac and Fox
petitioners, and finds them to be without merit.

Briefly, the petitioner Iowa arguesthat by virtue of certain
language in the Prairie du Chien Treaty of 1825 (7 stat. 272) in
"which the Sac and Fox.Indians agreed that the "Ioways“ would "have
a just claim.to a portion of the country between the'bounda:y line,

described in the next preceding article, and the Missouri and Mississippi . . . ." and ”. . . . the United States agree to and recognize

the preceding boundaries . . . .", the United States recognized title

to be jointly in the Sac and Fox;and Iowa Indians to the entire area

6 498

8

Eng south of the "Sioux and Sac and Fox" line between the Missouri
and Mississippi Rivers, which includes the area designated as Cession
69.

This argument, of course, ignores the plain fact that the Iowa
petitioner had already ceded any interest it had in Cession 69 one
year before the Prairie du Chien Treaty, and that the stated purpose
of the Prairie du Chien.Treaty of 1825 called for the establishment of
distinct tribal boundaries upon unceded Indian lands. In this connection the two treaty Commissioners, Lewis Cass and William.Clark,
in a letter to the Secretary of'War, dated September I, 1825, stated:

Wde had nothing to ask of them . . . . neither the confirmation of old or the grant of new cessions. . . ."
(Sac and Fox Ex. 104) '

Of interest in connection with the Prairie du Chien Treaty of
225 is an excerpt from.the records of the Bureau of Indian.affairs
dated January 9, I837, which indicates that the Government viewed the
joint Iowa-Sac and Fox;claim.under the 3rd Article of the treaty extended southward between the'Hissouri and Mississippi Rivers to the
Yissouri state line which coincides with the north boundary line of
Cession 69.
This excerpt reads in part:
"The Sac and Fox_are one nation and jointly with the Icways,

claim.an interest in.the lands north of the State of'Hissouri
. . . . . The claim of the Ioways to a portion of this tract
‘was admitted by the Sacs and Foxes in the 3rd Article of the

treaty with them and other tribes of the 19th of.August l825

. . . . .” (Iowa Ex. 12?)

Later, in l842, T. Hartley Crawford, Commissioner of Indian
Affairs,stated uneqpivocally in discussing the Prairie du Chien

reaty of 1825.

"This treaty attached ownership of the Sacs and Foxes and
Ioways to all the land south of the line fixed by the treaty
of 1825 between the Sioux and Sacs and Foxes, North of the
Northern boundary of the State of Missouri as that line then
existed, and between the Mississippi and Missouri rivers.”
(Underscoring supplied) (Sac and Fox Ex. l2l)

 

Also of interest is a letter of April 12, l83£ from.Andre Hughes
to Lewis Cass in which he states:

"The Ioways, Sacs and Foxes of the Missouri river desire to

cede to the United States a large tract of land.lying west

of the river Desmoines and north of and adjoining the State

of'R&ssouri . . . ." (Iowa Ex; 119)

In order to sustain the petitioner's Iowa claim of recognition
it is necessary to declare null and void the Iowa Treaty of 1824,
and thus effectively erase the boundary lines describing the ceded
area therein. This we are not disposed to do in the absence of strong
definitive language in the Prairie du Chien Treaty, or any other treaty
or statute, which would point us in that direction. In fact the Prairie
du Chien Treaty of 1825 makes no mention or reference to the Iowa Treaty
of l824.

The petitioner Sac and Fox.Nation seeks to impress a reservation
title upon the ceded lands involved in this proceeding'by virtue of the
language contained in.the opening statement in article 2 of the Sac and

Fox:Treaty of l804 (7 Stat. 84)'which reads:

“The general boundary line between the lands of the said
Indian tribes (Sac and Fox) shall be as follows: . . . .”

There then follows a description setting out the boundaries of the
ceded area. The petitioner Sac and Fox alleges that by implication

this language constitutes a recognition by the United States that title

6 5ooi_

the unlimited area lying outside and adjacent to the ceded portion
rests in the Sac and Fox Ration.

Generally speaking, we know that the setting of boundary lines
in a treaty of cession is somewhat arbitrary. The Government‘s main
concern in establishing these lines is to be doubly'sure that every
conceivable claim asserted by the Indians, regardless of merit, is
included within the ceded area; so that it is qyite immaterial what
portion of the ceded area the Indians may have exclusively occupied
and controlled as long as it passes under the terms of the treaty.

‘What the petitioner Sac and Fox.Nation is now urging upon us

is nothing more than the converse of the old recognition argument

advanced and rejected by the Commission in case of'The Quapaw Tribe of
Indians, et al. V. United States, (I Ind. Cls. Comm. #09). In that case
.ae Quapaw unsuccessfully'argued that the setting of boundary lines in

a treaty of cession is recognition by the United States of the Indian’s

title to the ceded area.

The Commission therefore rejects as untenable the petitioner's
Sac and Fox.claim.of recognition to Cession 69 or any portion thereof
and concludes that there is no language in the Sac and Fox:Treaty of
1804, or any'other treaty or statute, which would demonstrate a Congressional intent to award to the Sacs and Foxes in 180k a greater
interest in their unceded lands than in those lands which passed under
the treaty of cession.

Before turning our attention to those claims founded upon aboriginal use and occupancy, this commentrmnrte in order. By virtue of

6 501

the Louisiana Purchase of April 30, 1803 (8 Stat. 200), the United
States acquired from France, subject to the present Indian right of
Occupancy, a vast expanse of territory which includes the lands in
controversy. The bulk of evidence introduced by the petitioners in
support of their claim of title cites events occurring just. prior

to and subsequent to the 1803 date; As we view the evidence in this
case, the 1803 date is critical to the issue of aboriginal title,
since, in the absence of government recognition (which we have just
rejected), these Indians were powerless to increase their aboriginal
holdings after 1803. Therefore, each petitioner must satisfy the
Commission that it owned in Indian fashion the claimed subject lands
or any portion thereof as of 1803,  that it reasonably mintained

such ownership until the treaties of cession in 1823+.

The petitioner, the Iowa Nation of Indians, comprises two tribes,
petitioner, Iowa Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in Kansas and Nebraska
and the petitioner, Iowa Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in Oklahoma.
Each of these tribes is an identifiable group of Indians residing
within the territorial Limits of the United States, and both are the
successors in interest to Iowa Nation of Indians which participated in
the Iowa Treaty of August 1-I-, 18211», and as such are entitled to institute the present action against the United States for and on behalf
of the Iowa Nation of Indians and all its members pursuant to the
provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act. (60 Stat. 1049)

The Iowa Nation of Indians, one of the "Chiwere" groups of the

Sioux linguistic stock with a close affinity to the Oto and I-Iissomri

6 502...nd_ians originally came from east of the Mississippi. Early reports
place the Iowa in the late seventeenth century around the Lake
Okeboji region in Northwestern Iowa and southwestern I-Bnnesota.
Sometime around the middle of the eighteenth century they departed
this area and moved in a southerly direction down the Missouri River
into the southwestern part of Iowa where they established a village
just south of the present city of Council Bluffs, Iowa, From this
village site, which is located northwest of Cession 69, . the Iowa
hunted the area southward along the Missouri Pdver and east toward
the western boundary of Cession 69. During this period this same
area, which for the most part lies west and north of Cession 69,
was utilized for hunting purposes by other Indian tribes such as the
Omaha or Mahas, the Otoes and Nissouris.

Sometime between 1755 and l'?65 the Iowa Nation abandoned the
village site at Council Bluffs, and moved slowly eastward across
the southern part of Iowa to the Mississippi River, where eventually
it chose to settle at a more permanent village site on the Des Moines
River approximately 120 miles from the mouth of the Des Moines. This
village lying north of Cession 69 is the best documented of all the
Iowa village locations and the one which remained a principal Iowa
village site during the years that followed until about 1823.

Two principal. factors are attributed to the general exodus of
the Iowa Nation from the Council Bluffs area. In the first place,
the Iowas were being constantly harassed by their inveterate enemies

from the north, the war.-like Sioux, who were pressing from the northern

6 503

plains and conducting extended forays into the western part of Iowa.
Of greater moment was the fact that the Iowas desired closer contact with their Spanish and French'traders'whose operations were
centered primarily in St. Louis. with the rapid growth of Indian
trading activity, those tribes, including the Iowas,'who inhabited
this region became more dependent for the simple necessities of
life upon what they could barter with furs and skins. Thus, the
period throughout the latter part of the l700's and into the
nineteenth centu:y"was marked by an awesome exploitation of many

choice hunting grounds coupled with bloody and indecisive fights

among competing tribes in search for new and more fertile hunting spots.

Having adapted themselves to the use of the horse, the Iowas
hunted extensively west and southwest of their Des Hnines River location across_the southern part of Iowa to the Missouri and down into
their old Council Bluffs hunting grounds, and.in the plains between
the Grand and Chariton Rivers toward their headwaters. These hunting forays frequently carried them.into the northwestern portions of
Cession 69. They'continued to hunt in this area into the 1800's even
after the United States acquired title to the entire area in the
Louisiana Purchase of l803. However, the bulk of Iowa hunting
activity during this period was north and.west of Cession 69,
principally'in the southern and southwestern part of Iowa.

At the outbreak of the'War of l8l2 with Great Britain, the
United States, through the offices of william.Clark, Governor of
this territory, invited the Iowas, as well as the Sac and Fox:Indians,

to leave theirimississippi and Des Hoines River sites, and travel

outh and west across to the Missouri River. The obvious purpose

of Clark‘s move was to place these Indims outside of the scope of
British influence and separate them from their pro-English brethern.
Shortly thereafter, the Iowas temporarily removed from their Des
Moines River site and filtered down to the south and southwest toward the Missouri River. Thus, we begin to find first reference

to new Iowa village locations principally on the Grand River within
Cession 69. The first of these apparently was established, but only

temporarily, in l8l6, its exact whereabouts being unknov . Other

members of the Iowa nation moved across to the Missouri where they

joined with the Otoes and the Missouris. With the influx Of these

Indians into Cession 69, there developed agitation and hostility between the red men and the white settlers who were spotted along both
sides of the Missouri. River west of the Mississippi. Roving bands
of Iowas and Sac and Fox found occasion to renew hostilities with
the Osage. It was not until after the War of l8l2 that the Iowas,
who were now greatly divided, began to reassemble as a nation. Around

1820 they were reported back at their old Des Moines River site but

then abandoned it and built a new village on the Grand River in 1823
where the whole nation was reported to be living at one time. After
negotiating the Treaty of August 1:, l82?+, the Iowas remained within
Cession 69 only a short period and in 1827 they finally moved to a
new village site on the Little Platte River, west of Cession 69.
Throughout the period of their known history, the estimated population of the Iowa Nation rarely exceeded 1,000 persons.

5 505

Considering the resume of the Iowa History and movement during
the critical period in this case as set out above and as supported in
more detail by the Commission's Findings 7 thru ILL, we find that the

evidence in this case does not justify the extent of petitioner's

the
Iowa claim to those lands situated in/western half of Cession 69.

Instead, we find that at the time the United States acquired the
area in controversy in the Louisiana Purchase of 1803 and up to the
time of the Iowa Treaty of August 14-, 182+, the Iowa Nation held a
good Indian title to those lands situated in the northwestern portion
er Cession 69 as described in the Commission's Finding 15.

The petitioner, Sac and Fox Nation, or Confederated Sac and Fox,
is composed of three tribes or bands who are petitioners herein.
They are, the Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, The Sac and
Fox Tribe of Missouri, and the Sac and Fox Tribe of Mississippi in
Iowa. Beach petitioner tribe or band is adequately represented by
individual member petitioners, and each tribe or band is an identifiable group of Indians living within the territorial limits of the
United States, and all are the successors in interest to all the
tribes ar& groups of the Confederated Sac and Fox who participated

in the Sam and Fox Treaty of August 1+, 1821:», and, as such, are entitled to maintain this present action against the United States for
and on beihalf of the Sac and Fox Nation or Confederated Sac and Fox

and all its members , pursuant to the provisions of the Indian Claims

Commissioin Act. (60 Stat. 959)

Orig_:i.nally the Sac and Fox Nation consisted of two separate and

identifiable tribes of Indians belonging to the Algonquin stock.

650o’

Around 1735, due to their mutual hostility and conflict with the
French, they formed a close and intimate alliance, politically and
socially, so that from thence forward they have been dealt with and
referred to as a single nation both in their relationship with the
other Indian tribes and in treaty negotiations and other matters with

the United States.

It was shortly after this merger that the members of the Sac and
Fox Nation began to establish themselves in Iowa. They maintained
for many years and on into the 1800's several separate but permanent
villages constructed dong and on both sides of the Mississippi River,
from as far up as the Prairie du Chien and Turkey River area, to as far
down as the mouth of the Des Moines River in Cession l20. For the
most part the Fox Indians occupied the upper villages and the Sec
Indians the lower villages, including the small village near the mouth
of the Des Hoines River. The principal Sac and Fox village sites during this period were located on the Rock River which is considerably
north of the lands in controversy. Auguste Chouteau places the establishment of the Rock River location as l76l+, while first references to
the Sac village on the Des Moines River occur around l780. All of
these village sites are confirmed in subsequent reports, and in 1810
Debulon Pike sets them out specifically in a report on his 1805
Mississippi River expedition. (See Commission's Finding I9)

During the War of l8l2 with Great Britain, those members of the

Sac and Fox Nation, who claimed allegiance to the cause of the United

States departed their Mississippi River villages, and began to move

6 507‘ 1

down into Cession 69, There, during the years that followed, they
were located at various places, and at times in the company of the
Iowas. Reports have placed them on the Salt, Missouri, Osage, Grand
and Chariton Rivers. Best estimates as to the termination date of
the Sac Des Moines River village fall within the period of 1821 to
1833, when after abandoning this location, the Sacs resettled on the
Iowa River.

Having established their villages on the Mississippi around

1760, the Sac and Fox began to hunt the adjacent area on both sides
of the river from as far north as Prarie du Chien to as far south as
the mouth of the lllinois River. The principal hunting grounds of
the Sac Indians west of the Mississippi River stretched southward
below the Des Moines River to the Missouri River, and includes
generally the northeastern part of Cession 69 and all of Cession 50.
Cession 50 lies immediately east of Cession 69 and west of the
Mississippi, and embraces all those lands which were ceded to the
United States by the Sac and Fox Treaty of 1809+ (7 Stat. 81+).

The evidence contains many references to the Sac and Fox hunting

in this vicinity which show consistent use from about 1780 to at
least l8lO. Black Hawk, the intrepid Sac and Fox warrior, was
quite specific in stating that the "Two Fiver" country during this
period was the choice hunting ground of his people. This reference

points to the northeastern part of Cession 69.
DEE the entire period in which the Sac and Fox inhabited

this Mississippi River area, they found themselves involved in

6 508

‘__,‘¢,',L‘,.",.I_¢li

6- 509

rpetual warfare with their Osage neighbors from the South, who had
their villages just below the Iiissouri River outside of Cession 69.
Black Hawk, in his biography, speaks of his many engagements with the
Osages who were a constant threat to the Sac and Fox hunting grounds.
This habitual agitation and fighting between these two nations created
a veritable “no man's" land of southeast Cession 69 and the southern
portion of Cession 50 until at least 1808, when the Osage Nation by
treaty ceded to the United States all its right, title, and interest
to those lands north of the Missouri River (7 Stat. I07).

After l8lO the Sac and Fox hunting grounds adjacent to the I-Eississippi

River became so depleted that the quest for new and more productive areas
compelled these Indians to extend their hunting expeditions over great

distances west and northwest to the headwaters of the Grand and Chariton
nivers , and even further north to the headwaters of the Des I'=£oines and
Iowa Rivers. Because of the hazards and hardships involved, many of
these Indians, particularly the Foxes, abandoned these long treks and
concentrated on mining lead at their mines near Dubuque, Iowa.

In the years that followed the close of the War of 1812, and up
until the Sac and Fox Treaty of l82’~I», this Nation, can only be pictured
as a wandering nomadic group, scattered in all directions, and challenging the other Missouri River Indians f or control of the few remaining hunting areas near the Missouri River and its northern tributaries.

During the period in question, the best population estimates
of the combined Sac and Fox tribes range between 4,400 and 6,500

persons.

The Commission therefore concludes from all the evidence and
the facts as set out in the Commission‘s Findings 18 thru 22, that,
at the tine the United States acquired the area in controversy by

virtue of the Louisiana. Purchase of l803, and up to the time of the
Sac and Fox Treaty of 1824, the Sac and Fox Nation held Indian title
to those lands situated in the northeastern part of Cession 69 as
described in the Comm:Lssj_on‘s Finding 23,

Finally, we shall dispose of the title question surrounding
Cession l20, the aforementioned "Half-breed" tract. While the
petitioner, Iowa Nation, disclaims any interest concerning Indian
title to these lands, the petitioner, Sac and Fox, is asking this
Commission to treat these lands as part and parcel of Cession 69 insofar as determining the question of title. We feel, however, that

in accord with the plain and unequivocal language of the Sac and Fox

Treaty of 1821+ coupled with subsequent Congressional action, the question of Indian title has been determined. (Commission's Finding 21+)
Under the terms of the Treaty of 18211!’ a reservation was giyen

outright to the Sac and Fox half-breeds, and this reserve was never
ceded back or purchased by the United States, although requested to
do so by the Sac and Fox. Instead, Congress by the act of June 30,
18311-,released its reversionary interest therein to the Sac and

Fox half -breeds , granting them the full power and authority to transm

fer and convey a full fee. Petitioner, Sac and Fox, would now challenge the defendant's motive in setting up this particular reservation,

but this in no way attacks the authority and power of Congress to act

in this regard in the r....'=‘1ner it chose.

On the proofs before us the Commission finds no basis upon which
to attach either legal or moral liability to the defendant, if We deal
with Cession l2O as we would in the orclinary title casevinvolving lands
ceded to the United stetes. However, we shall I‘eSeI'~’e final judgent

in the matter of Cession 120 and afford an 0PP°1''tUnit17 '00 the Peti"

tioner Sac and Fox, if it so desires, to present 2.113’ E-dditi0n9-1 evidence“

covering the period of 182+ to l831-I-, which would demonstrate to the
satisfaction of the CoLr:t1.ission that the defendant's Cenduct relative to
the "Half-breed" tract worked such an injustice 01‘ injured the Petitioner Sac and Fox in such a way as would oblige and compel the defendant
to respond in measurable damages under the provisions of the Indian
Claims Commission Act.

Having determined the question of title in favor of the petitioners
to those portions of Cession 69 as set out in the Commission's Findings
No. 13 and NO. 23., we shall in like fashion reserve judgment on the
question of defendant's liability Until proof has been offered On the
questions of the consiieration paid to the Indians for the ceded lands.
the tota acreage, and the value at the time title thereto passed to
the defendant.

We note that the lands described in Findings 3305- 15 and 23 herein
are within the area claizned by the Osage Nation of Indians in Docket Nos
105, now pending before the Commission, and for which the Osage 339
claiming additional compensation for lands including those described in
Findings 15 and 23. No request for consolidation for trial, beeauee 05

the conflict of interests, has been made by any party’ v0 the Claims

6 512

set forth in.Docket lo. 135 or Docket No. 105. It ma , therefore,

be neéessaty to withhold the final determination in Docket No. l35

until the claim of the Osage is determined.

s/ Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

s[ Wm. Ivl. Bolt

Associate Commissioner

