1 I}1d*.'c1.t_comni._2§t5   —'_j. *  ‘  - -' 1' f I "345"

PAHNFE INDIA}! TRIBE 03‘ 0KI.u5.HOMA,

Umssn smmss,

\

_ BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

consisting of the four confederated bands of Pawnee Indians,
113111613: Chaui or Grand. Pawnee,
Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee,
Pitahsuerat or Tappage Pawnee,
and Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pawnee,

Claimant,

vs. Docket No. _1O

Defendant.

Mr. Arthur. B..Honno1d,
Attorney for Claimant.

Messrs. Ralph A. Barney,
and John F. Curran, with
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General A. Devitt

Vanech. . -.
JUL 1 4 1950 _

OPI NI ON

/

Holt. Comszissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission: '

The claimant, the Pawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, brings this
action before the Commission under the authority and pursuant to the
act of Congress of August 13, 19145, designated as the "Indian Claims.
Commission Act“ (60 Stat. 1019; 25‘U.S.C. 70). The jurisdiction of this

Commission is defined in said act as follows:

1'Ind.:-C1. Comm.i24'S,  ‘ . .  ,‘ it .' .4?-[*6

.. .
0 I '
_ 9
- H ' ‘ ._ C
.- -n ..
' . \ '.

\

‘I _

The Commission.shall hear and determine the following '
claims against the United States on behalf of any Indian .
tribe, band, or other identifiable group of American Indians
residing within the territorial limits of the United States
-or Alaska: (1) claims in law or equity arising under the
Constitution, laws, treaties of the United States, and
Executive orders of the President; (2) all other claims in
law or equity, including those sounding in tort, with
respect to which the claimant would have been entitled to
sue in a court of the United States if the United States
was subject to suit: (3) claims which would result if the

'-treaties, contracts, and agreements between the claimant
and the United States were revised on the ground of fraud,
duress, unconscionable consideration, mutual or unilateral_
mistake, whether of law or fact, or any other ground

I cognizable by a court of equity; (M) claims arising from
the taking by the United States, whether as the result of
a treaty of session or otherwise, of lands owned or occupied by the claimant without the payment for such lands
of compensation agreed to by the claimant;-and (5) claims
based upon.fair and honorable dealings that are not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity.

The Pawnees claim to have held original Indian title to a large

tract of land in what is now the States of Nebraska and Kansas, which

they allege was taken by or ceded to the United States,
The first cession of this land was made by the Pawnees under the

treaty of October 9, 1833 (7 Stat. HHS), wherein they ceded and re-.

linquished to the'United States all their right, title and interest to

all the land lying south of the hlatte River. The second cession vas_
made under the treaty of.August 6,-l8h8 (9 Stat. 9H9), wherein the
Pawnees ceded and.relinquished.a11 their right, title and interest in

a.smal1 tract of land in the Platte.Biver and on its north bank near

gFort Kearney, and.by'a third cession'under the treaty of September 2%,

- r
C

-_1 1nd, c1. Comm. 245 1' ~ . }  ' -" , _' ‘e ' a» _ [ f 247g_

\

v..,..

.
9

‘l857 (11 Stat. 729) the Pawnees ceded and relinquished all their right;

0 title and interest in and to all land owned or claimed hy them north of

the Platte.River, but reserving a tract containing 288,000 acres for
their home. In 1876 the Pawnces vere removed to a reservation in Indian
Eerritory and their reservation in Nebraska was sold and the proceeds
credited to claimant tribe. 0 _

The total recovery sought in the petition is $30,703,7l3.M0,to—
gether with interest thereon at 5 per cent per annum from the respective
dates of the alleged wrongful taking, cession or other accrual of lien
bility, as Juet compensation. This demand is reduced in amount by
claimant's proposed findings of fact.i I

There are eight separate claims or causes of action set forth_in'
the petition, of which the first five involve the land claimed in Kansas
and Nebraska, and are: a 0 I

1. The first claim is for the value of 1,280,000 acres

of land contained in an toutlet" strip ten miles wide extending westward through claimed "Pawnee country," alleged to have

sheen taken from the Pawnee Tribe by the defendant without its

consent or agreement and given to the Delaware Indians under

a treaty concluded September an, 1829 (7 Stat, 327) between

the United States and the Delawares, and for which claimant

has not been compensated, amounting to $1,600,000, or $1.25

an acre for the land. The amount claimed is reduced to‘_

n,1 Ind; c1.;comn. 24S."‘ I

-’h - _‘
$836,000.00 in claimant's nroposed findings of fact; is

2; The second claim grows eut of the treaty of October §,

1833 (7 Stat._eh8) between the United States and the Pawnee

to the United States "all their right, interest, and title in.u
and to all the land lying south of the Platte river.§.'Ehe
claimant alleges that this treaty and cession were procnred
throngh duress, misrepresentation, undue influence; mistake :
of the Pawnees, breach of trust by the defendant; and for and
nnconscionable consideration of $ll9,000¢00, or less than ¢§e—”
half cent per acre, and that the land ceded consisted of at
least 23,715,120 acres reasonably worth between fifty cents

to $1.25 an acre, and claim is made for the difference between

the reasonable talus of the land and the amennt paid for it

»under the treaty. Claimant asks "that said treaty be deemed

revised to do Justice." In claimant's proposed findings of

0 fact request is made that the number of acres in the cession

be fixed between 20,528,600 and 2U,O86,6lh acres, of the'value
at the date of the cossion of between 52-1/2 cents and $1.25

per acre.

}

3,‘ The third c1aim.grows out of the treaty of.Angnst 8.

1808 (9 Stat. 9H9) between the United States and the Pawnee

~2‘24s*

iTribe by the terms of which the Pawnees ceded and relinquished _

"Tribe of Indians. "It is alleged that this treaty was fraudulent?

_._’1-iInd.»~c1.1~coono.".245 - " " .0 r - 7      ; " 1  ‘ ‘-249’._ _ .
. ’ 6-O5“c-0

V”

1} and.unanthorized and that under the treaty the Pawnees ceded
'1 to the'United States 2h5,h00 acres of their land in the Platte
river bottom in the present State of Nebraska for an "insigw
‘ nificent” consideration of $2,000.00 for land that was worth
’ at least $5.00 per acre, and claim is made for $1,232,000 loss
-g$23000.00 paid under the treaty, or $1,230,000. This is reddced
to $552,090.00 for ll0,hl8 acres in c1aimant’s proposed findings
‘of fact. vclaimant also asks "that the purported treaty of 1888
Fibs deemed revised to do Justice to the Pawneos.“
. 53. For the fourth claim, it is alleged that under the
1 treaty of September 28, 1857 (11 Stat. 727), the Pawnee Tribe
1 ceded to the United States all their remaining land north of
the Platte River, less 288,000 acres reserved in said treaty,
amounting to at least 13,059,200 acres for which they received
gloss than five cents per acre. Claim is made for the difference betweon the amount paid for the cession and the price of
‘$1.25 an.aere paid by settlers. Claimant in its amended pro‘posed findings of fact reduced the acreage claimed to _1o,500,000
acres. 5 I
5. The fifth claim results from an error in the survey of
-0 the reservation provided for the Pawnee Indians in the treaty

of September 2%. 1857. It is alleged that the treaty provided

‘for 288,000 acres in the reservation, and when it was surveyed

\

"te\lInd.tC._1-i.Comm~. 24.5  . - ~. "  0' . 3  \_ ' .  25.0

-75 and set asidqjto the Pawnees there was a shortage of 9,152.80
acres; that the present value is $50.00 an acre,.and claim is
made for $U58,lh0.00. The claimant in its proposed findings 0
of iact reduces the shortage claimed to h,80O acres, and roduests
that its value to fixed at not less than $3.00 per acre. .

I The sixth? seventh and eighth claims are for the disposal by defendant of three small separate tracts of Pawnee reservation lands in.

Oklahoma, without the consent of claimant tribe, and are:

1

-9

0 6. The sixth claim is for the value on March 1, 1007 of
’ 0 88.h3 acres of Oklahoma Pawnee reservation land alleged to have
been sold by the United States without claimant‘s consent to
‘the City of Pawnee, Oklahoma, and for which land claimant re. fused to accept $1.25 per acre, which sum was paid by the cityi
‘to the defendant and credited to claimant. Claimant alleges
the land was worth $100.00 an acre, but in its proposed findings er fact it reduced this value to $25.00 per eere, or
$2,210.75 less $ll0.5h paid, plus interest as Just compensation;
‘ _h7, The seventh claim is for an award of $2,553.00 for 0
25.5% acres of Pawnee reservation land in Oklahoma, alleged
to have been wrongfully taken and disposed of to the Home
Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention vithout the
consent of claimant, which land was worth $100.00 per acre.

This claim is reduced in the proposed findings of fact to

J1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 251

$756.20. or $30.00 per acre, plus equivalent of interest as
Just compensation.

8. The eighth claim is for the alleged gnanting of two '
railroad rights of way across the Oklahoma reservation by the
United States, without the consent of claimant, taking about
16 acres worth sioocoo per acre for which damages of $1,600.00

are claimed. This claim is reduced to $77.00 in claimant's

proposed findings of fact.

The claimant contends that the boundaries of the tract of land in
Nebraska and Kansas held by it under original Indian title. are as follows:
Beginning at the junction of the North and South Platte
Rivers in Nebraska and extending northeastcrly along the
eastern boundary line of the Fort Laramie Treaty of sap.

tember 17, 1861 (ll Stat. 7&9), to the Niobrara River in

Northern Rebraska; thence east along the Niobrara River to
a point some eight miles west of its mouth; thence south
and across the headwaters of Shell Creek and down Shell
Creek to where it enters the Platte River; thence west
along the Platte River about twelve miles; thence south
along Range Two East, to approximately Township line North

Bins, and then extending from that point southwest into

Kansas to a point 25 or 30 miles east of the Great Bend of

the.Arkansas River in southern Kansas; thence westwardly

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 352

-08:9

following the.Arkansas River to the Colorado state line;

thence North 18 miles along the Colorado line and then bowing eastwardly and north to the place of beginning,

The claimant alleges that it was the owner in possession of the
above described land for several centuries prior to the time it was
taken by or ceded to the United States, and contends the'United States,
having accepted treaty cessions from claimant tribe, is new estopped
from disputing claimant's ownershipo

The position taken by the defendant is that the claimant tribe did
not exclusively occupy and possess any part of these lands, except the
lands within the limited and indefinable area of their villages along
the Platte and loop Rivers in Nebraska, and claimant tribe not having
exclusive possession of definite areas of this land, then it did not
have a compensable interest therein and is not entitled to recover under
any circumstances.

On the issues thus raised, the first question to be determined is

whether the claimant has established by the evidence that it had original

Zndian.title to any of the lands involved in the first four claims, at

the time it was taken by or ceded to the United States. The defendant
does not question claimant's occupancy title to the land reserved for

claimant under the treaty of September 2M, 1857, and which is involved

‘ 1 Ind. C1. COHIIH.  ' 2 

O-0900

Indign»Title

 

Both parties have submitted considerable evidence on this question
of ownership, consisting of documents, historical data and oral testimony, In a general way it appears from the not too definite evidence
that the Pasnee are presumed to have originated in the far south or
southwest, and in prehistoric times to have slowly migrated northward
until they reached Nebraska, The first historic reference of the white
man contacting the Pawnee was in l5M1 when the explorer, Coronado,
reached the province called Quivira, located in what is new central
333388» Coronado did not visit the Pawnee territory, but was informed

that the Pasnees lived in a province called Harahey, lying somewhere to

‘the north of Quivira. nAfter the Coronado report, the Pawnees are next

mentioned by explorer Marquette in 1673. Marquette did not contact
them, nor were they mentioned in his Journals, but on a crude map of the
area, which omitted the Missouri River and its major tributaries, he
locates the Pawnee in the Platte River valley in Nebraska. During the
18th century there were various rather indefinite reports and maps of
French and Spanish explorers,.which place the Pawnees in the Platte

valley. In 1796 the explorer Collet, on his map placed the Republican

‘Pawnee band on the Republican River in addition to the.other Pawnee bands

on the Platte and Loup Riveres Reports of white explorers made after

1800 substantiate these general unverified reports on the location of

1 Ind. C1. Comm..245 254%

.-.10 .._

the Pawnee during the 18th century;

In l802oDuLac, a French explorer, reported Pawnee on the Platte
end Loup Rivers in Nebraska, and the Repuhlinan Pawnee band on the north
bank of the Republican River near the present Xansas«Nebraska State line,
and in 1806 Explorer Pike also reported visiting Pawnees on the Eepub1i—
can River.

The first major expedition visiting Pawnee territory after the
Louisiana Purchase was the Lewis and Clark expedition in 180M. The.
map prepared by that group shows a Pawnee village on the Loup River and
also a village on the south side of the Platte River, all in the present
State of Nebraska.

In 1811 Major Sibley reported that the Pawnee band on the Bepubliu
can River had given up their village there and had moved up and joined
the other Pawnees on the Platte River in Nebraska, and the evidence
shows that subsequent to 1809 all Pawnee villages were located along
the lower courses of the Platte and Loup Rivers £n.Hebraska.

At the time the treaty of October 9, 1833, was concluded between
the Pawnees and the United States, ceding and relinquishing all their
interest in land lying south of the Platte River; the Grand Pawnee
village at the Clarke site was the only Pawnee village located south
of the Platte, and the Skidi, Repblican and Pappage Pawnee bands
occupied villages on the Leap River north of the Platte. In l8h8

the location of their villages was approximately the same, and there

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 ‘P V 255

I-11¢-I

is no evidence that they were living on or occupying any of the land

which they ceded and relinquished to the United States under the treaty
of August 5, 1838.

By 1851 the entire Pawnee tribe had moved to the eastern part of
Nebraska and established two villages on the south side of the Platte
River Just south of the present town of Fremont, Nebraska, and they
were not living on or actually occupying the land north of the Platte
River at the time they ceded it to the‘United States under the treaty
of September an, 1357.

While the Pawnees claim title by occupancy and use to this vast
territory in Nebraska and Kansas, yet the location of all known historic Pawnee villages on the Loup and Platte Rivers in Nebraska were

‘within an area of approximately one hundred miles east and west and

less than twenty five miles north and south, with at least half the
villages located within the general area of the land reserved for them
under the treaty of September 2%, 1857s The extreme western village.
being the Palmer site on the loup River near the present town of St.
Paul, Nebraska, and the extreme eastern villages being the Mcclaine
and Leshara sites on the Platte River near the present town of Fremont,
Bebraska, where they had located in 1851.

The Pawnees for many years hunted on and roamed over most of this
territory claimed by them in the present States of Kansas and Nebraska.

They did not, however, hunt on and roam over this land alone, as there

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245

- 12%.

s were a number of other Indian tribes who also hunted and roamed in

different parts of this territory and disputed the Pawnees use of the
same. The evidence shows that tho Pawnees were compelled to continuously fight against these tribes and it was this constant pressure
that unquestionably was the cause of concentrating all of the Pawnee
villages in the Platte and Loup River valleys in Nebraska shortly
after the opening of the 19th century.

A.number of these contending tribes were the Comanche, Cheyenne
and Arapahoe on the west, the Otoe and Missouri, Omaha, Kansas and
Osage tribes on the east and northeast, and the Ponca and Sioux to the
north and northwest. There were no recognized boundaries between the
Pawnees and these surrounding tribes. Each tribe hunted wherever game
was to be found in the territory extending out from its villages, the
extent of the area so utilized depending upon the numerical strength
of each particular tribe from time to time, rather than upon a recognition by any tribe or tribes of exclusive ownership or right of occupancy to any definite area in any other tribe or tribes.

The principal hunting_expeditions of the Pawnees were made in the
area to the south of the Platte River, extending as far south as the
Arkansas River in southern Kansas. On many of these expeditions the
Pawneos would set up temporary winter quarters on the.Arkansas River,

but they returned in the spring to their permanent villages on the

Platte and Loup.Rivors in Nebraska.

256

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 ' 257

...'13...

_ The territory lying south of the Platte River which the Pawnees
new claim belonged to them does not appear to have ever been described
or its boundaries definitely fixed until outlined by Dre Waldo R. Wedelg
who was called as an expert witness by claimant, It is the area as
described by Dr. Wedel that the Pnwnees new claim was owned by them
and ceded to the United States under the treaty of October 9, 1833.

It is a significant fact that a large portion of this same_area was
claimed by the Kansas and the Osage Tribes of Indians. In the cased
of the Kansas Indians there appears to have been sufficient merit to
their claim to cause the'United States to enter into a treaty with
the Kansas Tribe on June 3, 1825 (7 Stat. 23H), wherein they ceded to
"the United States the larger part of the land in the present State of
Kansas that is now claimed by the Pawnees, and the Kansas Tribe now
has three cases pending before this Commission in which they present
claims on the basis of their alleged aboriginal title to said land.
The “outlet” strip of land granted the Delaware Indians under
the treaty of February 28, 1829 (7 Stat. 326), upon which the Pawneesi
first claim is based, was included within the boundaries of the land
ceded by the Kansas Indians to the United States in 1825. The Government's purpose in granting the "outlet" strip unquestionably was to
give the Delawares access to an area then regarded by the Government
as a common hunting ground, and it is reasonable to believe that the

Government considered all possossory rights in the "outlet" strip had

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 3 _ V. 253

- 1h been.acquired from the Kansas Indians by the cession in 1825.

The evidence does not show Just how extensively the Pawnees hunted
on or to what extent they controlled the land north of the Platte River
which they new claim, although their permanent villages were located
principally within the fork of the Leap and Platte Rivers in Nebraska
in the general area of the tract reserved for themrunder the treaty of
September ah, 1857“ There is no question but that the Sioux Tribe dis- A
puted this territory with the Pawnees, constantly attacking and harassing them over a long period of time. The Sioux were particularly active
zgainst the Pawnees after 1835, when the Pawnoes population wos~matéi1a11y
reduced in numbers, and it was this aggression of the Sioux Tribe that
limited the Pawnees in the use of the land north of the Platte River,
and by 1851 had caused the Pawnees to move to the East and re-establish
their villages on the south side of the Platte River, where they lived
‘until the 1857 treaty was concluded.

There is also evidence that the Omaha Tribe claimed hunting rights
in this area north of the Platte, and the Pawnees appear to have respected
those rights, at least in part, as the Omahas were permitted to supervise
the hunt when held north of the Platte.

There are several decided cases in which the courts have considered
uhat proof is necessary to establish original Indian title in land claimed
by an Indian tribe. It is well settled that where a claim is based on ‘

Original Indian title, occupancy of the claimant tribe to the exclusion

ll Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 l ‘ _ 259

“.15of other tribes. necessary to establish aboriginal possessory title,

is a question of fact to be determined as any other question of fact.

 

T-i‘-0JICI\—j%-If

United States v. Santa Fe Ehilrcad. con. 11+ nos. . 36 L., Ed. 260.

and also Alcea Band of Qillanocks vs1;gnited States, 10 Ct. Cls, M U,

§§Q.

In the case of‘United States v, San§a.Fe Railroad. suura, an action

j--Uhtht  In 3‘brought by the United States as claimant to enjoin the railroad from

     

     

interfering uith.the possession and occupancy of the Indians in lands
claimed by them under aboriginal possession, the court, in interpreting

what constitutes "Indian title,“ said (p. 3M5):

If it were established as a fact that the lands int
question were, or were included in, the ancestral home of
the Halapais in the sense that they constituted definable
territory occupied exclusively by the halspais (as distinguished fron lands wandered over by many tribes), then
the Walapais bad ‘Indian title‘ which'unless extinguished
survived the railroad grant of 1855.

And compare Crazner v., United States, 261 ms. 213, 67 L. Ed. 62 .

In the following three cases the court, upon consideration of the

evidence, found aboriginal title had not been established. In the ease

Choctaw'Nation, et al. vsa The United States! Eh Ct. Cls. lz, the court

in holding that_the Wichita Indians had not established aboriginal possession, at page 51 of the opinion said:

In all cases there must have been actual use or
occupancy and not more constructive or desultory possession; some mastery of a tribe over the soil to the
exclusion of others, or the joint possession of two or
more tribes such as gave to each something of a fixed
habitation or use of the land as hunting ground to
establish a title by occupancy.

1 Ind.’ CI. Comm. 245
- . - - 260

“- 16In the case of Assiniboine Indian Tribe vs. United States

C18. 27, in which the suit was based on claim of original Indian title,

the Court of Claims in holding that the Indians had not proven they held

original Indian title, at page 368 of the opinion said:

We think the evidence fails to establish that the

plaintiff tribe had held any definite portion of this
land by permanent and continued occupancy to the exclusion
oi‘ all other tribes, and we cannot agree that a tribe
which is shown to have made such wide and extensive
migrations can be held to have established title by
‘immemorial possession‘ to the lands over which they

reamed,

In the case of Wichita Indians et al, vs. The United States 8 Ct

C18. §zS, the court in its opinion at page 1415 said:

,There is no evidence in this record to show, beyond
mere conjecture, the extent of any territory within the
large area now claimed by plaintiffs which they claimed,
possessed, and occupied to the exclusion of and with the
recognition of other tribes and bands of Indians who
lived, roamed, and hunted within the area in controversy.
Ehere have been few cases where Congress has authorized adjudication
of claims arising out of a taking of nothing more than the original Indian

title.

?8. The United States, 10: Ct. Cls. high, the Court of Claims decided that

the claimants had proven by satisfactory evidence they held original Indian

title to the land, and permitted recovery, This decision was affirmed by

the Supreme Court, United States vs. Alcoa Band of Tillamook Indians, et

113, §§ ms. 1&0; 21 Ia. Ed. Q. -The Court of Claims in dismissing the

However, in the most recent case of Alcea Band of Tillamook Indians

\

l.Ind. C1. Comm. 245 . 7 I 2.61

=17...

evidence submitted in support of the claim of original Indian title, at

page 558 of its opinion said:

The investigation and reports made and submitted in
1855 by Indian Superintendent Joel Palmer, under and pursuant to direction and instruction of the President * * *
substantially support the claim made by the * ° * tribes
in respect of the lands for which they claim conpensationi
and to which they claim to have held original Indian title
in 1855 and long prior thereto. He found and reported that

these tribes and bands occupied areas with definite boundaries, and the proof which has been submitted in this case

XI:-1

satisfactorily shows ghggg these definite boundaries were
with respect to the tribes composed of the bands mentioned

in the petition. * * * Other evidence which has been submitted in the case fully supports this View and further

shows that as far back as history can be traced, at least

to 1750, there has been practically no change in location

of piaintiff tribes and bands along the Oregon Coast, and
east to the Coast Range Mountains; and that these tribes

and bands held. occupied, and used such lands within rather
definite boundaries to the exclusion of and in recognition

by other tribes and bands. The proof satisfactorily shows
that plaintiff tribes * * * lived upon, claimed. and occupied
these lands in Indian fashion to the extent that Indian tribes
and bands usually exclusively used and occupie‘ lands prior to
1855 and as far back as the history of these tribes and bands

can be traced.

 

00113

' ° ' we have in this case the testimony of Dr. John P.
Harrington of the Smithsonian Institution, an eminent ethnologist of a quarter of a century of service in the Bureau
of.American Ethnology, in connection with the investigations
and studies he had made and completed of the Oregon Indians.
including * ‘ * plaintiff tribes * * ‘. Dr. Harrington
testified * 3 ¢ he had been convinced beyond any shadow of

O a doubt that these tribes and bands of Indians which fringed
the Coast were the ancient and original inhabitants, and that
if an.investigation had been made centuries before the capedition of.Lcwis and Clark the tribal holdings would have been
to all intents and purposes where they were at the dawn of

history.
(Underscoring supplied)

. -J.n.n-54:6

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 '- s p 7 - _'262

- 18p»

It is clear from these decisions that in order to establish an

original Indian title, the Indians must prove their exclusive occupancy
and*use of a definable area of land.

We believe the same proof must be made in the case at bar. ‘It is

true the jurisdictional provisions of the Indian Claims Commission.Aet

s are broader than those contained in prior acts of Congress authorizing

the adjudication of Indian.claims, but this does not permit the Commission
to deviate from these requircnonts made by the Supreme Court, as to what
is necessary to establish original Indian title in land.

In the case at bar the claimant tribe must establish the boundaries
of the territory claimed, and these boundaries must be fixed with.some %
degree of certainty in order to justify their claim or right of occun
pancy to this tract of land lying south of the Platte River, which was
‘unsurveyed and indefinitely described in the treaty of October 9, 1833.
If the boundaries can be determined, it is necessary that the claimant
establish that they exclusively occupied and used the land within these
boundaries at the time the land was ceded to the Government;

iThe only definite boundary of this area south of the Platte River
which the claimant has sought to establish is the Arkansas.River as the
southern boundary. The east and west boundaries are indefinitely fixed
and appear to have been arbitrarily fixed by claimant's counsel from

information supplied by the witness. Dr. Waldo R. Wedel, who had made
\ special study of the Pawnee Indian tribe.

~ ~263
1'Ind.t C1. Comm. 245

This tract of land claimed. extending from the Platte River south
to the Arkansas River, was used as a hunting ground by all the surrounding Indian tribes, as well as the Pawnees, and the evidence discloses a
continuing conflict between the Pawnees and these tribes over this territory during Pawnee.hunting expeditions. That the rights of these other
tribes in this territory conflict with those of the Pawnees is shown by
the cessions made by the Kansas and Osage Tribes of a major portion of
the area. It would be difficult from the evidence submitted to fix the
boundaries of any definite area in this tract of land which could be
considered as having been exclusively occupied and used by any one tribe
or band of Indians at the time it was ceded to the United States,

The boundaries of the land claimed in and north of the Platte River
are fairly definite, although the northern and western boundaries of the
tract north of the Platte River, as now fixed, vary from those fixed by
the treaty of September 2h, 1857 because of overlapping cessions made by
other Indian tribes. The occupancy and use of this land by the Pawnees
was also disputed by other hostile Indian tribes, and the evidence is
lacking to prove that any definite portion thereof, except the undefined
areas contained within the Pawnee villages on the Platte and Loup Rivers,

was exclusively occupied, sod and possessed by the Pawnees at the time
their interest therein was coded to the United States.

Counsel for claimant argues in his brief, in effect, that the

.PaHnees had been the owners under original Indian title of the entire

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 354

0-020:-I

territory, and should be considered as having Indian title to all this
land they claimed and owned, and that any portion thereof in which other
Indian tribes may have acquired an undivided interest, should be apportioned to each tribe according to its interest. We do not believe
that it is possible from the record for the Commission to determine the

; boundary lines between these contending Indian tribes, and ascertain
the amount of land in which the use and occupancy of any one tribe was
superior to that of another tribe,

The Court of Claims in considering such a contention in the case

)f Duwamish! et al. Indians vso The United States, 79 Ct. Cls. R§0, at

page 573 of the opinion said:

No possible means exist by which the court may ascertain the landed boundaries of the Indian plaintiffs and
award one tribe a Judgment which may not do an inexcusable
and palpable injustice to another. The fact that Indian '
tradition recognized natural formations as boundary lines
and the Indians manifested a Jealous protection of their
claimed territorial rightsc while available in some instances
to fix certain tribal rights, will not warrant a finding of
definite takings of land unsurveyed and undescribed, not—
withstanding a belief that a portion of the lands taken may_
have fallen within the areas claimed by the tribes.

We have examined carefully the evidence submitted by both.the
claimant and the Government on the issue of the Pawnees‘ original Indian
, title to the tract of land involved in the first four causes of action,
and it is our conclusion that the proof does not establish that the
Pawnees had original Indian title through exclusive use and occupancy

be any definite part of this land at the time it was ceded to the United

1 Ind. Cl. Comm.‘2l+5 - I 255-‘

— 21States. It is true, however, that the Pawnee Indians had their villages

along the Platte and Loup Rivers in the present State of Nebraska, but

there is no evidence to show the extent or boundaries of the areas so

‘occupied and exclusively used by them.

Recognition of Indian Title
The claimant tribe, however, does not depend wholly upon proof of

its original Indian title to the land involved in order to recover on

‘the first four claims. Counsel for claimant contends that the United

States by accepting the cessions from the Pawnees'under the treaties of

- October 9, 1833, August 6, ISMS and September 2M, 1857, is new estopped

from disputing their ownership of the land.

Counsel for defendant contends that Indian tribes could not convey
land to which they did not have an Indian title; that treaty cessions
were no more than quit claim deeds, and the United States by accepting
a cession did not necessarily recognize title in the Indians.

This'presents the question of whether under the three treaties of
October 9; 1833, August 5, l8h8 or September 2M,ll857, the United States
did recognize or acknowledge the exclusive occupancy, right or title of
the Pawnees to the lands in respect of which these claims are made. For
if there was such a recognition of claimant's Indian title, no proof of
original Indian title would be necessary in order to establish a com»

pensablo interest in the lands ceded. Alcoa Band of Tillamooks vs.

‘United States! 2gE‘U.S, 40; 31 L, Ed. gg.

1 Ind. Cl._Comm. 245_ * _ ‘Z65

-22«—

To sustain its contention that the United States by accepting
cessions is estopped from disputing ownership, counsel for claimant
relies upon the decision in the case of Qgahauggihe vs, United States,
§§ Ct. Cls. 532, an the language used by the Court of Claims in reach»
ing its decision. In that case the treaty involved provided that the
Omaha Indians ceded all land lying south of a designated east-west
line, and all land lying north of said line was reserved by the Omahas
for their future home; with the further proviso that if the land north
of the line was not suitable for the Omahas they had the option of;
selecting other lands not exceeding 3003000 acres for a futurehome,
in which case "all of the country belonging to the said Indians north
of said due west line, shall be and is hereby ceded to the United States
by the said Indians, they to receive the same rate per acre for it, less
the number of acres assigned in lieu of it for a home, as now paid for
the land south of said line." The Omahas exercised this option and
selected land south of the line and the Government refused to pay for
the acreage in excess of the 3C0,000-acres in the reserved area north
of the east-west line, claiming the Omahas never owned that land.

The Court of Claims had under consideration the effect of a treaty
cession of land that had been definitely reserved for the Indians in a.
treaty. %he Court of Claims did not hold that the United States by

xccepting all treaty cessions is thereby estopped from disputing Indian

title. What the court did hold in effect was that when making.the treaty

P

-I-0-J 1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245 . _ W o . L257

- 23 _ .

in question the United States agreed to reserving of the land north of

the designated line for the use and occupancy of the Indians, and thereby recognized and acknowledged the Omahais "Indian title" to said reserved

land, promised to pay for it and could not question that ownership suhse—

quent to the.making of the treaty,

This interpretation is in accord with the statement made by the

Spreme Court in the opinion of Horthwestern Shoshone Indians vs. U. S.,

3214 ms. 3 5. At page 3% the court said:

Petitioners argue that the permission from the Indians
for travel or mining and for the maintenance of communication
and transportation facilities by the United States for its
citizens imply a recognition by the United States of the
Indian titleo They quote, as persuasive, these words from
an early Indian case: ‘The acceptance of these cessicns is
an acknowledgment of the right of the Cherokees to make or
withhold them.‘ Worchester V, Georgia, 6 Pet (US? §15, 556.
8 L ed M83, M99. An examination of the circumstances under
which.this Court made the justwquoted s tement illustrates
how inapposite its use by petitioners is to the present
questicno Ehe quotation was written in explanation of rightsi
of passage which were granted by the Cherokees through lands
which by other articles of the treaty had been specifically
set apart and solemnly guaranteed to the Cherokees.

 

The question of governmental recognition of Indian title to land
reserved by the Pawnees is not an issue in the present case, We have

here the broader issue of whether treaty cessions made by the Pawnees,

wherein they ceded and relinquished whatever right, title and interest

they had in the land claimed, was a recognition and acknowledgment by
the United States of the Pawnees Indian title to that land.

we do not find where this precise question.has ever been squarely

1 Ind. c1. cbmm. 245 268

- an _

presented to and passed upon by the Supreme Court; however, the question

was fully considered by the Court of Claims in Northwestern Band of

 

§§g§hone Indians vs.‘Unitgd_Statesg_g§_§t, Cls. 6h2. In that case,

petitioners sought to recover damages for the taking of several million

pacres of land claimed under original Indian title, and alleged to have

been recognized by the United States in a treaty between the Indians
’ and the'United States. The treaty described the boundaries of the country
it was understood was claimed by the several Shoshone bands, and granted
the United States rights therein for travel, mining and maintenance of
communication and transportation facilities. The Court of Claims found
the'United States did not intend the treaty should constitute a recogniu
ltion and acknowledgment of any exclusive use and occupancy right or title
in the Indians to the lands involved. Certiorari was granted by the
United States Supreme Court to determine whether there was a recognition
or acknowledgment by the United States of such original Indian title,
either through the language employed in the treaty or by the mere act
of treating with the Indians for rights in lands claimed by them.’ The

Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the Court of Claims, §2k‘U.S. 335:

L

39 L. Ed. 98 . In considering the text of the treaties, the Supreme

Court said:

Nowhere in any of the series of treaties is there a
specific acknowledgment of Indian title or right of occupancy. It seems to us a reasonable inference that had
either the Indians or the United States understood that
the treaties recognized the Indian title to these domins.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 - n _ it ' I 269

_ .
‘Q.

such purpose would have been clearly and definitely

expressed by instruction, by treaty text or by the

reports of the treaty commissioners, to their superiors

or in the transmission of the treaties to the Senate for ’
ratification.

And_the Supreme Court said further in its opinion (89 In Ed. p. 996):
Petitioners point out that the word ‘claim’ or the
phrase ‘country claimed? was often used on the frontier
to indicate title or right. We know this meaning in
mining law and in entries for land patents.« The meaning
of the word or phrase depends upon its use. In these
treaties it seems clearly to designate the boundaries
over which the Indians asserted Indian title but that

falls short of acknowledgment of such right by the
United States. i

we cannot agree with the principle that every case of an acceptu

ance of a treaty cession from Indians can be construed as a recognition

and acknowledgment by the United States of the Indians exclusive pos-S

sessory use and occupancy right or title in the land included in the

cession.

We believe that the issue of whether there is a recognition by a
treaty of Indian title must be determined in each case from the treaty

itself, and the circunstances surrounding its execution. See North 

western Band of Shoshone Indians vs. United States, suora.

It has always been recognized by the United States that Indian
tribes held a beneficial possessory interest in lands which they ex»

clusively occupied, used and possessed, with the United States having

the exclusive power to extinguish this Indian right of occupancy.

Johnson vs. McIntosh‘ 8 Wheat. §IH;:§lcea Band of Tillamooks vs. United

 

270
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245

- 25 states; §39'U.S. "0. 21 L» Ed. g2. This was generally accomplished by

g a process of negotiation and treaty whereby the Indians ceded and relinquished to the United States whatever rights or title they had, or
claimed to have, in certain described land, or even in land not fully
described. In turn there was set aside or reserved a delimited area
lfor the exclusive use and occupancy of the Indian tribe, party to the
treaty. The result was that in many instances the area of possible
Indian title held was unknow* to the treaty negotiators at the time the
treaty was made. This method was used in negotiating and making the
three treaties with the Pawnees, and particularly in the case of the.
October 9, 1833 treaty is.it apparent that the treaty negotiators were
not aware of what area south of the Platte River was held by the Pawnees

under Indian title.

Treaty of October 18

The first treaty of cession involved herein is the treaty of
October 9, 1833. _ I

The Pawnees and the Delaware Indians, as sell as the other tribes;
had been fighting over the hunting grounds lying to the south of the
Platte River. The conflict was especially bitter between the Pawnees
and the Delawares over the "outlet" strip of land granted the Delawares
by the United States under the treaty of September 2%, 1829, which.is
set forth in the findings. The Pawnees were also having trouble from

attacks by the Sioux Tribe on the north. The United States authorities

F

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245 I

-27were aware of this situation and planned the establishment of a general
peace among these hostile Indian tribes.
On March 30, 1832. John.Dougherty, Indian.Agent stationed at the '

Fort Leavenworth Indian Agency, wrote the Superintendent of Indian
Affairs at St. Louis regarding the "outlet" strip granted the Delawares,
and reported that the "outlet" lead into the heart of the country
claimed by the Pawnees as their hunting grounds and recommended that

the Government extinguish the Pawnees' claim to all lands lying south
of the Platte River. Daugherty also recommended that until this land
was assigned to an Indian tribe or tribes that it should be used as a

common hunting ground, which he believed would likely put a stop to

-conflicts between the various tribes hunting on this land.

On October 8, 1833, Henry L. Ellsworth, treaty Commissioner, met
in council with the chiefs and leaders of the four Pawnee bands at the
Grand Pawnee village on the south bank of the Platte River. The record
does not disclose what instructions were given Ellsworth for negotiating the 1833 treaty, but the minutes of the Council meeting, dated
October 9, 1833, reveal that one of the main objects in making the
treaty was the restoring of peace among the Indian tribes in that area,
and to effect the civilization of the Pawnees; Ellsworth.also suggested
that the Pawnoos select delegates to accompany him to Ft. Leavenworth
for the purpose of making peace with hostile tribes. Ellsworth advised

the Pawnees that when the United States gave the Delawares their land
I

!

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 272

...28...

it was not known that the Pawnees claimed any part of it. Be_told the
Pawnees the‘United States was willing to aid them in agriculture and
give them goods if they would cede their interest in the land lying
‘south of the Platte River, with the Pawnees being permitted to retain
hunting privileges in the land with other friendly tribes until it was
assigned tola tribe or tribes. The Pawnees were also anxious for peace,
as shown by the talks of the Pawnee chiefs, and they appear to have

understood they were ceding their interest in the land lying south of

‘the Platte River.

The extent of or description of the land thus ceded, or what part
of it was owned by the Pawnee under Indian title does not appear to
have been considered or discussed at any time by Ellsworth, the Pawnees,
or by John Dougherty, who was present during the treatv negotiations
and was a witness to the treaty.

The treaty itself provided in Article I that "the confederatsd
bands of Pawnee aforesaid hereby cede and relinquish to the United
States all their right, interest and title in and to all the land lying
south of the Platte river," while.Article II provided "the land coded
and relinquished hereby, so far as the same is not and shall not be

assigned to any tribe or tribes, shall remain a common hunting ground,

-during the pleasure of the President. for the Pawnees'and other friendly

Indians who shall be permitted by the President to hunt on the same.“

.he Grand Pawnee band was the only band of Pawnees living south of the

P

1 Ind. CH1. Comm. 245 A273

-39...Platte River at the time, and article III of the treaty provided that
the annuity agreed to be paid the Grand Pawnees was "in full remuneration for removal from the south to the north side of the Platte river
and building again.“

Commissioner Ellsworth transmitted the 1833 treaty, and later
forwarded the talks had with the Pawnees in council when the treaty
was negotiated, without comment so far as the record shows. the Com- 8
miseioner of Indian.Affairs in a letter to Ellsworth on December 5,
1833, acknowledged receipt of the 1833 treaty. The treaty was approved
and ratified by the United States Senate, without alteration, and proclaimed by the President on.April 12, 183k.

The treaty of 1833 does not contain any specific acknowledgment
or recognition of the Pawnees' Indian title or right of exclusive
occupancy other than their right to hunt on the lands ceded and relinquished along<with other friendly Indians until the land was assigned. ‘We do not find anything in any of the official documents,
communications or instructions leading up to the making of the treaty,
the treaty negotiations or the reports of Commissioner Ellsworth to
his superiors, or in transmittal of the treaty to the Senate for ratification, which indicates such an acknowledgment on the part of the
‘United States of exclusive ownership of the Pawnees in any part of

this land,

5

There is, however, one letter which claimant contends charges

1  C1.   , H ..‘

..3Q the United States with knowledge of Pawnee claims and ownership of the
land south.o£ the Platte River. This was the letter heretofore referred
to which was written by Indian Agent John Dougherty to we. Clark. Superintendent of Indian Affairs at St. Louis on March 30, 1832. over a year
prior to the 1833 treaty negotiations. This letter does show that
Dougherty considered the Pawnees as claiming an area of land in the
vicinity of the Delaware “outlet” as a hunting ground for many years,

but he makes no reference to any definite area of land as being in the
exclusive possession of the Pawnees. There is no evidence that Dougherty's
report was based on any investigation made by him of the existing facts
regarding Pawnee claims, and we do not believe his report can he accepted
as decisive in a case as important as this, where there is no other
evidence to support it. His report did bring to the attention of the I
Government the fact that the Pawnees claimed as a hunting ground an

area in the vicinity of the Delaware “outlet” t we do not believe

that the general statements made by Dougherty can be considered as charging the'United States with knowledge of or recognition of Pawnee owner»
ship of any definite area of land south of the Platte River.

Treaty of.august 6, l8M8

 

The second treaty of cession was concluded on August 6, l8h8.
The United States had considered that under the terms of the aforesaid
1333 treaty, the Pawnees had relinquished all their interest in the lands

south of the Platte River and agreed to move north of that river. However,

1 Ind. c_1. Comm. 245' 275
.. 31 ..

a large contingent of Pawnees continued to reside on the south side of

tthe Platte. These Pawnees were attacking other Indian tribes and committing depredations on white emigrant trains on the overland trails
through the region. The Pawnees who were north of the Platte, as well
as the Omaha and Otoe tribes, were being attacked by the Sioux, and

there developed an extremely restless attitude among all the Indians

in the area. This situation was reported by the Office of Indian.Affairs.

by letter of June 15, 18h? to the War Department of the United States,
and on June 16, ISN7, the Adjutant General of the United States wrote_
to the Commanding Officer of the Battalion of Missouri Volunteers who
had been charged with the duty of establishing military posts along the
route to Oregon for the protection of white emigrants, and to maintain
peace among the Indian tribes along the south. In this letter the
Commanding Officer was instructed that as he proceeded west in the
performance of his assigned duties, it was made his Jspecial duty to
visit the Pawnees and compel the immediate removal of all Pawnees to
the north of the Platte, However, Lt. Colonel Ludwell 3. Powell, Coma
manding Officer of the Missouri Mounted Volunteers, after consulting
with John Miller, Indian Agent at Fort Kearney, obtained a suspension
of the order of immediate removal of the Pawnees north of the Platte.
On.August 6, 1838, Lt. Colonel Powell, on behalf of the United
States, concluded the treaty with the confederated bands of Pawnees

under which they "ceded and relinquished to the United States all their

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 275

- 32 -_

right, title, and interest in and to that tract of land described as

follows: viz:
Commencing on the south side of the Platte, five
miles west of this post, ‘Fort Childs’; thence due north
to the crest of the bluffs north of said Platte river,
thence east and along the crest of said bluffs to the
termination of Grand Island, supposed to be about sixty
miles distant, thcnco south to the southern shore of
said Platte River, and thence west and along the southern
shore of the said Platte River to the place of beginning."
The area ceded and relizquished to the United States under the
ISHS treaty was indefinitely described, particularly as to its northern
boundary. It is possible, however, to ascertain from the description

in the treaty, that the area lay in and north of the river bed of the
‘Platte with the south bank of the riser as the southern boundary. The
southwest corner was five miles west of Ft. Childs, and the east line .
was approximately 55 miles to the end of the Island. The north line was
a crest of'bluffs north of the river. %

It is apparentthat Lt. Colonel Powell concluded the aforesaid lsggwwl
treaty in furtherance of his assigned duty to establish military postsar
on the route to Oregon. The record does not disclose the negotiations
at the time the treaty was made, and Powell, on August 10, 1s1+e,t transmitted the treaty to the Adjutant General of the United States without
comment.

By letter of December ll. 1838, the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs

forwarded the 18MB treaty to the Secretary of War, stating "it was a

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 ' 277
 ..

cession by the Pawneee of a strip of land on the north side of that
(Platte) river for military purposes connected with the establishment
of the first post on the route to Oregon in advance of the frontier."

The treaty of 1848 contains no specific acknowledgment or recognition
of lndian title or right of exclusive occupancy in any part of the land
ceded and relinquished. Her do we find anything in the record disclosing such an acknowledgment or recognition on the part of the United
States in any of the transactions had with reference to that treaty.

gggafy of September 24, 1857

In 1851, the Pawnees were visited by two missionaries, Oehler and
Smith, who reported them living in two villages on the south side of the
Platte River near the present town of Fremont, Nebraska. This was land
that had been previously ceded to the United States. The Pawnees had
been forced to leave their permanent villages in the Loup River area
and move to this more eastern location because of the repeated attacks
by the Sioux Indians, and the fact the.Pawnee population had been materially reduced by disease and continuous warfare to between four and
five thousand persons. The white settlers were also beginning to arrive
in eastern Nebraska, and there was increasing conflict between them and
the Indians, which finally resulted in Wm. Dennison, 7nited States Indian
Agent, being sent to counsel with the Pawnees. Dennison reported to his
superiors that in his talks with the Pawnees they had complained of the

bad treatment from the whites and their trespassing on lands claimed by

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 5 '- q  278

-3}them, and expressed a desire to end their difficulties by a treatv with
the Government. .He also reported that the Pawnees nunbered between
three and four thousand and were in a state bordering on starvation
because of lack of food and ammunition to hunt game.

On May 23, 1857, J.‘W. Denver, Commissioner of Indian.Affairs, in
a letter to the Secretary of the Interior advised the Secretary of
Dennison's report and called attention to previous reports of the Come
nissioner of Indian Affairs in 185k, 1855 and 1856, recommending a
treaty with the Pawnees as the best way to establish then in a fixed and
permanent home. ‘Denver suggested that this purpose be carried out and
negotiations be entered into with the Pawnees for the extinguishment of
their title to the country north of the Platte, and for the purpose of
quiet1ng.a1l complaints, by the establishing of the Pawnees in a pernan
nent home. .

On August 15, 1857, J. W; Denver was appointed as treaty commissioner “to enter into negotiation with the Indian tribes west of the State
of Missouri and Iowa for the purpose of securing the assent of said
tribes to the settlement of the citiaens of the United States‘upon the
lands claimed by said Indians, and for the purpose of extinguishing the
title of said tribes in whole, or in part, to said lands.”

On September Zh, 1857, at Table Creek.(Nebraska City), Nebraska,

a treaty was made between the United States and the four confederated

sands c£'Pawnee Indians, wherein, under Article I of said treaty; the

1 Ind. (:1. Comm. 245 279

;..j5..

Pawnees ceded and relinquished to the United States all their right,
title, and interest in and to all the lands now owned or claimed by
them, except.ae hereinafter reserved, and which.are bounded as follows,
viz: l V

On the east by the lands lately purchased by the

United States from the Omahas; on the south by the lands

heretofore ceded by the Pawnees to the United States; on

the west‘by a line running due north from the Junction of

the Rorth.with the South Fork of the Platte River, to the

Eeha—Paha River; and on the north by the_Keha~Paha River

to its junction with the Niobrara, L'eauqi Court, or RunningWater river, and thence, by that river, to the western

boundary of the late Omaha cession. Out of this cession

the.Pawnees reserve a tract of country thirty miles long

from east to west, by fifteen miles wide from North to

South, including both banks of the Loup Fork of the

Platte.Riwer; the east line of which shall be at a point

not further east than the mouth of Beaver Creek.

There is:ne record of the 1857 treaty negotiations. It is evident
that Commissioner Denver was following the established policy of the
Government at that time of acquiring Indian title in not only land
actually owned by the Indians but in all territory claimed by them.as

well. There is no evidence that Commissioner Denver had any knowledge

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 23°

- 35 of, or that he made any investigation to ascertain the extent of the
actual occupancy or rights of the Pawnees in the land included in the
cession of 1857; The claimant now concedes that the western boundary
of the session included land that belonged to the Sioux tribe, and

that the correct boundary on the west should be the eastern boundary

line of the Ft. Leavenworth Treaty of September 17, 1851 (11 Stat. YN9).

Claimant also concedes that territory belonging to the Ponca tribe was
included in the cession on the north, and that the northern boundary
of the 1857 cession should be the Niobrara river.

The 1857 treaty was ratified by the United States Senate on
March 31, 1858, with an amendment which provided as follows: Wand it
is further agreed that the President may at any time, in his discretion,
discontinue said perpetuity by causing the value of a fair commutation
thereof to be paid to, or expended for the benefit of said Indians,
in such manner as to him shall seem proper." This amendment was duly
approved by the Pawnee tribe on the third day of April, 1858, and the
treaty was proclaimed by the President on May 26, 1858.

The treaty of 1857 does not contain any specific acknowledgment
or recognition of Indian title or right of exclusive occupancy in any

t of the land ceded and relinquished, except the tract of land

thirty miles long from east to west by fifteen miles wide from north
to south on the Loup.River, which was reserved for the Pawnees exclusive

occupancy. We find nothing in any of the official hommunications, treaty

281
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245

p3?“

instructions or circumstances surrounding the making and ratification
of the 1857 treaty, as amended and proclaimed, that indicates an acknowledgment or recognition of the Pawnees exclusive use and occupancy,
right or title, in any of the land ceded thereunder, other than the
reserved area mentioned above.

we thinkrthe evidence fails to disclose that the representatives
acting on behalf of the Government at the time the three treaties of
October 9, 1833, August 6, ISMS and September 23, 1857 were negotiated
and concluded, recognized or intended to recognize or acknowledge that
the Pawnees were actually occupying and in exclusive possession of any
definite portion of the lands included in said cessions, other than the
land which was specifically reserved for their exclusive occupancy and
possession in the treaty of September 2M, 1857.

The Commission therefore concludes that the claimant tribe is not
entitled to recover on its first, second, third and fourth causes of
action for the reason that it has not been established that the Pawnee
Tribe of Indians actually occupied and exclusively used and possessed
any definite portion of the lands claimed under their first four causes
of action, nor, was their exclusive occupancy and possessory right or
title therein recognized or acknowledged by the defendant at the time
the treaties of October 9, 1833, August 5, l8H8 and September 2h, 1857

were negotiated and concluded.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 245 332

-33..

Fifth Claim

 

The claimant tribe seeks to recover on its fifth cause of action
for a shortage in the acreage reserved by it under the first Article
of the treaty of September Zh, 1857 between the Pawnees and the United
States. The treaty provided that out of the cession "the Pawnees reserre
a tract of country thirty miles long from east to west, by fifteen miles
wide from north to south ’ * ‘,3 when the boundaries of this reservation
were resurveyed it was discovered that through an error in the original
survey the east and west boundary lines were but twenty-nine and a half
miles apart instead of thirty miles, resulting in a shortage of 3,500
acres of land in the reservation, as described in said treaty;

The record does not disclose when this resurvey of the reservation
was made, but the error and resultant shortage in acreage were reported
in a letter written to the Secretary of the Interior by the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs on December 20, 1873. The Secretary of the Interior
recommended to Congress that the Pawnee Indians be indemnified for the
shortage, and upon this recommendation the Congress of the United States
appropriated the sum of $6.000 under the act of March 3, 1875 (18 Stats
#20) to indemnify the Pamnees for the N,800 acres, which sum.was credited
to the Pawnees' account.g

The claimnt tribelclaims the 74,800 acres was taken from them withvut their consent, and without payment therefor of adequate compensation.

The defendant admits the taking of the H.800 acres of claimant's

1 Incl. c1. Comm. 245 283

c.39h_

land, but contends claimant has been fully reimbursed for its value.
There is no question about this land having been taken from

claimant, so it is entitled to the value of the land at the time it

was taken, which occurred when the lands were disposed of br'defendant.

United States V39 Creek Nation: 295'U.S. 103; Greek Nation VS. United

an-u.--nun .....¢rsnn-nun-$¢-I:

     

Statesg §02‘U.S. égge ‘Unfortunately, however; there is no evidence in
the record that discloses when the U,8OO acres in question were actuallye
taken by the defendant. The first mention of this land having been dis«
posed of by the defendant is contained in the letter of December 20, 1873
of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs when in reporting the error in the
survey to the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner stated that the
lands were then thickly settled by white settlers.

The claimant would have the Conmission determine the value of the
land as of 185?, when the treaty was nade setting "side the reservation,
and if not in that year, then in 1875 when the $6,000 payment for the
land was credited to the Pawnees. Claimant insists that in 1875 the
3,800 acres were worth at least $3900 per acre, and as proof of this
value, depends upon the letter written by Charles West,.Acting Secretary
of the Interior, to Will Rogers, Chairman of the Indian Affairs Committee

in the House of Representatives. In this letter West expressed an

nopinion that the Pawnees should be paid for this shortage at the rate

of $3.00 per acre.

4
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 21:5 28

- ho._

V We do not believe a letter such as this is evidence of value. It
is only the opinion of the writer, based entirely, as it shows, upon
his examination of records in the General Land Office showing the average
sale price per acre of Pawnee Reservation land sold under the act ofv
April 10, 1876 (19 Stat. 28).

It is significant that when the Pawnee Reservation lands were
appraised for sale under the act of April 10, 1876, the appraised values
ranged from $1.25 to $5900 per acre, with many tracts being appraised
at $1.25. $1.50 and seaoo per acre, which would indicate a considerable
variation in the quality and value of these lands. So even if values
were to be fixed for the h,800 acres on the same basis as values were
fixed for the reservation land in 1876, we would be unable from the
evidence to determine whether this H.800 acres was of the $1.25 an acre
or $6.00 quality.

The evidence before us does not disclose the quality of this M,800
acres of land, or even where it was located in the reservation. In our
opinion there is no competent evidence in the record proving the value
of the 3,800 acres, and it would only be speculation on our part to
find that in 1857 or 1875, or at any time between those years, this
land had a greater value than the $6,000 paid for it by the defendant.
We therefore conclude that the claimant should not recover on its fifth

cause of action.

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245 . 285

' - 1+1 Sixth Claim

The sixth claim is for the value of 88.H3 acres in the Pawnee reservation land in Oklahoma, which was sold to the town of Pawnee, Oklahoma
by the United States under the act of March 1, 1907 (31; Stat. 1015, 10th)
for a consideration of $ll0e55, or $1.25 an acre. The claimant alleges
this land was sold without its consent, and contends it was a part of the
tract of 755 acres which was reserved at the time land was allotted to
the Pawnees in Oklahoma for school and agency purposes, with title thereto remaining in the.Pawnee Tribe. Claimant seeks an award of the value

of the 38.h3 acres as of March 1, 1907, less the $110.55 paid by the town

of Pawnee and credited to claimant.

On November 23, 1892 the United States and the Pawnee Tribe entered
into an agreement (I Kappe #98) by the terms of which the Pawnee Tribe
ceded to the United States all of its reservation land in Oklahoma. In
consideration of this cession the members of the tribe were to receive
allotments in severalty in the reservation, and as an additional and
further consideration for such ccssion and conveyance, the United States
agreed to pay to the tribe the sum of $1.25 an acre for all surplus land
in said reservation, after the individual allotments were made. The
agreement provided for the payment of $80,000 upon ratification of the
38Teement'by Congress, and the residue of the proceeds of the surplus
lands was to be placed to the credit of the tribe in the Treasury of the

United States and bear interest at the rate of 5; per annum until dis1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 245 5 - 286

_ ha tributed to said tribe per capita. This agreement was ratified and
confirmed by Congress on March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. 612, 6UU).

By resolution of the'United States Senate all claims of the Pawnee
Tribe were referred to the Court of Claims on February 21, 1911, for a
finding of fact and report. One of the claims presented to the Court
of Claims (5h Ct. Cls. 1) was for the surplus lands of the reservation
in Oklahoma, after allotment in severalty, ceded to the United States
under the agreement of November 23, 18920 The Court of Claims found
that after allotments to the members of the tribe there remained 171,088.37
acres of surplus lands, but deducted 755 acres as having been reserved
for school and agency purposes which it said continued as "tribal property." For the balance of 170,333.37 acres the court found the Pawnees
were entitled to $1.25 per acre, with interest on the amount due at 5%
per annum from March 3, 1893, the date the agreement was ratified by
Congress.

It cannot be disputed that the Pawnee Tribe conveyed all of its
reservation lands in Oklahoma under the agreement of November 23, 1892,
and that after individual allotments were made, the United States was
obli ted to pay $1.25 an acre for the surplus land. (Although the Court
of Claims did not recommend payment for the 755 acres, yet it did find
the 755 acres were a part of said surplus lands, and there is no evidence
that the.Pawnee Tribe acquired any vested interest in the 755 acres when

the Government reserved it for school and agency purposes. We do believe,

1 Ind. (:1. Comm. 245 _ _ 287

..l+3...

however, that it is entitled to be paid as provided under the terms of
the November 23, 1892 agreement.

Under the agreement of November 23, 1892 the claimant was entitle
to payment for the 88,33 acres at $1925 an acre, or $1l0,55, on March.3,
1893, but did not receive the payment until on or about March 17, 1921.
The agreement and the act of March 3, 1893 ratifying and confirming
said.agreement provided that the amount should bear interest at 5§;per
annum, and therefore the claimant is entitled to interest on $110955
at 5§;per annun from March 3, 1893 to March 17, 1921. See Cherokee

Nation vs, United States, 210 U,.f‘:_,_____1¥}"5e 10 L. Ed, sgu.

Seventh Claim

D-at-> an-uélull-—I$nu-Q: In-h-I'-v.-4--ulna 

 

The seventh claim is for the value of 2595M acres conveyed by the
Uhited States to the Home Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention.

The Home Mission Board, and its predecessors, had started missionu
ary work4among*the Pawnee Indians in 1880 and small tracts totaling 25.5H
acres of land in the reservation had been set aside by the Department of
Interior for the Mission Board's use in connection with this works The
Missicn Board had been placing improvements on this land and requested
that a patent be issued to it under authority of the act of March 3,

1359 (35 Stat. 781, 81%). This act provided that the Secretary of the

Interior was authorized and directed to issue a patent in fee simple to

a duly authorized missionary board engaged in mission work on any Indian

1 Ind. c1. Comm.

- hh reservation, for such lands thereon as had been theretofore set apart
and was then being“used and occupied by it for mission or school purposes.
Under the authority of this act, on June 3, 1920 a patent was issued by
the'United States conveying the said 25.5% acres to the Home Mission
Board. This land was also located in the 755 acre tract referred to in
the sixth claim, and what was said in consideration of the 755 acre
tract is fully applicable to this claim and need not be repeated.

Although the defendant contends that this issuance of the patent
for the 25.5% acres was for the benefit of the Pawnee Indians, yet we

belkeve that they should have been paid for it as provided in the agreeL ment of November 23, 1892. The claimant tribe is therefore entitled

to $1.25 an acre for the 25.5M~acres, or $31.90. The agreement and the

act of March 3, 1893 ratifying and confirming said agreement provides

that the amount should bear interest at the rate of 5% per annum, so
claimant is also entitled to interest on the $31.90 at the rate of 5%
per annum from March 3, 1893.
Eighth Claim

This claim is for the value of 16 acres of land alleged to have
been granted for railroad rights of way sometime prior to 1903, and
new used by the St. Louis and San Francisco Railway Company and the
Santa Fe Railway Compan~. The claimant contends these rights of way
cut through the 755 acre reserve referred to in the sixth claim, and

that the Pawnees were not paid for the 16 acres taken.

233 ’

' 289
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 245

...l;5 ..

The defendant in its answer alleges that the rights of way of the
dtwo above named railroads crossed allotments of individual Pawnee
Indians, who were paid for this land. However, the defendant offered
no proof to sustain this allegation. %

vThe claimant relies upon the letter of Charles West,-Acting Secretary of the Interior, written May l89 1937, to the Chairman of the House
Committee on Indian.Affairs, contending this letter acknowledged $77900
due on this claim. In his letter, West reported that the record indicated a right of way across the agency and school reserve as having
been grants the Eastern Oklahoma Railway Company in 1900, and in 1903
a right of way across the same reserve was granted the Arkansas Valley
and Western Railway Company; and no record found of any damages having
been paid in either case. West does not state what amount of land was
taken by the rights of way, but estimates the damage at the rate of
$50.00 a mile, or a total damage for rights of way of $79.50a

The agency and school reserve mentioned by West is undoubtedly the,
755 acre reserve of the Pawnoes referred to in the sixth claim. There
is no evidence however as to what amount of land was taken from the
755 acre reserve for the two railroad rights of way; so we do not believe
the claimant should recover on its eighth claim.

We conclude, therefore, that the claimant tribe is entitled to
recover (1) on its Sixth cause of action for the interest on the $110.55

paid for said 88.N3 acres of land at the rate of 5% per annum from the

290
1 Ind. (31. Comm. 245

u h6 3rd day of March, 1893 to March 17, 1921, 111 the amount of $155.00: and
on its Seventh.cense of action the claimant is entitled to recover the
sum of $31.90 for the 27.5% acres of land, with interest thereon at 5%
per annum from March 3, 1893, subject, however, to the deduction of
offsets, if any, and the determination of the amount of the offsets, if
any, is reserved for further proceedings as provided by the rules of
this Commission; and, (2) the claimant is not entitled to recover on
its First, Second, Third, Fourth, Fifth and Eighth causes of action,

and they are dismissed. It is so ordered.

Chief Commissioner %itt.and Commissioner O'Marr concur in the above

Li On.

Jul? 1“; 1950.

