BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

rss YAKIMA TRIBE,
Plaintiff,
V, Docket No. 162

THE UNITED STAEES,

Defendant.

‘ 

Decided: June 5, 1956
. FINDINGS_g§ FACT

The Commission makes findings of fact as follows:

1. The plaintiff, the Yakima Tribe of Indians, is a recognized
tribe of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of
the Uhited States, and has a tribal organisation representative of the
Yakima Tribe recognized as such by the Secretary of the Interior (Par.
11 Petition, admitted by Deft's Answer, p. 1)."

2. On June 9, 1855: a treaty was executed between the Yakima
Tribe, or nation of Indians, and the Uhited States under the terms of
which, and for a Consideration therein stated, said tribes ceded lands
to the United States and agreed to remove to and consolidate as one
tribe upon a Reservation, the boundaries of which are specifically
described in Article 2 of said treaty. Said treaty was ratified on
Harsh 8, 1859, and proclaimed on April 18, 1859, 12 Stat, 951.

3. Article 10 of said Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855, further
provided as follows:

"And prOVided, That there is also reserved and set apart
from the lands ceded by this treaty. for the use and benefit

1+ 269

of the aforesaid confederated tribes and bands. a tract of
land not exceeding in quantity one township of six miles
square, situated at the forks of the Pisquouse or Wenat—
shapam River, and known as the 'Wenatshapam Fishery,‘ which
said reservation shall be surveyed and marked out whenever
the President may direct, and be subject to the same pro- '
visions and restrictions as other Indian reservations.”

' M. From the date of the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855, until
1892 the United States utterly failed and neglected to make any effort
to locate definitely and survey the Wenatshapan Fishery Tract in accordr
ance with Article 10 of said treaty (Cl. Ens. 6; 8} 15, p. 36).
0n July 11, 1892, Mr. Jay Lynch, United States Indian Agent

for the Yakima Tribe. on behalf of said Yakima Tribe. called the Departs; 15, p. 1).

ment‘s attention to this failure (01. Ere. 6;
5. On August 27. 1892, this failure was reported to the Secretary
of the Interior and authority was granted to said Indian Agent to visit
the locality, and locate the Wenatshapam fishery tract by mates and
bounds, or by natural objects, taking care not to interfere with the
vested rights of white settlers located thereon (G19 Exs. 6; 7; 8; 15,
p. 2).

6. The Reservation, as provided by Article 10. as ultimately made.
is agreed.upon by counsel as being the tract of land within the red line
of plaintiff's exhibit number oneewthe location of same. as stated, being

agreed upon by the parties and that said Reservation contains 23,000

acres. (See defendant‘s requested Finding of Fact No. 1 and the footnote thereto.)

7. The pending suit is based on the contention that the $20,000
paid by the defendant for the 23,000 acre tract, coded to it by the

plaintiff in.l89¥, was unconscionable; that the land was worth at the

1: 270

etc by the plaintiff and by the defendant.

time $7.00 an acre and that the plaintiff should recover the difference
between the amount it has received for the land and its value of $7000
per acre.

The only issue now before this Commission is what actually
was the value of this tract of land in 189M, when it was acquired by
the United States. That this is the only issue in the case is agreed
(Tr. p. 3; Deft‘s Brief,
p. 18). The acreage involved and its location is agreed to by the
parties (Tr. p. 3) and that the Commission has jurisdiction to entertain and determine the claim as asserted, and that the plaintiff had
the title as asserted at the time of the cession to the defendant, is
agreed to by the defendant (Deft‘s Brief, p. 18).

3. The United States had neglected to survey the Wenatshapam
Fishery tract reserved to the Yakima Tribe under Article 10 of the treaty
of June 9. 1855, until August or September of 1893. Qhereafterg in order
to obviate the strenuous objection of white settlers in the area comprisw
ing the so~cal1ed Fishery tract, the Secretary of the Interior directed
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to negotiate for the purchase of the
“fishing privilege” of the tribe in said tract, and in his instructions
to Commissioners indicated a limited price to be paid therefor. After
three days of “negotiation” under these circumstances, the United States
Commissioners induced the Yakima Tribe to cede said tract to the United
States for the price of $209000.

9. Special Agent John Lane was designated to act with La T. Erwin,

Yakima.Indian Agent, in the proposed negotiations with the'Yakima Tribe

(Clo BX: 159 pa 3l})o

The instructions to these commissioners, duly approved by the

Secretary of the Interior and dated October 13, 1833, stated in part as

follows (01. Ex. 15, pp. ho~h2):

"In fixing the consideration to be paid for this cession

of land, you will take into consideration the object of its
original reservation by the treaty of 1855, and impress
upon the Indians that they are surrendering a privilege
rather than a property-«one too that for thirty years or
more, they have held in such light estimation that they

have not even made a demand on the government for its proper
location and survey. While this office does not desire to
prejudice its valuation by naming a price for the cession_
yet it ventures to express the opinion that the consideration should not exceed the sum of $10,000. A question may
arise, as has been intimated in the correspondence submitted,
that the reservation has not been properly located.

"Some of the Indians, I am informed, claim a different
location for this fishery. Be this as it may, you.have the
treaty before you and whatever description of land may be
incorporated in the agreement as the 'Wenatshapam fishery,‘
let it be understood, that it is intended to embrace and
include the whole of the land referred to in the 10th
article of the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855, and no other.
“The terms and conditions agreed npon in council should be
reduced to writing and incorporated in the agreement to which
when properly signed by a majority of the male adults of the

Indians, your certificates and that of the Official Interpreter should be attaehedo"

10. In accordance with the above instructions the Commissioners On
behalf of the United States called councils with the Yakima Indians on
December 13, 19. 20, 1893, and January 6, aHL 8, issh (01. Ex. 15, pp. 69»
117).

During these negotiations the United States Gommissionefs 939181394
that the purpose of the Councils was to negotiate with the Yakima Tribe
for the sale of the Wenatshapam Fishery Tracto While representing 30 the
Indians assembled that they were not to be influenced in any way in their

decision to sell said tract, the Commissioners minimized the value of their

rights in said tract, and the value of the lands therein.

11 272

The Commissionenafive times during the council impressed upon

the Yakima Indians assembled the statement contained in the instructions

to them, that the Yakima Indians were merely disposing of a “privilege”

and not a.”property" right (01. Ex. 15, pp. 72, 7h, 75, en, 37). The
Commissioners further blamed the Indians for not theretofore asserting
their rights to said tract. and permitting white men to go on this land,
and “that the Government thinks it best that the Indians place a moderate
price on it, and they will buy it" (01. Ex. 15, Pa 70); the Commissioners
well knowing that under Article 10 of the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 18559
it was the duty of the United States properly to locate and survey this
tracts and also to prevent its settlement by white memo

United States Indian Agent Erwin-the one who without authority
had changed the original location of the tract as fixed by United States
Indian Agent Jay Lynch as approved by the President; and under whose orders
the U. 3. Deputy Surveyor had surveyed the tract as relocated contrary to
his instructions (01. EX. 15, p. l33)~-represented to the Indians assembled
that the tract was improperly located; that he had no anthority to change
the location, but that all he could do was to see it properly surveyed as
located by Agent Lynch; and that:

“Now the question then resolves itself intothisz ‘Would

it not be wise to sell the fishery not properly located;

a piece of land that might get into the Courts, and the

Courts might declare that that fishery is not where the

treaty calls for it, and if it did get into the Courta you

might lose all your rights. To avoid_all this the Govern”

ment sends Special Agent Lane with a proposition to buy its

“There is one more point that the Government wishes to

impress upon you and that is. if you agree to sellg you

will be selling a privilege and not a property, iago this

is a fishing privilege and not a property, and they come with
a.proposition to b-" this privilegeo" (C1. 32. 15, p?o ?l, 72).

M 273

Little wonder was it that the Indians asked Agent Erwin: "I
Want you to answer my question so that all the pecple can hear you.

Are you our Agent, or a land purchaser?" (Clo Ex, 15, p. 99).

The Commissioners further stated to the Indians (Cl. Ex. 15,

p. 75):

"We will give you.$lO900Q.0O for a relinquishnent of
this fishing privilege, that is, the Government authorizes us to offer you that amount, and as none of the
Indians use the Wenatshapam Fishery» nor do they live on
it, for you, it is just like picking up that amount of
money in the road. ° 9" ‘

The record shows that the Wenatchee Indians, a constituent part
of the Yakima Tribe, living in the vicinity of the fishery, had long used
the fishery and the Wenatchee River for their salmon supply; that they
wanted the fishery tract properly located, and did not want to sell it;
that they wanted to live upon it and not have any trouble with the white
settlers; that they were afraid of the whites, and had been poorly treated
by then (Cl. Ex. 15, pp. 78, 80, 95). That the tract as surveyed was a
less desirable location for the Indians (Cl. EX. 15, p. 96).

The Commissioners stated that they were authorized to negotiate
for the sale of the Wenatshapan Fishery Tract as laid off on the map
(01. Ex. 15, p. 89).  

The Commissioners told the Indians they had not told any

man there what to ask for the land, but left the price to the Indians

(C1. Ex. 15, p. 99). However, when the representative of the Wenatchess

described the tract (Cl. Ex. 15, p. 98):

“On the right bank of the river the 1
agricultural purposes and most of the

-I
on that piece of land there is heavy t

good for

C land is here,
mber nearly all
It is a

and is
good
i

J‘. I

over,—~all timber that grows in the mountains.
good piece of land for lumbering purposeoo”

M 271.1

and when the Yakimas made the following offer (01. Ex. 15, p. 100);

5” ° The young man there from Wenatchee says it is a
good piece of land. It is good in all respects both

in timber and location. There are many white people
prospecting through that country. Now all the Indians
here have appointed me to set the price on that piece

of land. The railroad purchased a piece of land from
us and we set a price of $5.00 per acre. We think
about that piece of land over there our price would be
ten dollars per acre. We are not offering to se1l~- the
Government wants to buy. That is what we all think and
that is our price."

The Commissioners immediately replied (Cl. Ex. 15, pp. l0O~lO1):

“The Government will not entertain that price for a minute.
The Government buys the very best timber land for $1.25 &
$1.50 per acre and that is a big price. There is no use

of us going any farther in this business because it will

not be considered by the Government in Washington. If the
price mentioned is agreed upon, we need not consider this
matter any further. You.have six miles square that the
Indians say they do not want to live upon. This land is of
no service to this reservation nor to the Indians living .
here. The Government at Washington understands this fact

as well as you and I do. Whatever sum they may give you
for this piece of land is just like finding it in the road,
and besides the Wenatchee Indians are secured with the land
where they desire to live in severalty. There are 23,000
acres of land on this place and if you will take fifty cents
per acre for that land we will make a proposition to Washing»
ton for their consideration. The price you mentioned is

unreasonable. and they will not consider it for a moment.
a on

When an old Indian. who stated that he was an ignorant old man and
didn’t know the value of the lands, suggested a price of $1.50 an acre
(01. Ex. 15, p. 103). the Commissioners stated (Cl. Ex. 15, p. 107):

“° ° There are white men on this fishery who don't want
to get off, and if you will accept a reasonable sum from
the Government it will settle all this trouble.

“We will advise you as soon as we hear from Washington.
and if your offer is accepted. we will then draw up the
agreement for the approval of Congress."

4 276

The Indians offered to sell for $1.50 per acreo The Commissioners

 

then wired the Commissioner of Indian Affairs resemmonding the aeceetance

IT  p¢_nm1ux:3—n.a-an-.1-mr 

   

 

of the $1.80 oer acre offer and for instructions, and upon receipt of
his reply advised the Indians as follows (C1,'Ex. 159 pp. 108~lO9):

"You will see from this telegram that the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs has refused to accept your proposition. He
says that the price is out of question aad he would not
recommend it to Congress» Now as business men, the question
is ‘What shall we do?’ It is a question that is still left
with you entirely. It is not necessary that we discuss this
question very lone. You all understand the question and now
which do you need most, six miles square of land or ten or
fifteen thousand dollars? If you had ten or fifteen thousand
dollars, this money could be used to great advantages You
cannot put that land to any advantages It is settled upon
by whites and the Indians up there donit want it, and the
question now is which do you need the most” the land or the
money? That is the question we want you intelligent men to
decide here this afternoon.”

Thus beaten dos’ an old Yakima Indian sugoested a price of $205000

s.___"!

for the tract, stating that (01. Ex. 159 pp. 1099 110):

”* ” White men are around the outside and want to get in

there. I know that we have no power to hold the Wenatshapam
land away from the whites and for this reason I gave my consent
to sell it onceo I want you to look into this matter and think
it over. I gave my reason because I had no power whatever to
hold this land, We]_]_ I cannot 33;? if.‘-‘_'“:;9.’-.‘. E 3‘-.'O13_'1.d. not sell the
Wenatshapam lando It is better for us to have fifteen or twenty
thousand dollars than to have that land" Twenty Thousand Dollars
would be a great deal to us and would be better too. This is all
I have to say nose I will speak more after awhile."

At the Council on December 19, 18939 Agent Erwin stated in part that
(01. Ex. 15, -9. 87):

"It has been understood by the Government that these Wenatchee
Indians did not want to go to this place; that they Wanted to
remain where they new live, so the Government says to us ‘You
may say to them that we will allot their land under the 3th
Section of the General Allotment Law, 5 “ Q and in addition to
that, we will buy this piece of land at a reasonable price¢‘“

Later in the Council Agent Erwin stated (01. ex. 159 130 115);

“There are 125 Wenatchee Indians over there and by allottin;
each of them 80 acres, the Government gives them 103000 acres
of lands All this land and $10,000 for a fishery that none

of the lndians want is a good trade for you, and you should not
hesitate a moment to make such an Agreement."

Under the circumstances above set forth the agreement provided in
the treaty was secured.

11° The agreement thus obtained is set forth as follows: (01.
1: 6)
ex» 15» Pen 55“ 3 o

"Whereas, John Lane» Special U. S. Indian Agent, and Lewis To
Erwin, U. S. Indian Agent fot the Yakim Indian Agency, duly
appointed Commissionersg on the part of the United States, did
on the Eighth day of January, 189“, conclude an Agreement with
the following tribes and bands of Indians Viz3wmYakimas,
Palonses, Pisquouses, honatshapams, Klickitats, Klinqnitsg
Kow—was~say-us, Liwaywwas, Skinpahsg Wishhams, Shymiks,
Oche-chotes, Kah-miltwpahs, and Sewapacats, all constituting
what is known as the Yakima Kation of Indiansg by their Chiefsww
headwmen and principal men, embracing a majority of all male
adult Indians, belonging to the Yakim. Ration of Indians aforem
said, which said agreement is as fo1lows:m—Whereas a.certain
right of fishery was duly provided for in Article Ten of the
Treaty concluded with these Indians by the Uhitcd States in the
year 1855, and ratified by Congress on harch 89 1859 which said
article reads as follosso toewitz

“'Artic1e 10. And Provided, That there is also reserved and

set apart from the lands ceded by this treaty, for the use and
benefit of the aforesaid confederated tribes and bands, a tract

of land not exceeding in quantity one township of six miles square,
situated at the forks of the Pisquouse or Wenatshapam River, and
iknown as th Wenatshapam Fishery," which said Reservation shall
be surveyed and marked out wheaever the President may direct, and
be subject to the same provisions and restrictions as other

Indian Reservationso“

“Aid Whereas, 3 certain tract of land was duly surveyed and set

rt in the year 1893 by the United States in fulfilment of the
Aeseeaent on the part of the United States to be performed as

t forth in said Article 10 of said Treaty of 18559 as fore”
id; saich said tract of land is known as the Henatshayam
s

‘ I

neryg and is described as follossg to wit:

1* 277

"AED PBOVEEE5. That there is also reserved eni set ever? from
the IBDQS Ceied by this Treaty, for the use and bene§it of the
aforesaid oonfedereted tribes and bands, a tract of land not
exceeding in queeeity one township of six miles squares eituw
ated at the forks of the Piequeuee or Webatehspen River, and
known as the *WEEATSHAPAM FISHBRY3, which eeié Reeervatien
shall be surveyed and marked out whenever the President may
direct, and be subject to the same pruvieiene ani restrictions
as other Indian Reee’vatione.”

"And Whereas, Ehe said Indians have feure the said right of
Fishery, and the said Fishery ebnve deeeribeé, of 11t:1g use
or benefit to them and are willing in iiepoee of the same to
the United States. Therefore? in e?&er to Carry out such

]g)‘J.I°pOSe, it is I’.‘«.€?i‘F3b:; a._'_-f_‘;3.*.F_3-,‘31i as fr'>:i_3.C=1,*‘,:§‘.§==«=
Article I.

“The said Indians hereey Ce£e eve relineaiee 1‘
States, all their right, title, in
of whatsoever meme or nature, of e
of Fishery as set forth in Article 13
“ii,

‘I’
‘J

9
said, eei else all their flake, _D _ H
demani, 6;, in 93% to said land weave éescrihei c
rested description ther+of ani %e<wv es the Weeet\
 -H 11 TH?
ND-‘\..a.9,A..t)' Q

“In consideration of the forgqninr torsion axe relieqjishment
the lnited States he 7
Inéian Agent Yak‘
sun is to be d .o 1' W
use and benefit, es seen as appvevee hf Gee
to their order. ene Indians resereieg a

said money as they may deeiie 11 eeeere Cevmvll to be held by
then, ani for that perpeee. Rf::e th; rat:fieetioe of this
Agreement by Ceaerees, ani the furtne“ coeriderecion that the
Indians known as the egnezeeapem Iedégxsg reeidlug on the

. $ .

to them in severeltyg in ihe vicinity of weere they now reside,
1 . ,.._ .__ ~ ,~ ‘.2
or elsewhere, as beey may eel ct, 1n eeaeudaece wlth Azulcle *,

of the General Alleimeet lee.
Axtiele 5°

"ibis Agreement small not be bieiing tee; either p
ratiliee by Ceegrese.

H
e
('3
‘*1
S
m
c.*.
6*‘
R""Dated and signed at Fort Simcoe, Yakima Agency, Washington,
January 8, 18§h.

John Lane (seal)
Special U. S. Indian Agent
Lewis T.IErwin (seal)
U. S. Indian Agent Yakima
Commissioners

"The foregoing articles of agreement having been fully ex»
plained to us in open council, we the undersigned Chiefs. headmen
and principal men of the several tribes and bands composing the
Yakima Nation of Indians in the State of Washington. do hereby
consent and agree to all the stipulations therein contained.
Witness our hands and seals at Yakima Agency Washington this
ighth day of January. Eighteen Hundred and Ninety-four.”

fl
-1
.35.:

The vreement is si ed b" 2M6 Indians. 9 siznine their names. and
30 J a o
the balance of 187 signing by mark. Seven other signatures were added.
Tomwashe signing by his mark for them (01. EX. 15, pp. 59~66. 68).
The Agreement is certified to as follows (01. Ex. 15. p. 6?):
"We hereby certify that the foregoing Articles oi‘Agreenent
were carefully read and explained to the Indians. parties hereto, in open Council, and were thoroughly understood by them
before signing the same, and t at the Agreement was executed
and signed by said Indians at the akima.Agency in Washington

1
on the Eighth day of January, Eight en Hundred and Ninety~Fonr.

Frank Reaches,

Interpreter
his
Jack Long a
Interpreter mark

Witnesses:
T. J. He ling.
E. E. Ramsanr.”
12. Although said Agreement was certified as having been signed by
said Indians in oven Council on January 8. 1893. the record shows that
M): _ ‘vs 4 '' ,_~_‘
these were not the facts. On January 15. 183*. Comnlsslcncr J0hR Leek»

wired the Commissioner of Indian Affairs from Toppenish. We8hingE03s 33

follows (01. Ex. 15. p. 51):

M P

and forward papers and let me go to Coeur d’ Alene? Answer

Tophenish Washn."

See also letter of Agent Erwin to Harmilt, dated Jan. 19, 189k

(C1. Ex. M).

The record does not disclose how the other signatures
were obtained on said Agreement, but it certainly shows that these
additional signatures were not obtained in open council on January 8,
189M, as above stated, and that a majority of the male adult Yakimas

did not sign the agreement in council on that date.

13. Commissioners John Lane and L. To Erwin transmitted said
Agreement to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs by letter dated January 27,
l89h, which reads in part as follows (Cl. Ex, 15, pp, 52~53);

“We have the honor to hand yon herewith, the proceedings

in full of the different Councils held Ev us in accordance
9 0.

with your instructions ‘Land 3€879ml893‘ in reference to
the sale of the Wenatshapam Fishery, We also enclose the
Agreement drawn up by us, on the part of the Government,
with the Yakima Nation of Indians, said agreement being
signed by 2&6 Indians which we does a clear najori-y as,
according to the last Census, there were 382 male adults
on this Reservation, a majority of ehich eculd be 192.

"Many difficulties were experienced in the consummation

of this Agreement, among sLiCh was the perfect indifference
of a great number of the Indi.is; others egpeared to be
conscientiously opposed to selling their land, claiming it
was just like selling their mother. A more malicious class,
led by Thomas Pearne, denounced the whole thing as a robbery, and circulated the report all over the Reservation
that Coal had been found upon the ienatshapan Fishery, hence
the reason on the Qart of the Government to purchase. This
latter, led to the high price first placed on the land by
the Indians. As you will see from the proceedings, their
first price aggregated $230,300.00. we were anxious, and
made every effort to agree upon some reasonable terms, and
their offer of $20,000 is really the best we could make, and
we further believe that if their proposition i§_ngt accepted

now, that it never will he offered by them, again, at that

figure." (Undsrscoring added)

         

   

 

lh, A.large group of Yakima Indians protested this sale, and
forwarded their protest to the President, The protest, signed by 16?
Yakima Indians, requested the President not to consummate the sale of
the Wenatshapam Fishery Tract; urging that the agreement for said sale
was obtained by misstatements of tact; that the United States Indian
Agent, L. T. Erwin, made them believe that the Indians were selling
only 13,000 acres instead of 23,000 acres; that the selling price of
$20,000 for 23,000 acres was objected to because “we have every reason
to believe we could sell the timber off the land for, from three to
ten dollars an acre"; that "We think our Agent, should be our advocate
and protector, and that he should see that we get full value for what
we sell, and should not be a party to the fraud;" and that the tract
as locatedtas not in accordance with the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855,
and that the land originally selected by Agent Lynch was along the
Wenatchee River and level and more valuable (Cl, Ex. 15, pp, ll5-12M),

A similar protest was forwarded to the Secretary of the
Indian Rights Society, signed by 170 Yakima Indians (Cl, Ex, l5, pp, 125m
130) .

Both protests are in the official files of the Office of
Indian.Affairs, evidently having been forwarded to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs (01, Ex, 15).

15.

Indian Agent for the Yakima Tribe, who had originally located the

On December 26, 1893, Mr. Jay Lynch, former United States

Wcnatshapam Fishery Tract in 1892 when acting as such Agent (Cl, Ex, 5),

wrote a letter to Honorable Darwin R. James, dated December 25, l893,

which reads in part as follows (Cl, Ex, 15, pp, hs~50);

"I take the liberty of writing to you in reference to
a great injustice done to the Yakima Indians, by reason
of a recent survey of the boundary line of a reservation
established by executive order of President Harrison
1892 known as the Wenatohopan Fishery, I refs: you to
the Hon. Commissioners annual report 1892, where you
will find a portion of the correspondence, description,
orders, and authority. You will see that this ros“r~
Vation was to contain a strip of land, down the river
from lake icnatohee, a distance of ten miles. In my
report, I described the tract very plainly, desiring

to include as much of the river as possible and to in»
elude an old fishery that had long seen in use by Indians.
(but a few years since destroyed by the $hltC people)
and the Indians driven away. This spot is located at
the loser end of the ten mile strip, it see and is the
bone of contention, I was removed by the President
last June, before the survey was made, Since my removal the survey has been made under the direction of
L, T, Erwin, the present Agent, eao has very materially
changed the boundary lines, only including about four
miles of the river, leasing the best portion of the
lads, and river, outside oi the tract ssrveyed, Whilst
he has inolodod the amount of lpni, most of it 13
located away from the river on a very high mountain
shore it is practically worthless to the Indians or

any one else, I an informed there is new a Special
Agent at the agency trying to purchase this Reservation
of the Indians, at fifty cents per acre, I had fully
informed the Indians as to lorotio: of reservation as
described in exeoutive order. They are astonished and
bewildered at the change, The tract as set apart in ,
executive order is located noon onsnxfeyei Government
land, and belongs to the H, S, Government, is near the
main line of the Great horthern R,R, and is well worth

:1-:--~c-09*‘-1--tune

ten to twenty dollars oer zero to: tints: alone borderw

I

_&Eb-1.-1--In-«I---x---:-Irv--vs--Is:--.~-z-——r--—u-um.-nu-—r—e1-1.-n-1-.-...-..—-m...-....l.-_..-..-u.----_r. .—....—. .........—........._... .~ ........_..........-........_,.....,_....._A

leg as it does the river, for tee distance 1 has re»
ooxnended, Ibo river runs thxovgh a narrow valley, from
one, to two miles wide, very nigh mountains Lising
sebruptly from the valley, land along the river is much
,more valuable, than mountainous lasd, I do not think

i can give you a clearer idea of the situation than to
Quote the remarks of an old Iniiaz in making his argue

 

I

;aent to me in behalf of their old fiqbesv 3Does our

4' ‘ "7 *'\‘ Q "‘ '1“ ‘ Iv‘ .- -.  - " .-c
§?oet Fates? at oasainsson, tags; a Q~‘;»; 13 an Eagle,

__3 |-I-».;s..4..5. A
that lives on top of a mountain? or does he think a
tSaison is a Door that lives in toe woods, and hills?

Or does he think a Salmon is a mountain goat, that lives
among the rocks of the snow covered mountains? T911 Our
Great Father, the Indian does not care for the little
trout, in the Lake, but wants, the Salmon, that lives

the rockey places in the river, where the Indian can find
him. Our fishery is in the river where you saw it, and
was destroyed by white men, and the Indians driven away.
We want our fishery in the river, snore Governor Stephens
gave it to us a long time ago.‘ (Underscoring added)

"Pages, might be written in reference to this matter,
covering a period of nearly forty years, but I do not
think it necessary to go into further details at this
time,"

This letter is also a part of the official records er the Office of
Indian Affairs, it evidently having been forwarded to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs (Cl, Ex, 15),

15. Notwithstanding the facts above set forth said Agreement of
January 8, l89h, was ratified by Act of Congress, approved August l5,
18915 as Stat. 321, in the follow‘-zinyg lan;j;:1a.g;e:

"Be it enacted by the Senate and House of
Representatives of the United States of Anarica in Congress assembled, That the said agreen
nent be, and the same hereby is accepted, ratiu
fied, and confirmed,

"For the purpose of carrying this agreement and
ratification into effect, there is hereby apu
propriated, out of any money in the Tree nry not
otherwise appropriated, the sum of twenty thousand
dollars, to be paid to the Indian agent of the
Yakima Indian Agency, to be expended by him as
provided in the second article of said agreement,
in such manner and in such sums as may be decided
upon by the general council of the Yakina.Nation
of Indians, convened and held for that purpose,

And the land so ceded and relinqnished is hereby
restored to the public domain, subject to the land
‘laws of the United States: Provided, That the
Indians, known as the Wenatshapan lndians, re»
siding on the Wenatchee River, tate of Washington,
shall be allowed the privilege of taking allotments

M 28H

of land in severalty under the fourth section of the
general allotment Act of eighteen hundred and eightyseven, and amended Act of eighteen hundred and ninetyone, as contemplated by the second article of said
agreement: And provided further, That it shall be

the duty of the Indian agent of the Yakima Indian
Agency to see that the Wenatshapam and other Indians
living on the Wenatdhee River, .tate of Washington,
shall receive and have paid to them their full and
pro rata share of said moneys.”

17. Section H of the General Allotment Act of February 8, 1887,
EM Stat. 388, provided in part as follows:

“That share any Indian not residing upon a reservation, or for whose tribe no reservation has been
provided by treaty, act of Congress or executive
order, shall make settlement upon any surveyed or
unsurveyed lands of the United States not otherwise
appropriated, he or she shall be entitled, upon
application to the local land—office for the

district in which the lands are located, to have

the same allotted to him or her, and to his or ,
her children, in quantities and manner as provided

in this act for Indians residing upon reservations;
and when such settlement is made upon unsurveyed
lands, the grant to such Indians shall be adjusted
upon the survey of the lands so as to conform thereto;
and patents shall be issued to than for such lands in
the manner and with the restrictions as herein provided,"

Said Section N was amended by Act approved February 28, 1891, 26

Stat. 795, as follows:

"Sec. u. That where any Indian entitled to allotment under existing laws shall make settlement upon
any surveyed or unsurveyed lands of the United States
not otherwise appropriated, he or she shall be entitled,
upon application to the local land office for the dis«
trict in which the lands are located, to have the same
allotted to him or her and to his or her children, in
quantities and manner as provided in the foregoing
section of this amending act for Indians residing upon
reservations; and when such settlement is made upon unn
surveyed lands the grant to such Indians shall be adjusted upon the survey of the lands so as to conform
thereto; and patents shall be issued to then for such
lands in the manner and with the restrictions provided
in the act to which this is an amendment, * *”

l8.i The amount of $20,000.00 appropriated by Congress to fulfill
said Agreement of January 8, 189M, was set up on the books of the Treasury
Department on.August 15, 189M, and was advanced to Lewis T, Erwin” Yakima
Indian Agent during the fiscal years 1896 and 1897, and paid, except for
$975.50, which remained on the books of the Treasury Iepartment until
March 19, 1929, when it was covered into the surplus fund of the United

States Treasury pursuant to the provisions of the get of February 12,

1929, H5 Stat. 116M, The $976050 belonged to those individuals who

opposed said sale, and refused to accept their per capita share of the
payment (01. E38. 11, 1h).

19.

The lands in the Wehatshapam Fishery Tract, as surveyed in

l83§, were in a mountainous d'strict and were heavily timberedg and were

valuable chiefly for their timber (Clo Exs. 5; l0; l5, pp, 6, 129 9”),

Along the right bank of the Weaatchee River were some good agricultural

lands, which were then occupied by white settlers (Cl, Exs. 5°

pea 95. 9833

In 1392 a transcontinental railroad, The Great Northern Railroad, was constructed through the Weuatchee Valleyg from the town of

Eenatche to the West Coast (01. Ex, 5; Deft, E30 13 pa l0S)° This rail»

road which was completed in 1393, passed within two miles of

shapam Fishery Tract (01. Ex. 1; Deft, Ex, 1, pp. 99 11’

area with markets on the West Coast and the Eastern Stateso

of the railroad this area 2‘

With the construction

upca by shite people, including the tract in question (01, Exo 530 In

-1

1892 the town of Leavenworth was established, and became a railroad

'\-:_-..£
9

Ci}
\..il

division point in 1893 (Deft. Ex._1, p. 118). This town developed on the

Wenatchee River, about 18 miles south from the Wenatshapam Fishery Tract
(01. Ex. 1). In 1888 the town of Wenatohee was platted as a townsite and
was incorporated in 1893 (Deft. Ex. 1. P. 118).

In addition to the railroad, in 1893 the settlers had built a
County Road from a point on the Wenatohee River 17 miles from the mouth
to the head of Lake Wenatchee, a distance of 28 miles, which was opened
that year (01. Ex. 15, p. 17). This road ran through the Wenatshapam
Fishery Tract (Cl. Ex. 1).

By not of March 2. l853, 10 Stat. 172. the Territory of
Washington was established. In 1868 the southern portion of the
Wenatshapam Tract was part of Yakima County. In 1883 it was made a part
of Kittitas County. In 1888 the north portion was included in Okanagon
County,

On November 11, 1889, Washington was proclaimed a State, under

the provisions of the Act of February 22, 1889, 25 Stat. 176, In 1899
Chelan County was established, with senatehee as the County seat, and
said tract was entirely included in Chelan County (Def. Ex. 1. p. 88).
At Wenatchee. about 50 miles from the Wenatshapam Fishery
Tract, the Wenatchee River joins the Columbia River. and with the cons

struotion of the Great Northern Railroad, the said tract was linked

with the Columbia River water transportation fas11ities to Portland,

T Oregon, and the West Coast (Def. Ex. 1, PP. 89~90, 108-109).

In 1897 most of the Wenatshapam Fishery Tract was seotionized
by the United States Geological Survey (01. Ex. 10). In 1901 the first

patent for lands in said tract was issued to a white settler under the

it 28%

Homestead Act (May 20, 1862, 12 Stat. 392). Other lands in the tract
were patented to the Northern Pacific Railroad in 1902 (Act of July 2,
13611,, 13 stat. 365), to the State of Washington (Act of Feb. 22, 18899
35 Stat. 175), and to white settlers under the Timber and Stone Act

of June 3, 1878, 20 Stat. 89 (Daft. Ex. 1, pp. 109u11h), The record
shoes 15 sales to individuals of land in Chelan and Kittitas Counties
between June 11, 1888 and November 13, 1901, and that the average

Price paid for timber land between 1888 and 1890 was $2,2h9 per screw“
from 1891 to 1900, $1.60 per acre and in 1901 for $1090 per acre. In
1902 the lamb Davies Lumber Company purchased from the Northern Pacific
in excess of 10,000 acres of timber land in T. 2? NORO 1?Eo, W.£o9 in«
cluding the odd sections therein at a price of $2000 per acre, This
township embraced most of the tract under valuations

20, In 1893 the first sawmill was established at Leavenworth

(Deft. Ex. 1, p, 125), about 18 miles from the Wenatshapam Fishery
Tract (01, Ex, 1); and other small sawmills operated in the area at
times prior to 1901, supplying local demands for lumber (Deft, Exo 19
Pa 3,2690

la 1902 the big luster operators came into this areao Lambm

Davies lmmber Company, from Clictong Iowag purchased lands in the Wenatn

shanam Eissery Tract from the Northern Pacific aailroad in 19023 sad
built a large lumber mill at Leavenworth (Clo Ex, 12; Befto Wito Adamsg

Re }3~§9, 31). In 1903 the Schmitten Lumber Company and the Peshastin

Lumber Company began operations in this area; making box shock to supU1y

the demands of the fruit growers (Daft, Wit. Adams, Ba 36).

1+ 28';

h 288

The sawmills supplied lumber locally for the railroad and
settlers; and timber from this tract was manufactured into shingles,
and shipped by full shingle train lots to eastern markets (Deft. Wit.
Adams, R. N2--143) .

The Great Northern Lumber Company, successor of the LambDapies Lumber_Company, continued operating in this area until 1926 (C1.
Ex._2). The timber cruises of the Great Northern Lumber Company, made
in 191%, covered practically all of the Wenatshapam Fishery Tract, and
showed the types of timber on this tract as yellow or ponderosa pine,
Douglas Fir, White pine and cedar; and that in actual logging operations
the volume of timber cut was from 10 to 15 per cent higher than the cruise
volumes shown above (Cl. Ex. 2).

The White pine and Ponderosa Pine, and Douglas Fir were important
merchantable timber species in this area (Henze, B, 11-12).

21. Because the best use for the land was for the use of its
timber, its value at the time of the cession must be based primarily
on the Value of its timber. The sale of public timber land had a miniu
mum price of $2.50 per acre. It had been authorized by Act of Congress
of June 3, 1878, (20 Stat. 89) called the Timber and Stone Act.

That portion of the tract involved which was not conveyed to
the Northern Pacific Railroad, but which became public lands, could only
be acquired in limited amounts under the Timber and Stone Act, or the
Homestead Act--which limitations greatly retarded the sale and developm
ment of timber land because the heavy stand of timber and the difficulty

of removing the same, made it'very difficult, if not impossible, for an

investor, speculator or lumberman to secure a block of timber of suffi»
cient size to justify the expense of building access roadsg camps or other
facilities necessary for the logging and exploitation of same; and the
cost of the clearing retarded the purchase of same for agricultural uses.
In the early nihetiess there was much stealing of the timber,
and the timber stolen and that owned and marketed by the settlers, re»
sulted in the establishment of a mill at Leavenworth in the Ueeatchee
Valley in l893, which produced railroad ties from the Ponderosa pine and
and there is evidence

railroad structural timber from the Douglas fir;

that a mill for the manufacture of box shocks from pine was in operation

at Wenatchee in the winter of l9Ol»l9029 Befendantls witness, Plemmer,
says that “it is reasonable to ass“ee that small mills ” * * may have

operated in the area at earlier dates * * ° sellie it to the railroad

Us

outlet in limited local demaedo“ (Deftiso EKG 13 p. 12530

History of the Public Land Policies it is stated

In Eihbard‘s
that the effect of the Timber and Stone Act (and the Homestead Act

necessarily contributed thereto) was that the Government realized about

"\

“$30,000,000 for the sale ct

timber worth at a V :3 conservative estiu

229 On J'eeary 8, l?QL9 when the azreeeeet was executed for the
sale of the Wenatshapam Fishery Tract, under wdich the United States

acquired said 233000 acre tract for $2O3OOOoOO, he volume 0; the
Valuable merchantable timher on said tractg according to the cruise

report of Ho J. Eeez (Plitfs EKG 2), was; (Eenzea R9 2l~22}3

5,359,000 feet of Idaho White Pine;
176,973,000 feet of Ponderosa Pine;
72,U2l,000 feet of Douglas and White Fir;
2,137,000 feet of Cedar.

Henze said that the lands in said tract were excellent forest
lands and usually good for lumbering operations; that the White Pine and
Yellow Pine, and Douglas Fir were good merchantable species, and were
known in the lumber markets in 189M; in fact, the Douglas Fir and Ponderosa
Pine were the major sources of lumber in the Northwest (Henze, R. 11, 12;
Deft's. Ex. 1, p, 9h); that there was a demand for this species and lumber
in 189h (Mason, Dxt. M7, C1. Ex. 87, pp, 11m139 16m17,°5o; Steer, Dkt.

M7. 01. Ex. 88, pp. 1s»2o; ghugs),

Henze testified that on January 89 189k, the value of said

23,000 acres of land and the timber on said tract was (Henze, R. 2l~22):

Idaho White Pine $2.00 per M board feet;

Ponderosa Pine .60 " " "' "
Douglas and White Fir .30 " " " "
cedar 030 H n u n
Land 1.00 per acre,

The witness stated that the fair market value for the land and timber on
said 23,000 acre Wenatshapam Fishery Tract in 1893, was $7,00 an acre, OT
$151,000.00 (Henze, R. 21), (This value including $1.00 per acre for the
land only.)

23. The volume of the valuables merchaatable timber of said tract,
as estimated by plaiatiffis witness, Henze, in the foregoing finding,
was based on p1aintiff‘s Exhibit No. 2, shich is a sworn statement of
H. G. Merz of the records of cruises made by the Great Northern Lumber
Company in 191h, as shown by the records of said lumber company; The

affidavit of said Hers further says that “In actually 1ogging;the lands

cruised, affiant states that the actual volume of timber cut was approxin
mately higher by 10 to 15 per cent of the cruise’s volume given.” rAlthough
the witness, Henze, says that the cruise relied upon did not cover the
entire tract, that he (Henze) had visited the entire tract for the purpose
of estimating the timber thereon in 189U, and had viewed the remaining
stumpage thereon and had estimated the timber on the entire tract in
189M in accordance with the cruising as shown by the hers statement, In
View of the fact that there certainly was more timber on the-land in 189M
than there was in 191M, the estimate of Henze would seem to be dependable.
The qualification of said Henge, as a timber exeertg and as
to reliability are shown to be very high, He was a man he years of age;
a partner in a high~class firm, whose besiness was that of Consulting
forester; which firm had made a great many a;praisals of timber land
from 1921 down to the present time for very large ember firms and other
companies interested in timber (See Tr, in Dkt. Eco U?9 pp. 8»l3~wmade
a part of the record in this case by reference.) He had aryraised from
one to four billion feet of timber a year; had been engaged continuously
and exclusively in forestry appraisal work from 1931 to 195M? except for
a period of three years, he served in the United States Army Air Forceo
in Valuing the timber he based his value per thousand board feet UEOR
the values found in standard works ad records for the gear 18930
230 In the early days of our history the forests of our country

were generally regarded as inexhaustible and the early settlers were

interested in the use of the land for agricultural and grazing Purposes

vs9

and the clearing of lands for those purposes Was a burdensome and exm

Pensive processo

However, almost from

the need of timber for homes and local inéustriee, as well as for export,

recornized and an early appreciation by business interests,

-.'*_;~'‘*

'?.-‘'’8. S

distinsuished from

value of our timber resources J

~ 1
oteees of tee

13.... .1 and

the
its begirning in the

east and gradually extended first through the Lakes region and then

to the northwest. These operations reached the Oregonuwashington area

&bOut 1890 to l900, although some ehip?en‘s of timber in the Puget Sound

oleee in lSh~. While loriine was difficult and exI -...... ._,_

area were tacins

f''''
«L;

until the use of highulino leggiee teehnioue first broke the

—- ;

,eeed after the

‘ --3 . v-‘.1 -. -...-'-. . A - V
‘Z‘."vrez1’:‘“1e’?;Tr"- Cetlii-11?.‘ :-=.:'_:.x g-'.*.’».,.1.,»’\.;3.--e...- t‘:-e e,‘§3:C>1.1.C.e..t-3.o;1 of

to 1e”{S geeh as here involved,

1- ...-~ 
Juszeess save aP“°<€

-..'L...\ 5.)

there Were smallmseale operati.ns between l3§O and l?ee aid even prior

/

--.

reel ‘

theretomwend a developing issninn by interests 0; the potential

Value of the forests of Washington eel Creron,

The fine harbor and deep ate f;:il.t_es of the Puget

9iy€“e1'e, t'e use of en 0 91 retarded; : 9 e‘, es previoesly stated,

I‘ -v** -~-''\‘‘'‘' ‘*9 “ F V‘ H 3‘ '‘ Ir‘ 1‘
tee future deiel, ; -wa:oe of thCSc fo_» is C T3f?€T mes fON5S€EH;13 and
recognized in t?* oefly nineties,

0The construction of the Northern Pacific Railroad to a point
Within a few miles of the timber lands here involved took elaoe in 1893
and this added transportation facility greatly promoted the development

of the lumber interests in this section and enhanced the value of standing

timbero

253 We find that the value of the 239000 acres involved? at the

date of the cession, in 189%, was $3.00 per acre; or a total of $69,000.

I’

20, We further find that the amount of $20,000 paid by the defendant

to the plaintiffs for the ceded land was an unconscionable consideration

undo? the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Acto

'12‘

4-Jo

Edgar

.._a.—.-_..-..

Chief'Commissioner

W :1. ‘E; "5

 
 

 

._."".\(
O‘maf?

..._...n..__.-u-..--.-_-—.~....u q.—o-Louis Jo

a—-u-nu-—-—-. -_..—.

Associate Commissioner

   

‘Jr 293

