EFOR3 '23:»: limnnr cxmms comzxss I011

calms E. "WILLIAMS, Josnvs )
REDTHUHDEB, and HARRY OWHI )
as representatives of the )
NEZ PERCE mm, )
)

Petitioners, )

J

v. g Docket No. 180-A
THE UNITED sm':=ss_ Q_I_E",4‘-LIAEB.ICA.» g
Respondent. l)
Decided: August 10, 1955
Appearances:

David Cobb, with whom were
James E. Curry, Lyle Keith,
,and I. S. Weissbrodt,

.Attorneys for Petitioners.

John 3. Sullivan, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry‘W. Morton.
.Attorneys for Respondent.

OPINION Q§_TEE COHMISSION

 

0‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petitioners here, the Nez Perce Tribe, seek recovery from the,
United States for the value of gold removed.by shite miners from the
Nez Perce Reservation during the period from 1860 to 1867 and compenr
sation for the use of parts of the reservation land taken over by nonIndian intruders during the same period for settlements, townsites, etc.,

all while the petitioners were in the rightful possession of the reservation.

35

There is no question about the right of petitioners to the exclusive
possession of the lands from which the gold was taken or which was
occupied by the white intruders, for these lands (Royce, Indian Land
Cession, tracts his, 1:142 (Washington-Idaho) Part 2 of the 18th Annual
Report, Bureau of American Ethnology) were expressly set apart for the
exclusive use and benefit of said tribe by Article 2 of the Treaty of
June 11. 1555. 12 Stat. 957. which provides (Finding-_1+):

“All which tract shall be set apart and, so far as necessary,
surveyed and marked out for the erclusive_use and benefit of

said tribe as an Indian reservation; nor shall any white man.

except those in the employment of the Indian Department, be

permitted to reside upon the said reservation without the permission of the tribe-and the superintendent and agent.

This treaty, by its terms (Art. ll), became “obligatory upon the

contracting parties as soon as_the same shall_be ratifiedby the Presiden,f~i—

and Senate of the United States.“ It was ratified on March 8. 1859. and 

proclaimed on April 29, 1859.

Goldwras discovered on parts of the reservation about the year 1860
causing an influx of white miners and settlers who began mining operations
and settled large areas of the reserve, and as a result of these intrusions
the defendant negotiated a treaty with the }':’ez Perce on June 9, 1863,

114. Stat. 611.7, (Find. 11), by which the tribe relinquished all their lands
reserved by the 1855 treaty, except a tract (Royce 1+’-1-2) which was retained
for their diminished reservation. This treaty (Art. 10), by language

identical to that quoted from the 1855 treaty,became effective only on

ratification, and it was not ratified until April 17, 1867, and proclairnedfj

on April 20, 1867. So it is certain that the Indians were entitled to

exclusive possession of the lands upon which the trespasses occurred fro: J

at least, March 8, 1859; to April 17, 1867, the date on which the 1863

treaty was ratified. Bush v. United States, 29 C. Cls. lhh. It is for

the gold removed and the other trespasses, between these dates, that

claim is made.

The evidence in this case is voluminous. It consists of 738 exhibits

of a documentary character offered by petitioners and 26 documents offered

by defendant. In addition, there are upwards of 300 pages of testimony
offered.by the parties. Giving this vast volume of evidence the effect
contended for by the petitioners, and it is not in the main disputed by
defendant, it purports to prove that hordes of gold-seekers descended
upon the Nez Perce reservation, beginning in the year 1860 and continue
ing until 1867, who began and continued mining onerations, establishing
mining districts, laying out and occupying towns, locating settlements

of various kinds, establishing civil government and in many other ways
encroaching upon and.taking over large areas of the reservation in disregard of the lndians' rights. It has been estimated that as many as
20,000 intruders were on the reservation by 1862, and this number doubled
in later years, and between the years 1860 to l867, it is estimated by

counsel for petitioners that between 30 and 30 million dollars worth of

gold was removed from the reservation.

The Government's agents made some effort to prevent the encroachments

"upon the Indian lands but those efforts were ineffectual by reason of the

fact that the Indian agents had insufficient forces to restrain the thousands of goldeseekers pouring into the reserve during the years from 1860

to 1867. In any event, the representatives of the Government could make

3 55

no effective efforts to prevent intrusions or to remove the intruders

who had located on the reserve.

But giving the facts shown by the record the force and effect contended for by petitioners, do they show liability on the part of defendant '

for the losses sustained by the Indians?

The claim as pleaded and argued actually falls into two categories:
one is for the occupancy of the Indian reserved lands by white intruders,

and the other is for the conversion by respondent of gold removed from

the Indian lands by white trespassers.

Land Occupancy Claim

 

.As we_have stated above, the discovery of gold on the Nez Perce
reservation caused a rush of gold-seekers and others to enter the reservation and occupy many parts thereof, in the manner and for the purposes
outlined above, in disregard of the Indians‘ rights and. in fact, despite
the efforts of the Government authorities to restrain the intruders._

There can be no question about these facts, in truth, the Government makes

no attempt to dispute them.

The consideration of this branch of the case has been difficult and
confused because of the efforts of the Indians to base liability upon
concepts of the Government‘s liability growing out of the fiduciary
relationship existing between the Indians and the Government and upon
theories of a taking by the respondent of an easement of parts of the
reservation for use of third persons, the trespassers, while the Governe

ment defends on the legal theory that its agreement in the 1855 treaty

3 586

to protect the Indians in the exclusive possession of the reserve did not
make it liable for the losses sustained by the Indians through its failure
or neglect to prevent the encroachments of the whites. It relies'upon the

case of H32 Perce v. United States. 95 C. Cls. 1, in which the Court of

Claims, in referring to Article 2 of said treaty, stated:

The purpose of the above provision was to set apart absolutely
the lands described.for the exclusive use and.benefit of the
plaintiff. The second clause, that no white man should be permitted to reside on the reservation, was inserted only to emphasize
the statement in the first clause that the lands were set apart
“for the exclusive use and benefit of said tribe.“ We are clearly
of opinion that no intention can be gathered therefrom that the
defendant intended to guarantee that no white man should reside
thereon and that it should respond in damages if they did.

Independent of treaty, the defendant as the sovereign.power
wasgunder the duty of protecting the plaintiff in the peaceful
occupation and possession of its property; Cherokee Nation v.
Hitchcock, 187. U. S. 29%; but this duty, of course,-goes no
further than a duty to use its forces to endeavor to prevent a
threatened wrong and to afford it redress in its courts against
the wrongdoer if the wrong is committed. No one has ever
asserted.that because a.person‘s_rights are invaded by a stranger
the sovereign is liable in damages for a failure to afford adequate
protection. Cf. Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations v. United States,
75 0. C13. 39h. This is true even though the sovereign be grossly
negligent in failing to afford.the necessary protection against
the threatened danger. The sovereign is not liable for failure

to perform a governmental function.

Incidentally, the judgment in the above case was set'up as a bar to our

consideration of this claim or the gold claim but we thought such claims
were based upon grounds not adjudicated in the former case and we therefore overruled the respondents‘ contention that the former case was res

adjudicata.

While under the law as it existed.prior to the passage of the Indian

Claims Commission Act, there may be some basis for the Government's

contentions, the interpretations of our act by the Court of Claims in

the recent case of Otoe and Missouria Tribe v. United States, ' C. C15.

T

3 decided May 3.'l955, on appeal from this Commission, the court,

speaking generally of the effect of the Indian Claims Commission Act, said:

The Indian Claims Commission Act is both remedial legislation and special legislation. It broadens the Government's
consent to suit and as such is in derogation of its sovereignty.
It confers special privileges upon the Indian claimants apart
from the rest of the community, and to some extent is in derogation of the common law. This was, we think because of the
peculiar nature of the dealings between the Government and
Indians from very early times. On the other hand, it remedies
defects in the common law and in pre—existing statutory law
as those laws affected Indians. and it was designed to correct

_certain evils of long standing and well known to Congress.

And again:

‘ * * In.providing for the adjudication_of claims which would
arise from the revision of treaties or on the basis of fair and
honorable dealings, however, Congress was creating causes of action
and admitting a liability in the Government on such claims. The
question is then, do these newly created causes of action extend
to claims falling within their general terms including claims
based on property rights in the Indians that are not compensable
or justiciable under ordinary rules of law or equity.

And also:

If clause (R) permits Indian claimants to recover for the
uncompensated taking (deprivation) by treaty or otherwise of a
property right which.in itself created no legal right in the
owner against the Government, it would seem reasonable to conclude
that Congress also intended.that the same property right ceded _
under a ratified treaty of cession for a grossly inadequate consideration, would give rise to a cause of action under clause (3);
and also, that where the Government*s dealings with Indians conr _
cerning that same property right were less than fair and honorable,
the Indians should have a claim under clause (5). A study of the
legislative history of the Act as a whole and of those three
clauses in particular, persuades us that Congress did so intend.

Here it is plain then that the fair and honorable dealings clause was
intended to and did create a cause of action that was not before cognisable

under ordinary rules of law or equity, and is ah‘admission of liability

2- es‘

3 588

for such causes. The fiduciary relationship of the parties does not seem
to have a very important bearing on the claim here under consideration.
What is important and basic to these claims is that the Government, as
has been shown, granted the Indians thezeservation and.promised them the
exclusive use and occupation thereof and to protect them against intrusions by white men. So the question here to be determined is whether
the respondent can, under the fair and honorable dealings clause, be held
to make reparation for damages sustained by the tribe resulting from the
Government's failure;to protect the tribe in its use and occupation of the

reservation, as it agreed to do.

In considering the question of liability under our act, we start pith
the provisions of the 1855 treaty. .Article 2 thereof (Finding H) set aside
the reservation for the exclusive use of the tribe and the Government I
agreed to keep white men off the reservation unless permitted to resided,
thereon by the Indians. Here is an obligation assumed by the_Government;
it was not an empty promise, for, as stated in Men Perce v. United States,
supra, “Independent of treaty, the defendant as the_sovereign.power was
‘under the duty of protecting the plaintiff [§haian§7 in the peaceful OCCUr
pation and possession of its property * *.“ as shown by the excerpts from
the opinion of the Court of Claims the obligation to protect the Indians
in the exclusive enjoyment of their property was recognized by the Governr
meat but under the law as it previously existed a failure to comply with
such a promise did not make the Government liable for its failure to perform

since it, as the sovereign, incurred no such liability.

_ To the same effect is the case,Creek v. United States, 318 U. 5. 629.
In a treaty with the Greeks, the Government "guarantees to them [the

Creel:_s_7 quiet possession of their country" and it was contended this_

promise made the Governmentliable for a breach thereof. In concluding .

that such guaranty did not make the Government liable for a breach thereof. the court said this: “This conclusion does not mean that the_United

States made an empty promise. The Government undertook * * through its

administrative and legislative policy to aid the tribes to hold possession

of their lands.“ See also Leighton v. United__States, 29 _C. 015. 288, 161

U. S. 291, 296, and Blackfoot _v. United States, 810. Cls. 119, 123.

In all these cases the courts were of the op_inion the Government by
such treaty promises assumed a responsibility but was not legally liable

to make payment if it breached its promises. It can hardly be ‘doubted

that in such a contract between a non-Indian and the Government a breach
of such promise would require the latter to make reparation. Fairness

and justice would require such reparation. It seems to us that clause (5)
of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act was intended to give
substance on moral grounds to such a promise and that the respondent is
liable for the damages resulting from its failure ,to prevent the intrusions and occupancy of the Indian lands during the period 1860-1857

while the Hez Perce were entitled to the exclusive possession thereof.

We shall not discuss in detail the evidence showing white encroachments on the reservation, for the record is replete with undisputed

evidence of white trespassers, as the findings show. In this connection,

. ..''I1:h.. . :. 4.. ....,, _. ..

hopever, an agreement was made between respondent and the Nez Perce

(Finding 7) which requires consideration.

This agreement was made on.kpril 10, 1861, and its purpose, as itsd
terms provide, was to permit whites to enter, roughly, the northern half

of the reservation "for:mining purposes." It expressly provided that the

- Indians‘ root-grounds and agricultural tracts in the opened area should

not be taken or occupied by the whites and that the part of the reservation lying south of the dividing line, except for a right of way to the
north, should remain free of whites. The United States also agreed to
maintain a.military force on the reservation "to preserve the quiet of

the country and.protect the Indians in the rights secured to them by

treaty and these articles of agreement."

k

The Agreement of April 10, 1861 was not effective even as to the
lands it was intended to cover, for shortly after its execution, military protection was withdrawn and the miners and others occupied lands
covered by the agreement for purposes other than mining, and with the_
discovery of rich placer mines with the reservation south of the line
fized.in the 1861 agreement, miners and othenseztended their encroachments throughout a large part of the reservation without serious opposition on the part of Government officials. and shortly after the 1861

agreement, negotiations for a cession of the goldebearing area began and

resulted in the consummation of the treaty of cession of June ll, 1863.

The evidence offered by the tribe shows that many areas of the

reservation were occupied by white intruders for various purposes, but

.3 59%

the parts of the reservation so occupied and used by the trespassers
within the boundaries of the reservation, hereafter to be determined,

is not_shown, except in the vaguest way. Certainly, not in a manner
by which we can determine where they are and the extent to which the

parts of the reservation were occupied by the trespassers. Without

_definite proof as to such occupied areas no determination of compensation for_ the use thereof can be made. We presume this proof will be

forthcoming in connection withlproof of the value of the use of the

occupied areas. So, insofar as the land occupancy is concerned, we now

. merely decide‘ that the Government is liable for the value of the use of

so much of the reservation as the evidence may show was occupied by the

trespass ers .
5

Boundaries of l855 Reservation.

 

By the Treaty of June ll, l855,' a. reservation was set aside for the
Nez Perce Tribe (see Finding 1%), but it was never surveyed.‘ Petitioners

have requested ultimate findings with respect to the boundaries of the
reservation. There is no dispute among the parties to the north or west

southern boundaries (Requested Ultimate Findings of Petitioners. No. 5

(b), p. 80), and but slight disagreement as to the southern boundary of the

reservation. (Requested Ultimate Finding No. 5 (c), p. 92). There is

serious disagreement, however, as to'the eastern boundary line.

Historical Background
During the negotiations leading up to the Treaty of June ll, 1855,

Governor Isaac Stevens, treaty commissioner, in speaking to the Indians

at Walla Walla proposed a reservation in the Nez Perce country to extend

from the Blue Mountains to the spurs of the Bitter Root Mountains and

from the Palouse River to part way up the Grande Rondo and Salmon Rivers.

(Pet Ex. 53).

_Then, in more specifically describing this proposed reservation in

Council, Governor Stevens said:

We commence where this river the Palouse comes from the
m0unt8inS: and down the river to the mouth of the Ti—noh—pan-up,
then to the Snake river 10 miles below the mouth of the El-powwow-wee, then to the source of the El—pow-wow—wee, thence along
the crest of the Blue Mountains to the Grande River below the
Grande Ronde, thence along the ridge between the Wal-low—how
river, crossing the Snake river 15 miles below the mouth of
Powder river, thence to the Salmon river a little above the
crossing, thence by the spurs of the mountains to the source
of the Palouse river at the place of beginning.

The discovery of gold within the Nez Perce country immediately raised
the question as to the exact location of the eastern boundary. On
September 16, 1861. Agent Hutchins wrote to the Superintendent of Washington Territory as follows regarding the matter: (Pet. BX. 208)

I deem it important that the eastern boundary of this reservation should be precisely defined. This line (in the words of
the Treaty) runs along the spurs of the Bitter Root Mts. It
would be impossible to describe a boundary in a more vague and
indefinite manner, especially in a country like this, which is
a succession of mountains and spurs of mountains. The importance
of this line being accurately determined, is from the fact that
the gold mines, as yet discovered, lie within these spurs, and I
recommend that you take the necessary steps to procure an appropriation for the purpose.

And again on June 30, 1862, Agent Hutchins wrote to the Superintendent as

follows:

By the treaty of June 11, 1855, with the Nez Perce, the tribe
ceded and relinquished to the United States all their interest
to that tract of country between the summit of the Bitter Boots

3 592

3 S93
Retyped

and the spurs of said mountains; and in the second article of
said treaty this tract is not included in the lands of the reservation, but the eastern line of the reserve is established to run
along those spurs. No line or boundary can be more superlatively
indefinite with the topographic features such as the country
presents as a line "by the spurs of the Bitter Root mountains to
the place of beginning." This country might be described as a
vast sheet of table-lands, broken occasionally by deep canyons,
where flow the streams, which, rising from the banks of the Snake
river, extend eastward, gradually reaching mountain altitudes.
The rise from the table—lands to the mountains proper is so
uniformly gradual as to cause expert judges to be at a loss to
determine any natural points on the course of the line as marking
the eastern boundary. The vast interest that has attracted citizens
to the reserve is centred in the tract that lies between what is
unmistakably mountain and the true base of the mountains constituting the foot—hills. This is the gold region, and it is my
opinion that if this line was "surveyed and marked out" under
authority, as required by the second article of the treaty, that
the mines would be found to be entirely without the reservation.
But, as the Indians claim the mining lands to be within their
country, I have deemed it best, in absence of any surveys heretow

fore, to officially view the mines within the reservation until
the contrary is legally established. * * *

Expert Testimony.

If Agent Eutchins found it impossible to determine the eastern boundary
from the treaty call of "by the spurs of the Bitter Root Mountains” so do

the experts who testified in this case.

Mr. Fred Hartman, a cartographer, was employed by petitioners to transpose to a larger scale modern map the lines of the reservation taken from
Land Office maps and to attempt to either validate or adjust "that line"
in reference to other documentary material. In direct examination, Mr.

Hartman's attention was directed to the treaty call and he replied:

A. Well, "by the spurs" to me meant along the fingers of the
Bitter Root Mountains as they stretch down from the range itself.
There seems to be evidence in many of the source materials,_/
and they are actually labeled spurs of the Bitter Root Mountains.

 

/ Iot cited and none found

that this line should come at the foot of these spurs coming
from the Bitter Boot hountains, in contrast to the line running
along a ridge as shown on.Eespondent's Hap Arl.

I wouldnlt interpret a ridge line to be a spur of the Bitter
Root Mountains. '

Q. ‘Would you say as a cartographer that you could locate actually
a.spur along that Bitter Root Mountain Range?

A. I would say it would be very difficult or impossible.

Q. So that if your only information to trace this line was by the
spurs of the Bitter Boot Mountains and you had no other historical
documents to show the intent of the parties at that time, would you
be pretty much at a loss?

A9 Yes 3 H I Wollldo

Q. In view of the present survey. So then is it your opinion that
if “by the spurs” means anything, it means that the line that should
be put on the map should not run along peaks of hills, but should
run in front of mountain ranges? '

\

A. That is correct._ At the feet of hills.
Q. Do you get confirmation then from that construction of the treaty?

A. The line as I have drawn it here, Royce's line, does run generally
in the lower areas, at thezfeet of these mountains here; at the feet
instead of running along the ridges to the west, as the Eespondent‘s
Hap A»l.shows. (T. 130-131).

The defendant offered as its expert on the boundary question, Mr.
William H. Richards, Chief, Division of Surveys, Bureau of Land Management,

Department of the Interior, who had this to say with respect to the treaty

call: (T. 277-278).

A. * ' * The call which reads, "thence by the spurs of the Bitter
Boot Mountains? is a line that really couldn‘t be identified on
the ground by physical features, with any certainty. For that
reason between the two terminal points of the east boundary we
simply followed the general configuration of the Boyce line as the
basis for that map.

‘#3

D1

Q. You say that the description in the treaty, “along the spurs
of the Bitter Boot Mountains" cannot be determined on the ground.
Is that _right?_ ' ‘ A. That is perfectly evident, I think.

3!‘

Q. Is there anything about the topography of'the_.country there
that would in anyway help in determining what was meant by "along
the spurs of the Bitter Boot Mountains“ Mr. Bichardst

A. I don't believe you could identifypthat line from that description
with any degree of precision.

Defendant's East Boundary Line.

 

is noted above, defendant's witness, Mr. Richards, in mapping the
east boundary line followed the general configaration of the Royce line
(Royce 11-‘N1, Map of Idaho, Baa. E., .l8th Annual Report, Part ~2) between
two "terminal points“ of the east boundary. The terminal points would
be “the Salmon river above the crossing“ —— the southeastern corner of
the reservation and “where the Mon-ha-na-she or ‘southern tributary of the
Palouse river flows from the spurs of the Bitter Boot Mountains" --'- the
northwestern corner of the reservation.
_ Mr. Richards between these points stated he attempted to follow
the general configuration of the Royce line although he did not know
upon what evidence Royce based his east line (T. .278), and in view of the
fact that the topographic features of Boyce‘s map "are undoubtedly inaccurate in places,” ('2. 281). The witness further testified that the
Boyce line was in itself an approximation and "it would siznply be an
approximation to try to place it on another map.“ (T. 282). (The defenda.n.t‘s_map is Defendant‘s Ezchibit A-1). Mr. Richards testified that

he took as a land:na.r}: the two forks just east of the middle fork of the

Clearwater as “general support“ of the east line drawn on defendant's

map and that Boyceis map confirmed that position.

Petitioners‘ East Boundary Line.

 

“Mr. Hartman transposed the lines shown on defendant's Exhibit A-1
to petitioners’ map, Exhibit 729. These lines on this exhibit appear
in green color. Mr. Hartman also utilized Royce’s map to transpose
"portions? of Hoycekseastline to petitioners‘ Exhibit 729. All of Hoyce's
southern and most of Royce's eastern line, he testified, could be transposed mechanically because of the location of the township lines on Royce's
The remainder he sketched in by general reference to the shape of

maps.

Hoyce‘s line. (T. 121;). Mr. Hartman also testified that Boyce‘s map
did not show accurate topography in the area where Hartman was unable to
make a mechanical transposition of part of the Royce east boundary and at

the point where the Salmon River bends sharply north. (T. 125).

Lnoortance of Royce Line Eransnosed to Hodern Mans.

Although the parties have testified to inaccuracies in Hoyce's map
and.there is no evidence to show upon what sources Royce depended in
setting his boundary lines both petitioner and defendant rely heavily
on Royce's lines to support their conception of the boundaries -4
especially the eastern boundary. The distinguishing feature, and the
important difference, in transposing the Boyce line lies in the inclusion
on, or exclusion from, the reservation of the mining camps of Elk City,
Ora Fino and Pierce City.

Taking defendant‘s Exhibit 3-1, it will be seen that the eastern

‘boundary line contended for by defendant runs to the west of Elk City.

3 596

On petitioners’ Exhibit 729, the boundary line contended for by petitioners
would run to the east of Elk City. Defendant*s Exhibit A-l does not show

Pierce City. It does show the modern town of 02:0 Fino. Petitioners

contend, however, that in transposing defendant's Exhibit 3-1 to a modern
survey map (Ex. 729) that the eastern boundary line lies to the west of
Pierce City and to the east of the ;present location of 01-0 Fino  to
the west of the old location of 01-0 Fino, which old location in 1862 was

some four to five miles east of Pierce City.

other Evidence of the Boundary Line.

 

Petitioners introddced certain other maps showing the eastern boundary
lines, mostly in a general manner. Two, petitioners‘ Exhibits 697 and 698,
locate the eastern boundary line "only in a very ‘general sense“ but do
show Pierce City, Oro Fino, Elk City and Florence, within the boundary.
Hartman testified, however, that the topography on these maps is almost
nnrecogizable. The Stevens‘ maps (Pet. Exhibits 693 and 691%») show the
eastern boundary in only a general sense althoughrpetitioners contend that
it can be gathered from Exhibit 691+ that the line should be placed along
the foot of a series of ridges as was done on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit

729.

Am examination of the Stevens‘ maps does not swport such an assumption since he merely showed the eastern boundary but in a general sense.

The most important early map of the area is petitioners‘ Exhibit 695
(Defendant‘s mnhibit 6), which is a map that was prepared to accompany the
report of E. Giddings, Chief Clerk, Surveyor General‘s Office. Mr.
Giddings visited the Nez Perce reservation in 1862.

This map shows 311:

City and Florence to be outside the eastern boundary of the resewation

;:f=°:f-':§‘-"(iii-.«

and Oro Fine and Pierce City within the reservation.

As to this map. Hartman, petitioners‘ witness, testified, that in his
opinion the line that is shown.on defendant's Exhibit Arl generally conforms with the line on the 1862 map prepared by the Surveyor General's

Office. Hartman believed there were certain minor discrepancies between

the two maps (Def..Ex;.A—l and Pet. Ext 695) in that the line on Arl
aPPears to be some 5 miles west of Elk City, while on the 1862 map, the

line appears about one mile west of Elkrcity. Witness also testified

that as the line on the 1862 map went northward it differed from Arl in

pthat it included Pierce City and Oro Fine. The 1862 map, Hartman testified, also contained inaccurate information in that the course and shape
of the Salmon River as shown thereon is very different from present day
maps and the_location of the town of'Florence as depicted on the map is
entirely inconsistent with present day locations of the town. The general
latitudes and longitudes of principal points on the 1862 map seem to he

in general agreement with modern surveys and the general shape of the _
Snake and Clearwater rivers and the general position of Elk City, Pierce
and Oro Fine appear to be in fairly close agreenent sith.modern.maps.
according to Hartman. _(T. 105). To make defendant‘s map (Ex..Arl) cone
form more closely to the Surveyor General‘s line, he would.move the
defendant‘s east line closer to Elk City and, in general, farther to

the east to conform more with the shape of the line as shown on the
Surveyor General‘s map (Pet. Ex. 695), and would move_defendant's line
slightly to the east so as to pass Pierce City and Oro Fine just to the

east of those points. (T. 106-108).

3 593

Conclusions as to the Eastern Boundary

 

The evidence as to the eastern boundary is far from satisfactory
or conclusive. What Stevens actually meant in the treaty call “by the
spurs of the Bitter Boot“ is unlmown. As pointed out by Agent Eutchins,
the agent on the Nez Perce reservation in 1861, "it would be impossible
to describe a boundary in a more vague and indefinite manner, especially
in a country like this, which is a succession of mountains and spurs of
mountains.” A glance at any modern map will  how aptly the agent
described the country and would verify Eutctu'.ns' later statement that
expert ‘judges were “at a loss to determine any natural points on the
course of the line as marking the eastern boundary.”

The expert witnesses for the parties rely on the Royce line 
transpose it‘to modern maps, but there is no evidence as to what Boyce
depended upon as his sources in mapping the eastern boundary and both
witnesses agree that there are inaccuracies of a topograpmcal nature
on Royce‘s map.

Petitioners’ witness testified it would be very difficult or inpossible to locate a spur along the Bitter Boot ‘Mountain range. Defendantis witness testified that the treaty call “by the spurs” is a
line that could not be identified on the ground by physical features
with any certainty.

‘Hie best evidence available therefore with respect to the eastern
boundam is the Surveyor Genera.l‘s mp, petitioners’ Echibit 695, based
upon information undoubtedly obtained in l862 by Giddings who was in the

area. ‘This ma.p‘s boundary line, petitioners’ witness testified, has

us

generally_refle:::ted with reasonable accuracy in most parts of the line
on defendant's Exhibit A-1. So, by adjusting the line on A-l where it

is thounght necessary, the eastern boundary line should run just east of
Oro Fine and Pierce City as shown on the Surveyor General's map. Although the Surveyor C-eneral‘s map shows Elorence to be outside the area

due to topographical inaccuracies on that part of said map, the town

should be within the area and the line as drawn on defendant‘ s Exhibit
A-l would include Florence.

As to Elk City, it is believed the evidence justifies in holding
it to be just east of thereservation line. Not only is it so shown on
the Surveyor General's map (Est. 695) but further evidence to substantiate
this view is found in petitioners‘ Exhibit 680, Ba.ncroi't’s History, in
which the historian states that Elk City was situated a mile from the
lower end of a valley, on a flat between two ravines, and that on the west

the mountains rose ridge after ridge toward the great spur of the Bitter

Root range, which the miners were obliged to cross to reach Elk City.

The South Boundary Line

Petitioners object to the south boundary line drawn on defendant‘s
Exhibit A-l because it is a straight line drawn ‘from a point selected as
“the crossing of the Snake River fifteen miles below the mouth of the
Powder River” to a point at the crossing of the Salmon. Eetitioners contend for the Royce line which shows the general configuration of the
south boundary to bend somewhat south of a straight line drawn between

two terminal points. Petitioners also call attention to the two Stevens‘

maps which show such a ‘bend. Defendant's witness, Mr. Richards," testified
in effect that having two points, the crossing of the Snake River fifteen
miles below the mouth of Powder River and the crossing of the Salmon, he
merely drew a straight line m attempting to follow the calls of the treaty.

With respect to the southern boundary, it would appear that in the prepa.ration of the Surveyor G-eneral‘s map (Pet. Ex. 695')’ the same "technique, as

applied by Mr. Richards , was used in drawing the southern boundary line that is , a straight line between thetwo points. The southern boundary

should be as depicted on defendant's Exhibit A-1.

Conversion Claim

I It is alleged in the petition that the respondent, with ‘knowledge
that gold was unlawfully taken from the Nez Perce lands by trespassers
thereon, provided a. market therefor and purchased the gold from the
trespassers and converted the same to its own use without the consent of
the Indians and without paying or providing compensation therefor.

To sustain these allegations, the tribe has offered proof, which is
not questioned by the Government, that large quantities of gold and silver
were removed from the reservation by white trespassers during the years a
from 1860 to April 1?, 1857, but there is no proof whatever that the respondent mined and removed any gold or silver from the reservation during
this period. In fact, the petitioners do not even intimate that it did.
This gold claim is based solely upon the charge that the Government acquired the gold from the wrong—d.oers with full knowledge that it belonged
to the Indians from whose reservation it was taken against their will.
Ehere can be no question but that gold and silver of great value were

removed from the Nez Perce reservation in those years. The record is

3 602

replete with proof of that, ‘out the problem which confronts the claimant
and us, is the sufficiency of the proof as showing that the precious metals
taken from the reservation were (1) actually acquired by respondent, and

(2) in a manner that would make it accountable for the value thereof.

The Government seems to rely mainly on two contentions: First, res
judicata, which we have heretofore discussed, and, second, upon the fact
that the Government never purchased gold until the passage of the Gold
Reserve Act of 193%. This latter contention overlooks the fact that’in
the operation of its Mint the Government did purchase gold long prior to
the Gold Reserve Act of 1931:». The original Mint Act was passed on April 2,
1792, 1 Stat. 2&6, and by Section-lh thereof, a depositor could have his

bullion coined and returned to him, or, for a slight discount, could exchange his gold or silver bullion immediately for coined gold or silver,

and a fund was provided in the Act for making such settlement instead of

coining the deposit.

A new Mint Act was passed on}Ia.m.1ar_v 18, 1837 (Def. R. 22), w..ich,
in addition to providing for the coinage of the deposit (Sec. 30), provided by Sec. 31 for paying the value of the deposit, as soon as the

value of the deposit is ascertained, out of a fund provided for that purpose, and upon such payment the deposit ‘became the property of the Umted
States (Sec. 31) . This section also repealed the discount for immediate

settlement under the provisions of the l'{92 Act.

‘Ede 1837 Act was in effect during the period in question and until

the Miss Act of 1373, 17 Stat. 153., was passed, but this later act also

provided for settlement for the value of gold deposits by payment out of

a special fund without discount. In fact, similar provisions are in effect
today as Sec. 358, 3l‘U.S.C.&..(See testimony of Def. witness, Ida Parker
Davis, teens. p. 308 and Def. Exs. an and 25). It is stated in the.Act of

1837 and all those following, that upon payment out of the fund the deposit shall become the property of the United States.

Hence, the Government since 1792, when it established the Mint,

purchased gold bullion, that is, gold in the native state, and paid for

-it in gold coin (in later years in coin or bars) before the deposit was

or could be converted into coin or bars, and a fund was originally pro'vided for paying the depositor for the ascertained value of his deposit.
It is true that depositor of bullion could have had his deposit returned
in the shape of coin or bars, but that fact does not support the Govern»
ment‘s position that the Mint operation was merely to process the bullion
and return to the depositor the same metal in the shape of coin or bars.
In the absence or proof to the contrary, it is just as logical to assume
that depositors of bullion were paid.from “the bullion fund" as soon as
the value of the deposits were determined. In fact, the Government's
witness testiiied.that it was impossible to identify the gold a depositor
received for his deposit as that he turned into the Mint (T. p. 318), and
that he received the equivalent of his deposit. Furthermore, during the
Civil war the Treasury purchased gold through brokers or through the Mint.
(T. pp. 252-255). t seems very plain that the Government during the period
in question acquired gold from the producers or owners by paying therefor
its value in coin.or bullion procured for that purpose until 1873, and

thereafter, in either coin or bars, from a “bullion fund,”

Burden of Proof

The burden of proving that the Government acquired gold unlawfully
removed from the Nez Perce Reservation and converted it to its own use
rests upon petitioners. t is not contended that the Government acqiired
any Rez Perce gold except through its Mint, particularly, the San Francisco
branch, or its U. S. Assay Office, which were in operation during the

period the gold was taken from the reservation.

And it will not be seriously questioned, we believe, that for the

Indians to recover they must show by substantial evidence that the defendant acquired gold taken from the Indian lands. In fact, they recognize

this because they have offered evidence which they contend shot-zsthat gold

taken from the reservation was purchased by defendant, and also the value

thereof.

While the issue before the Commission on the gold claim was the
Government’s liability, this involved proof that it acquired gold taken
from the Fez Perce Reservation. The petitioners recognized the fact that
such proof was different from the_proof concerning an ordinary commodity,
such as grain, animals, and the like, which are identified and referred to
in kind and quantity, while unrefined gold, as the evidence shows, was
practically never referred to quantitatively in kind, but in money value.
Whether the inquiry concerned production, refining, coinage, dealings in
or use of native gold, the reference to it in the evidence was almost invariably in terms of money value. Accordingly, the only evidence available
to claimants on all phases of their proof on this claim was in terms of

money value and they necessarily offered evidence on that basis which

included evidence as to the value of the gold taken from the reservation
and.acquired by defendant and the hearing on the issue of liability was

concluded on such evidence.

To prove the quantity or value of the gold bullion taken from the

reservation.lands and the amount thereof acquired by the respondent, the

tpetitioners offered, as an expert, the witness Dr. Philip S. Brown, who

prepared reports (Pet. Ems. 735 to 738) and in addition, testified as set
forth at pages 159 to 263 of the Transcript of Testimony. The Government
offered no proof, oral or documentary, on the gold produced on the reservation or that was received by the Government, but seemed to rely largely
upon the contention that it never purchased gold produced on the reser-v

vation since the Hint operation during the period in question was simply

a refining process for the depositors of gold and that the depositors got

back their gold in the shape of coin or'bars.

We must now evaluate the testimony of petitioners’ witness, Dr.

Philip S. Brown (pp. l59-26% of Transcript) and his reports (Pet. Exs. 735738) relating to the amount or value of the gold removed from the reservation

and purchased by defendant during the period the petitioners were entitled to

the exclusive control of the Nez Perce Reservation. He has arrived at a

figure of $10,806,000 as being his estimate of the gold taken from the reser'vation within the boundaries contended for by the petitioners as shown byt

their Exhibit 729, and $T,5h5,000 as his estimate of the gold taken from
the reservation as delimited by defendant's Exhibit A~l.
boundaries arises from the interpretation of calls set forth in the 1855
treaty, the Indians claiming a much larger area than.does the Government,

this difference being also shown in petitioners‘ Exhibit T29.

The difference in

Concerning the boundaries of the reservation as described in the 1855
treaty (Find. 1!»), we,. by our Finding 13, have fixed the boundaries thereof

substantially as claimed by the Government in its Exhibit A-l, with a

slight adjustment of the eastern line shown on that exhibit, as extending

from near Elk City to the northeast corner of the reserve, to a location

,  p  . east of Oro Fino and Pierce City as shown on the Surveyor Genera.'!.‘s map,

petitioners‘ Exhibit 695 (Def. Ex. 6). This change does not materially

affect the evidence we are now to consider.

In considering the evidence as to the purchase of Nez Perce gold
several dates must be kept in "mind. , Oregon became a territory on March 3,
181.19, and comprised what are now the States of Oregon, Washington, and
Idaho. Later, and on March 2, 1853, the Territory of Washington was organ-.
ized from Oregon Territory and comprised the present States of Washington and Idaho. and on March 3,. 1863, Idaho was detached from Washington and

Idaho Territory organized. These changes in geographic divisions become
important in considering DI‘. Brown's conclusions as to the amount of gold
taken from the reservation and acquired by defendant, and are setforth
in petitioners‘ hhibit 738. This exhibit is derived from reports of the
Director of the Mint and by then he attempts to show the amount of gold

taken from the reservation. These and other Mint reports are not in

evidence so we were compelled to obtain them from the reports themselves.

The witness, for the purpose of showing the amount of gold taken from
the reserve, first tried to determine the amount of gold derived from all
Idaho mines. He started with the figure $3,939,665 which, according to

his report (33, 12, &, 736), represented the “Mint receipts from the Oregon

U!

606

2 50:

and Washington Territories in l86l-1863 * ‘ much of which came from Idaho.“
He apparently intended to use only one-half of this figure as representing
the probable amount of gold taken from Idaho but he used.the entire sun in
his computations. In any event, the figure is wrong because in our investigation of the Mint report for the fiscal year ending June 30, 1863 (House
Er. Doc. No. 3, 38th Cong., lst Sess., Cong. Doc. Serial No. 1186), we find
that for that year the Mint and its San Francisco branch received from

Idaho $1816.97 (this small sum could.be accounted for by the fact that

Idaho had been a territory only the last four months of this reporting
period), $31,235.88 from Washington Territory and.$3,0l6,82T.78 from Oregon.

"This report also shoes, in summary, that the Mint, its San Irancisco branch,

and the He»; York Assay Office had received up to and including see 30, isfg’ 

gold.accrédited to the territories as follows: Idaho $1816.97, Washington
$3l,U5l.58, and Oregon $3,980,285.93. So, it is evident that according to
the Hint reports for and prior to June 30, l863, only $1816.97 was reported
as originating in Idaho, and $31,351.58 as originating in Washington, which
had then been a territory for over ten years, while up to June 30, 1863,
there had.been received from Oregon $3,980,285 of domestic gold produced in
Oregon ($3,939,665, according to witness). Hence, it will be seen there is
no factual basis for attributing any part of his production figure, or the
larger Mint figure, to Idaho for the period prior to June 30, 1863. Therefore, we cannot accept the witness’ figure, whether he uses all or only
half of it, as he apparently intended, as any proof of Idaho production
received by the Mint or any of its branches prior to June 30, 1863, although

it appears the $1816.97 originated in Idaho for the four months after it

became a territory, should be so accredited and perhaps part of th
$31,151.55‘ accredited tc Washington while it included Idaho, but there

is no proof on the proportion attributable to Idaho.

‘Ens next item of Exhibit 738 used by the witness for determining

the total gold production of Idaho for the period from June 30, 1863,

‘to June 30, 1867, is $13,161t,1:33. ms amount is the total of gold

accredited to the entire territory of Idaho as shown by the Mint reports

of 1861!-5-6 (Finding No. 16). However, the total, because of an error
of $100,000 of the Mint in totaling its figures, should have been
$l3,061L;1£33. These reports are not in evidence but we have verified

them. (As to correct total for l86}-l—§—6—7, see 3:3. 692) .

We come now to the third item of Exhibit T38: “One-eighth of

privately refined gold and unrefined gold from unidentified sources
accepted by San Francisco branch of Mint in fiscal years 1865-67,
$1,372,362," lhis item is one—-eighth of $l0,978,89]%.89 taken from the
Director of the Mint report for 1867 (E. Ex. Doc. No. 2, 140th Cong., End
Sess., Serial £51328) showing in a column headed "Refined Gold“ a total
of that amount deposited in the San Francisco branch of the Mint for the
years ZL865-6-7, concerning which amount the witness at page 12 of his
report (Est. 736) says:
_ In addition to cmde bullion, which could be credited

to its geographic source, he mint accepted a great

deal of refined and ‘other gold’ that could not be so

credited. For example, $10,978,891!-.89 of match gold

was deposited at the San Francisco ‘oranch in the fiscal

years, 1865-67 and $8,693,399 .01 in fiscal year 1868.
A good share of this may have been mined in Idaho.

3 sos

..i .

gold originated in Idaho.

The San Francisco assaying and Refining Company was a privately operated
concern which received gold from all the western gold producing states
and territories and the evidence shows that by far the greater part of
this gold and silver went to this and other private refineries because
the refining charges were much lower than those of the Mint. See page 5,

E3. 600. Perhaps, some Idaho gold, privately refined, eventually.reached
the San Francisco branch but to say one-eighth of the unidentified “refined gold“ deposited in that branch in the years l865—5—7 was Idaho gold
is mere conjecture and has no factual basis whatever, in truth, we find
no proof in this record showing that any part of the unidentified refined
The witness admitted as much, for in his testimony concerning this unidentified refined gold he said (p. 231, Trans.):
"Much of it.apparently, I suspect, was gold refined at the San Francisco
Assaying and Refining Company. It was taken for one reason or another to
the Mint, some of it to be coined. Undoubtedly, some of that was newlymined gold from Idaho.

I have taken a fairly small percentage of t. I

had to take a figure. I took

I thought that this was a likely figure.
into account the relative importance of Idaho and the total western production picture, and so forth. This is an estimate of the amount of

newly-mined gold from Idaho that found its way to the Mint.“

It is a parent therefore that we must re’ect the item of
IL 3 ;

credited to Oregon and Washington as originating in Idaho in the years
prior to June 30, 1853, and the item of $1,372,362 as representing the
amount of unidentified refined gold accredited to Idaho. We have made

a search outside the record in an effort to determine whether any part

i" 6c

3 610

of the $3,939,665 could be legitimately accredited to Idaho but we found
no proofto sustain such an accreditation. A similar search was made
with respect to the unidentified refined gold but found only the I-{int
report for the l86'( (E. Ex. Doc. No. 2, Moth Cong. 2nd Sess., Serial
#1328) which shows "refined gold” from unspecified sources for the

following fiscal years:

1865 $ 2,59s,601.h9
1866 er 2,665,033.00
1867 _ ' §,I;§,26o.h0

Total $l0,9T8,89M.89

This is the total figure used by the witness. In addition, we found a
Hint report for the fiscal year 1868 showing deposits, with no source
‘designation, of refined gold amounting to $8,693,399 .01, a figure merely
mentioned in_ the witness‘ report. (3. Ex. Doc.iE'o. 2, 140th Cong. 3rd
Sess., Serial #1370, p. 3+3-.11). These reports are not in the record. There
remains of these items used by the witness in'his determination of the
total gold produced in all of Idaho in l86C}-66 only the total, as corrected,
of $13 ,O61+,1+1+3 , which is supported by evidence -- the Mint reports.

This brings us to the second part of Ex. 738, that is, the manner in
which the witness arrived at the amount of "Nez Perce Gold refined. and/or
coined by Government." It will be seen, he toolr a percentage of the total
Idaho output, 3-¥lj‘5 thereof, for the area of the reservation contended for
by defendant, which we find to be substantially correct. It is necessary, therefore, to examine the facts upon which he based the percentage.
And this involves the estimates he mde in Exhibit 735, which show the

total gold production of Idaho for 1861-1866 to be exact_y $65,000,000

and the totals oi"the Nez Perce area to be $26,650,000. Eis reason for

3 611

first estimating the total output of Idaho is explained by him (pp.
173-34 Trans.) as follows:

Well, I did.n‘t want to estimate or attempt to

estimate the production within the Nez Perce Reservation
without considering and testing it, so to speak, against
the estimates of areas outside. In fact, I examined what
material I could find on the mining districts outside of
the reserve area as carefully as I did those 1.-rithin. I
wanted to get a total of the production of all the areas
that was in the right proportion with one another and which

were consistent with what was known about the total prodnction for what is now the State of Idaho.

And as to his conception of the relationship between the Idaho production and that of the two areas of Nez Perce production, he testified (pp. 231-2, Transt):

Then the second part of the problem was to make a
division of that between the gold that came from these’
two areas that are separately delineated on these two
maps which I was given, and I simply applied in Case A
the percentage of the Nez Perce production, the production in the area described in mhibit A to the total
Idaho production during this period of sixty-five million
dollars. I applied that to the eighteen million, and then,
secondly, I applied the percentage that I calculated by
taking the gold produced in the area delineated in Extdbit B to total production of Idaho and applied that, and
I have two separate figures here.

{these explanations of the formulae adopted by the witness show that he
assumed that the Nez Perce gold reached the Mint in the same proportions

that the gold from Idaho as a whole reached it, namely, in the per  centage of his of the Mint receipts of gold from all of Idaho, and thus

determined the amount of Nez I’erce gold that reached the Mint,$'{’,575,000.
The witness stated further in his testimony (p. 232, Trans.) that be
“divided it just mechanically percentagewise, for the reason that there
was no reason “ " for assuming that any larger quantity of gold that

went to the Mint came from one portion of Idaho than from a.ny other

portion of Idaho.“ So it will be seen that the mathematics. computation

is based upon the assumption that Nez Perce ‘gold reached the Hint in the

same proportion as that from Idaho as a whole. We;find no support for this

assumption in the evidence. But however that may be, the method adopted

must 't!3e;based upon evidence showing the gold output for Idaho and the gold
produhtion of both segments of the reservation for the period 1860-66.
We shall now examine that evidence.

We have examined Dr. Brown‘s reports and reviewed his testimony
with care, and in doing so had to search the voluminous record in
order to identify the documentary evidence he relied upon in his.I‘eports and testimony. This laborious search was necessary because he

did not refer to such evidence by the exhibit numbers identifying it

in the record. Moreover, we mre compelled to locate and eiamine

documents that were referred to by him but were not offered in evidence.

In his report, Dr. Brown. makes this frank statement (p. 2,

EL 736): ..
H Probably $65,000,000 of gold and silver was mined

in Idaho in 1561-66. This figure is an estimate. No

mining, shipping, sales or other records ezuist that are
adequate. Unlike the output of bullion from Nevada,

which came mostly from a few large producers, or that of
California which was handled in blown ways, the output

of Idaho was mined by thousands of individuals and much

of it carried out by them. t no point was any tally ever
made. Nevertheless, a great deal of information is available
and a reasonable approximation is possible, especially by
reference to documents pertaining to the individual mining
districts.

And he was equally frank when he testified (p. 176, Trans.): "There are

no estimates of the amount of gold produced within or without the

particular boundary lines f.-he disputed a.I‘ea§7 because this is a matter
of particular interest. There are certainly no definitive estimates of
the output of Idaho itself.“ And again, on pp. 12-13 of his report he

makes this candid statement;

Ehe amount of gold mined in Idaho that found its way
to the mint is not precisely determinable because there is
no way of finding out how much is properly attributable to
Oregon and “other sources ," or how much was deposited-—
some in later years--a:fter it had been privately refined.
Likewise, one cannot know how much was exported. Gold lost
its source-identity after it was cast into bars. Moreover,
total exports are not known. Overland exports (to Canada
and Mexico) did not have to be declared; also, it is reported that mch gold sent overseas was not declared, so
_that it would not appear on" ship manifests and could be
smuggled into receiving countries. There were various
inducements for not declaring gold shipments. One was to
be able to offer gold in the highly speculative markets of
London and Paris without buyers‘ knowing that large shipments
had arrived and were overhanging.

So, it is plain he approached the task of supporting his base figures for
Idaho production and the Hex Perce production with some apprehension,_ for,
unless there is substantial proof of the production of all the mines in
Idaho and the production of the mines within the reservation, there is no
basis for his conclusions as to the amount of gold removed from the reservation which was received by defendant since hatestified (pp. 231-2,
Trans.), in explanation of the percentages he used in_ Exhibit 738, that
he applied the percentage of the Eez Perce production to the total Idaho
production of $65,000,000. ends, as as see by Exhibit 736, the Nez Farce
production of $26,650,000 for the area as bounded by the treaty is exactly

1+l;‘£ of $65,000,000, the total Idaho output.

When we examine the documentary bases for the witness‘ conclusions

as to gold production in Idaho we see that; as he stated, "there is

certainly no definitive estimate of Idaho itself." Too many intangibles

must be recognized in considering sueh.production for the period in
question to reach a “definitive estimate.“ some of the imponderables
are mentioned by the witnessuin his report. He mentions $3,000,000 to
$5,000,000 as retained in.circulation as medium of exchange, hidden
savings, gold sold to foreign countries, and gold used in domestic

jewelry manufacture. (pp. l0~l3 of 736). The amount of unrefined gold

3 613-‘:

in circulation has been estimated as many times the figures the witness used.

And in.Ex. 505 we find the Commissioner of Internal Revenue suggesting that
the Government take over assaying of gold and silver entirely in order to.

check the exportation of unassayed gold.bullion of which some $M0,000,000

had gone to England within the year prior to December 1, 186M.

_ And when we attempt to build up the production of Idaho from the
various mining areas, we encounter a similar state of unreliable production figures. A few examples will show the'variation in estimates.
Take the production estimates for the Florence area which was entirely
Within the boundaries of the reservation as claimed by defendant.
Lindgren states (Ex. 667, page 3) of this area: “The total production
cannot be determined, but it is estimated to be from $15,000,000 to
$30,000,000,“ This was apparently for the years 1861-67. Thompson
and Ballard in 1923 (Ex. 726) made an estimate to “serve as a basis
of comparison between the several districts mentioned” in amount of

$22,500,000 during its existence; it was gradually exhausted after its

I-0

-.-:

. _ 1
- .-_.-. J‘

5' "‘ ‘S
v;

peak output ‘in 1863, although production continued some years ter 1866,

~ ei , d Other writers are equally uncertain and generally make estimates for

periods of time that do not conform to the period in question and in
many cases writers accepted figures used by earlier writers as a. bases
for their computations when the bases of such earlier figures are conjectural. Shipping estimates of Wells Fargo, the estimates of Government
and state officials are only vague estimates_ that have little or no
probative value in determining Idaho production acquired by defendant.
When we examine the evidence relating to the Oro Fino, Pierce, Elk

City and Warren districts, the confusion and uncertainty mounts, for

 these districts extend from within the boundaries of the reser§ration'to

'_'. reservation and acquired by the defendant.

areas outside, thus making a division of the production between areas

‘ within the reservation and those outside of any claimed boundary of the

re serve impossible .

An attempt was made by the witness and earlier writers to arrive

 at the production of particular districts by guessing at the per diem
 earnings of the miners, but such computations afford no help because

 neither the number nor earnings of the miners can be ascertained.

Fe have studied the documents with care but find none that give

one any facts upon which we can say what amount of gold was taken from the

Even if we were of the opinion

_'that the amount of such gold could be ascertained by formula, the one
fused by the witness is basically unsound in that it assumes facts not

I :PI'0Ven, namely, the amount of gold produced in Idaho and the part thereof

originating in the Nez Perce reservation. Obviously, with either of these

\A

essential_facts missing there is no way in which the percentages can be
arrived at, and without the percentages used in Exhibit 738 there is no
way by which it can be determined what part of the $l3,06M,h33 came from
the Nez Perce reservation. So we conclude that the evidence now before
us is insufficient to sustain any claim for gold taken from the Nez Porce
reservation and acquired by defendant.

As shown by Exhibit 737 and the testimony of Dr. Brown at pages 21h
to 227, the petitioners attempt to show the amount of Nez Perce gold
acquired by defendant at some time. This was done by the production
figures of the reservation shown in Exhibit 738, reducing them by 15%
to cover gold supposed to have been used commercially, and taking 70%
of the balance of the respective amounts as representing the gold derived from the reservation, which he determined in the amount of
$15,885,000.

This method of approach is purely theoretical and apecur

lative in the extreme, furthermore, it is based on Nez Perce production

which we have shown not proved, We cannot accept it as any proof of
the amount of gold taken from the reservation and obtained by the
defendant,
While we do not think the proof so far offered shows the amount

of gold originating in the reservation which was acquired by respondent,
We are reluctant to dismiss this claim because of failure of proof when
there is a strong indication that some part of the $l3,06M,OO0 worth of
gold accredited to Idaho and acquired by the Mint came from the reservation but it is now based upon conjecture alone, However, we feel

3 616

.-J
-u

justified in’ now deciding that the respondent is liable for the amount
of gold taken from the reservation that is shown by further evidence

to have been acquired by respondent through the Mint.

Louis J. 0‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

I concur:

Wm. MI Holt
As sociate Comm‘. s si oner

I concur in part and disagree .
in part. See opinion attached.

8

saga: E. Witt
Chief Commi ssi oner

 

WITT, Chief Commissioner, agreeing in part and disagreeing in part,
with the majority opinion in Docket l80—A:

I interpret“ the opinion of my colleague, Commissioner O‘}.iarr, in
Docket 180-A, and findings of fact made, as holding that the evidence
in the record shows the conduct of the defendant such as to create
legal liability on the part of defendant for the losses and damages

sustained by the plaintiff Indians (Finding 12); and that the plaintiffs

‘ are to be accorded a. trial on the merits of their claims, when the

evidence now in the record together with any further evidence will be
given consideration in determining the amount of defendant‘s liability.
So understanding said conclusions I approve them; however, I do not
necessarily approve the findings of fact, or necessarily the evaluation
of the evidence as made in said opinion, which deal with the amount of
the losses and damages sustained.

I feel that the opinion errs, as do the findings made, by giving
consideration to evidence on the issue of amount of liability; that

while the parties may have invited the error of giving consideration to

facts involving the issue of the amount of the liability, if any, of the

defendant, by the introduction of evidence and the submission of requested

findings of fact as to same, the_Commission, I feel, will add error and

Confusion-' to the situation, by accepting the invitation and by making

findings of fact and expressions’ of opinionon the evidence as to amount

of liability before same is before us for determination of a.‘;;2.I"d.

In the instant case, the question now before the Commission is

whether or not plaintiffs have shown acts of neglect, wrongnl treatment,

etc., on the part of the defendant which create legal liability against
the defendant for losses sustained thereby and properly proven -- and
not the question of the amount of the liability.

The opinion and findings under discussion not only evaluate the
evidence of neglect and wrongful treatment for the purpose of determining
whether sane creates liability, but also evaluates and makes findings of
fact as to the evidence on losses, the result of such treatnent although as stated the issue as to the amount of losses and therefore
the amount of any award is not now before us.

The situation is analogous to instances where we first consider
evidence as to whether the plaintiffs have aboriginal title to the land

involved.-- which must first be found in favor of plaintiff bhfore defendant is under any liability - and if title is found to be in plaintiff,then, and not until then, do we consider the facts dealing with the amount ‘

of the liability.
.Attention is called to the final statement in petitioner‘s proposed

findings that “the amount of the recoverv and the amount of the offsets,

if anv; are reserved for further proceedings.“

.And the defendant in commenting on the gold losses and the lack of
certainty as to same says “in any event, such a figure would become
important if liability should be established“ (Brief, p. 36) which can

mean onlz that the uncertaintz as to proof of same at this time has

nothing to do with the issue of liability.

 

Moreover, the defendant does not consider the amount of the gold
losses of sufficient inportance to warrant it in putting in the record

any evidence bearing on same.

- taken from plaintiff's land is not now an issue before us.

 Finding l2.

The question of the amount of liabilit§:_' is not discussed by
the petitioners except in a general way and not a sgestion is

made as to amount of award, and the amount of liability is not discussedoby defendant at all. If the g_o_1_i_n_t_ of liability has no bearingon the issue of legal liability, then what is the reason for making
findings of facts on the evidence thereon and discussing the same in
the opinion?

Defenda.nt‘s brief is based solely on whether or not legal liability
“exists. against the United States on account of the claim stated in
the petition“ (Brief, p. 37).

The procedure herein is of concern to me by reason of the fear
I have that findings of fact ‘made now on the amount of liability
(which are not necessary to the issue now before  may be thought
binding when we later give consideration to that question and it will
‘be confusing to have some evidence as to amount of losses resolved
and other evidence to be considered later.

I cannot approve Finding No. 13 or any,di scussion in the opinion
as to boundary as that question concerns amount of-“liability only, and
not the issue of legal liability.

’ I cannot approve Findings Nos. 114 to 18, inclusive, or any discussion in opinion because the anount of liability for gold wrong;i'u_lly
I think a

finding as to gold liability should be made substantially as made in

i_ regard to liability for unlawful uses by trespassers as made in

In this connection, I call attention to statement on

« page 20 of the opinion that the government does not question that

3 H 62,

if-E large quantities of gold were removed from the reservetion'by trespassers.

'f'i I also call attention to petitioner's claim of mistreatment in this
2 respect (page 10 of its amended pleading) as follows:

'(a) failed to protect the Nez Perce Tribe
from trespasses on its lands and from
the taking of its properties from said I
lands.

iii

d'*eV_*T3 ”(c) failed to safeguard the rights of Nez

Perce Tribe to royalties or other compensation for the unlawful mining of
the gold on its lands.”

die‘; which indicates a claim as to gold, in addition to claim for gold acT qpired by defendant.

Eggs: E. Witt "

, Chief Commissioner

3 623

