6 681 ’

BEF'CE’..'E THE IND IAN CLAIMS COI'II-IISSION

was NOOKSACK TRIBE on II-EIANS
on RELATION OF JOSEPH Loois,
CHAIRMAN OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL,

Claimant,
1?. Docket No . 116

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERIZCA,

Defendant.
Decided: October 20, 1958

Appearances:

Fiederick W, Post, with whom
was Kenneth J. Selander,
Attorneys for Claimant.
Ralph A. Barney and Donald R.
Marshall, with whom was Mr .

Assistant Attorney General

Perry’ W. Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant.

oennon _(_)_F_‘ E cor~mssIoN

Holt, Associate Coxnmissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

By decision of the Commission filed July :_L7, 1958, it was determined that the claimant Indians were entitled under Clause 1:, of Section 232
of the Indian Claims Comission Act to an award in the sum of $S2,383.F§f3%..t
less such offsets as may be allowable under the Indian Claims Comrnissiocz.

Act.

on August 11, 1958, the defendant, pursuant to Section 33 of the

Gefieral Rules of Procedure of the Commission, filed a motion for a

xehearing in this cause of action, setting forth in said motion the
g'ou_nds upon which it alleged the Commission had erred. On August 18,
1958, the claimant likewise filed a motion 1' or rehearing setting forth

therein the grounds upon which it alleged the Commission had erred. On

October 9, 1958, the defendant filed a supplemental motion for rehearing

"setting forth an additional ground in support of its motion.

The Commission has considered the motions of both parties and the
oral arguments heard before it on October 86., 1958, and has determined
that the motions for rehearing should be denied. However, the Commission
wishes to set forth its opinion with respect to one of the alleged grounds
of error urged by the defendant, namely that it was error as a matter of
fact and of law to hold that clarimant is entitled to recover $0.65 per
acre f0!‘ 2,733 acres covered by water, most of which is under the Nooksack River. It is deemed important to comment briefly on this contention
only because it represents a position not previously contended by the
defendant and therefore not specifically referred to in our decision.

In this case both parties, at the outset of the hearing on value,
agreed that the acreage of the Nooksack tract, found to be held by the
claimant under original Indian title, was 80,590 acres,  the defendant's own expert appraised-the Nooksack tract as a unit of approximately é0,59O acres.  Commission likewise valued the tract as a. 
recognizing. of course, that the tract included the Nooksack River Bed
(Finding of Fact No. 18, e Ind. Cl. Comm. 578) and that the river bed

and 8‘-"avel bars accounted for approximately 8.165 of the area (see Opinion,

6 Ind» 01. Comm. 598). The Commission recognized that the submerged

6 682 “s

lands, included in the 80,590 acre tract, were not salable as such,

and, accordingly, the river bed and gravel bar areas would reduce the

average per acre value of the entire unit which, as we found, was primarily valuable for its timber. At the same time the presence of the

Nooks ack River flowing through the tract greatly enhanced the value of

‘the adjoining timber lands since it provided the possible means for
transporting the logs to saw mills and the finished products to outside
markets, when the timber became marketable. All large tracts of land
contain areas of greater or less value, and the plus and minus factors
must be taken into consideration in all cases in arriving at an average
per acre value for the entire tract.

In the instant case the result would_have been the same if, as
the government urges, the Commission deducted the 2,733 acres of submerged land from the total acreage since its unsalability, while not
specifically mentioned in the decision, was in fact considered in
arriving at our average per acre valuation of $0.65 per acre for the
entire tract. The exclusion of the unsalable area from the acreage to

be valued would have only resulted in a higher per acre value on the

remaining salable acreage .

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:
Ea ear E. Witt
hief Commiss ioner

Louis J . O*Ma.rr

 

Associate Commissioner

6 $83 I:

