Y lnd. Cl. Com. 7&7

BEFORE THE INDIA? CLAIHS COKEISSIOE
THE SUQUAMISH T3132 0? INDIAES,
Petitioner,

Docket R0. 132

d

U}

I
\..,/~...../-.._.2~.....a-sc./~...2\../-._/~.....»

Decided: July 10, 1959

Appearances:

Frederick'H. Post and 'Halcolm S. KcLeod
Attorneys for Petitioner»

Donald.R. Harshell,'with'whom
was Hr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry H} Morton
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION gg THE COEHESSIONV

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

 

By a nrior determination (S Ind. Cl. Conn. 1&0, l5?) this Cone

title to a certain area of land in what is now the State of
and that said.title in the Indians had been extinguished by the Treaty
of January'é2, l8SS, l2 Ste. 927, II Kapp. 669, whereby the lands were
ceded to the United states. The Commission further held therein that
the effective date of said 1855 treaty was March 8, 1859. This proceeding has been held to determine the value of said lands as of
March 8, 1859.

The boundaries cf the lands found to have been exclusively used

and occupied by the Suquamish Indians are fully setibrth in Finding 29

of our prior findings of fact (5 Ind. Cl. Conn. lhO,il57). Generally

76

-In

.L

speaking the lands, which will hereinafter be referred to as the Suquamish

tract, or the subject tract, are located in what is now Kitsap County,

Washington, and.inolude all of Bainhridge Island and.the eastern portion

of the Kitsap peninsula north of South Colby and southwest of Kingston.

The subject tract fronts on Puget Sound along its eastern border and
‘ts shoreline is deeply indented and much out up by numerous inlets
and.bays. There are no streams of any importance in the Suquamish
tract. The subject tract, including Bainbridge Island as well as the
Portion on the Kitsap peninsula, is quite rough and.broken in surface
t0P0gTaphy with numerous hills and ridges rising to 300 and hCO feet.
The coastline is in the main.precipitous with numerous extensive
stretches of perpendicular cliffs fronting on the water. The subject

9

tract, however, especially on Eainnridge Island, did contain some

7 Ind. C1. Com. 71;? 762

excellent harbors which were suitable 2" or ships used in the i:'._r::ber industry.

The Suquarish tract as described in Findmg 29 of our prior findings
of fact consists of a gross area of 88,1410 acres. From this total acreage
there is a deduction of 1280 acres 1»:hicE: represents the acreage reserved
to the Indians by the provisions of the---l85S treaty leaving a net acreage
to be evaluated of 87,130 acres. The subject tract has been classified as
containing 31,1112 acres of accessible timberlands, 55,128 acres of inaccessible timberlands and 290 acres of inland waters. The Suquanish tract
containedg a negligible amount of agricultural lands. According to the 1870
census there were {:5 farms in all of Kitsap County consisting of 982 acres
of improved acreage and 299 acres unir:1proved.g The parties agree that as
of March 8, 1859, the highest  best use of the subject tract was for
tinfoerppgggproduction and that as of that date there were no minerals of any
irrrportanceplknovm tobepresent on the tract.
_ J Theéuget Sound region was sparsely settled as of l8S9. 8The first

Americpan settlers in this region arrived  18145, and in 1851 they es-8 tablished? the i'i.rsthPuget Sound to‘:-zn, Tum-rater, about 1.10  south 8

8 of the Suquarnish tract. In 1853 the plat or the toi-In of Seattle; 

King County,“ across the sound from the subject tract has filed and that
C0111“??? had a population in 1860 of 3C2. There were few whites on the
subject tract as of the valuation date. It is estimated that the white
population within the subject tract as of 1859 totaled 25 persons mostly
engaged in lumbering operations. The population for all of Eltsap
County was about 5'1.'J.L~ The slowness oi‘ settlement in the Puget Sound

area prior to the l88C‘s has been attributed to the inaccessibility of

*‘5l'.3.h";:.

the region and the lack O; transportation facilities. As of l8S9 all
the settlements of western Washington were virtually dependent upon

water transportation there being few roads and no railroads. The
Northern Pacific Railroad was not completed until l883 and did not
reach the Puget Sound area until l887.

Timber production was the main industry in the subject tract as
of the yaluation date. A saaaill was in operation at Fort Madison on
Bainbridge Island and another in the southern portion of the tract.
Early timber operations were crude ard for a long period the timeber
first cut pas that along the waters of the Sound ahd.those streams
which could.be used to drive logs. Timber operators usually selected
only the best stands of trees for a distance of only one to two miles
inland. .Until the coming of the railroad making transportation to the
eastern part of the country feasible and.profitable and until lumbering
operations in the Great Lakes area and in the south diminished, the
market for Washington timber was limited to local demand and.to far
away markets such as California, South America, Hawaii and the Orient.
The only'means of transporting the lumber at that time'was by ship.

The witnesses for the parties agree that as of the valuation date
there was no market for the subject tract. Mr. James A. Crutchfield,

V

a professor of economics, appeared as a witness for petitioner. mr.

Crutchfield utilized two methods of valuing the tract and arrived at

V

an opinion of value under each method. In his first approach this
.4- C... I" _‘v_ co 1-; _ go
witness said the term.“market valuation" reierred to the Values'wnich

«G

could berimputed to the lands under conmercial.utilization of their

763

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 7247   ‘ 761;

marketable products. In applying this method the witness states he

followed tte procedure outlined in the earlier cases (The Nooksack Tribe

 

 

v. United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Co. .. S78; and I-Euctzleshoot Tribe v. United

States, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6C8). By the first approach he computed wrat

 

he considered to be the value of the timber on the subject tract based
on an average stand of lh,OOO board ft. BM per acre valued at an assumed
valuation figure of $1.00 per 1000 BM in 1902 discounted to 1859 at 8%.
To this figure was added an additional 15 cents per acre representing
his opinion of a residual value of the Suquamish tract for agriculture.
Combining the timber value and the agricultural value, H . Crutchfield
was of the opinion that the lands in the subject tract were worth $h.9l
per acre; This Commission in the Nooksack and hnckleshoot cases, supra,
stated that Er. Crutchfield's opinion could not be given much weight
under this approach because "his method of evaluation is not in accordance
with legally approved standards but rather involves methods'based on
conjecture and speculation, which methods have been specifically rejected
by the courts and this Commission.” For the same:reasons the Commission“
can give little weight to the witness“opinion“of value in this case;
Petitioner‘s witness in his second method of evaluating the landv
arrived at an opinion based on a “subsistence valuation." iBy'this
approach he was of the opinion that the net subsistence value of the
Suquamish tract was $97C;CO0.0C. The Commission refused to give any’
"eight to an opinion of value based on such a method in the Nooksack and

Hbckleshoot cases, supra, and will not do so in this case since the

 

approach is entirely theoretical and is not based upon any'judicially'

7 Ind. C1. Com. ?h? 76:
accepted method of evaluating land. hr. Crutchfield also would increase
the valuation by multiplying his appraisal figures by a 2.7 factor,

which, he claims, should be allowed to provide equal purchasing pouer

in terms of current dollars. Such.a method of increasin the valuation

G1}

amount was denied in the Nooksack and Huckleshoot cases, supra, and is
also herein denied.

Er. C. {arc Miller, a qualified appraiser, testified as an expert
witness on value for defendant. Er. Miller also prepared a comprehensive
appraisal report (Def. Ex. 2C5-A). Defendant‘s witness used the market
value approach to determine what in his opinion was the fair market
value of the subject tract in l6S9. Lacking comparable sales this witness testified the fair aarket value is arrived at by taking into consideration all matters that a hypothetical purchaser and.seller would
have in.mind such as condition of the area, demand, population, and
settlement. Mr. Killer classified.nost of the subject tract as timberland, accessible or inaccessible and a small part as inland water . ‘This
witness took into consideration the various elements to be studied in
evaluating land such as soil, topography, transportation, climate, markets,
demand, settlements and highest and best use of the subject tract for
which it was then adaptable or likely to be needed in thetreasonablx near
future. Er. Killer was of the opinion that the hypothetical prospective
purchaser of this tract would realize that only through the resale or use
of these lands could he expect to recove his original ilvestment, taxes,
fire protection, administrative costs and costs of resale and he would

expect to realize interest upon his investment for the period that the

7 Ind. Cl. Con. Th? 750

investrnent remained unliquidat ed.
Defendant's appraiser felt that a h'* tothetical prospective purchaser

V
9';

would have noted that approximately 33% of the subject tract, was

accessible. The purchaser, according to 1-Er. I-’ii_’1ler, would have expected

to dispose of the most desirable land within 2C years, or in an average
of 10 years, and dispose of the remaining 67% (the inaccessible and
least desirable) within hC« years, or an average of 30 years. Mr. Miller
was of the opinion that the fair market value of the Suquamish tract as
of March 8, l859, was $9,000. 00 or approximately l0 cents per acre.
Defendant‘ s expert witness in arriving at his evaluation figure
concluded that the hypothetical willing seller and willing buyer would
have recognized "that the price at which comparable government lands
nould be secured would effectively establish a ceiling on the price the
buyer could hope to secure from the resale“ ‘of the Suquamish lands, that
is,"$l‘.2S per acre. Using this $1.25’ per acre figure as a ceiling I-‘Er.

Killer calculated what in his opinion an investor would have paid for

3

l"the**lsu.‘ojectc tract. While they avai.lability of Governnent lands and the

d" subject  disposal  the area wouldbe taken”  consideration

by dprospective purchaser -it does not follow that the price set for
such Government lands would result m a ceiling which one might expect
tocapply to all lands in the area. There is evidence in this case of
lsomhe sales of select tizrberlands in excess of $1.25 per acre at or
reasonably near the time of valuation.

t A prospective purchaser in l='35'9 would have been aware of the fact

that the subject tract fronted on Puget Sound and contained some good

0 O

the Sound there was a great amount of other competitive
accessible timberland to supply the markets that then existed for the
region; and that there was no immediate value for the inaccessible timber.
The same prospective purchaser would also have realized that the average
stand per acre for this tract would have been considered below the
usual run in the region because of the large amount of burned, damaged
or decayed timber on.the tract. Such a prospective purchaser would also
take into consideration that'tinber operations were being successfully
engaged in on the tract supplying the rrady markets that then existed
for the region.

The Commission based upon.the findings of fact herein made and the

record as a whole and giving due consideration to the size of the tract,

 

its location, the then accessibility of part of the lands, and the
average stand of timber per acre, concludes that the fair narket valued
of the Suquamish tract of 8?,l3O acres as of March 8, 1859, was
373,500.CQ,dr at the arerage rate of approximately $0.90 per acre.
The case will now proceed to a determination of the consideration
paid to the Suquamish India 3, if any, under the prouisions of the
L Treaty of January 22, 1855, supra; whether the consideration so paid,
if any, was unconscionable and, if so, what offsets are chargeable against

said Indians under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

/s/  PE. Et.LT

 

Associate Commissioner
I concur:

/s/ EDGAR  
Chief Commissioner

