BEFORE THE I?~TDIA§‘~I CL1‘«..'L7=’IS CO3-EQSSI ON

'1?-U73 SEKI?-FOLK I-I.-"~1.TION, )
Plaintiff, 3
‘V. 3 Docket No. 150
Tim UNITEID STATES OF AKERICIL, ;
Defendant. %
Decided: June h, 1958
Appearances:

Roy St. Le:-Iis and
Paul M. Niebel,
Attorneys for Plaintiff.

Clifford R. Stearns, with
whom was Fir, As$is=t=_=.n":Attorney General, Perry W.
Norton, Attorneys for
Defendant.

OPIIQI ON BE  C OIQESSIQSE

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

On December S, 1955, the Commission, with one member dissenting
made an interlocutory award to the Seminole Nation of $31; ,2l3.66-less offsets, if any, to which the defendant might show itself entitled under Section 12 of the General Rules of Procedure of this
Commission. On November 18, 1957, evidence was tamn with respect
to offsets under Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60
Stat. 10249) .

The defendant, by its Ar:zendment to Answer, filed February 1, 1957,

claimed offsets in an aggregate amount of $165,271.96. At the hearmg

U0

\__ "r 1

on Rovember 18, l9S7, defendant stated it'was with raving its claim
for certain items totaling $129,937.85, leaving claimed offsets of
t3S,33h.11.

Defendant has introduced in evidence a.report by the General
Accounting Office, dated Jul’ l7, 1956 (Def. Ex. 55), which i5 Supple“
mented by a statement, dated October 3, 1955 (Def. Ex. 57). From.the
record of disbursements made by the United States, as detailed in these

two reports, defendant has presented the items claimed as offsets.

Defendant asserts that by the two General Accounting Office reports

' and the testimony of a General Accounting Office official, Mr. Gillies,

it has proven that the United States, during the period from August l,
1920, to June 30, l9S6, gratuitously expended for the benefit or on
behalf of the petitioner sums totaling $35,33h.ll for itemS‘WhiCh are
proper offsets under the provisions of Section 2 of the Indian Claims
Commission Act and should be deducted from the award.made in this case.’

Petitioner does not question the accuracy of the disbursements
listed in the G.A.O. reports. However, it contends that thecavidence
introduced by defendant fails to prove that any of the disbursements 1
‘were for the benefit of the Seminole Nation but rather indicates that
they were for the benefit of individual Indians or for agency expenses
and educational purposes, and, therefore, the claimed items are not

proper offsets.

The items claimed by defendant as proper offsets mar be generally

classed as:

(l) Those asserted by defendant as payments made directly to the

Seminole Nation;

(2) Those paid to Seminole and Greek Indians I-rhich defendant
claims should be offset in the proportion which the Seminole Indians
represent to the total population of the two tribes, and;

(3) Those paid to or on behalf of the Five Civilized Tribes
Agency which defendant asserts should be offset according to the proportion of the population of the Seminole Nation to the total Indian
population of the Five Civilized Tribes Agency.

Before proceeding to examine the items under the three classes,

we will briefly set forth the guides used by the Commission to test the

C legitimacy of the claimed offset items. ‘The applicable part of Section 2

of the Indian Claims Commission Act (25 U.S.C. me) makes the follonirg
provision respecting g:ratuit_v offsets:

. . . the Commission may also inquire into and con- _
sider all money or property given to or funds expended
gratuitously for the benefit of the claimant and if it
finds that the nature of the cl'i .3 and the entire course
of dealings and accounts between the United States and
the claimant in good conscience warrants such action,
may set off all or partiof such expenditures against any
award made to the claimant, except that it is hereby
declared to be the policy of Congress that moriiés Spent
for the removal of the claimant from one place to another
at the request of the United States, or for agency or
other administrative, educational, health or highway
purposes, or for expenditures made prior to the date of
the law, treaty or Executive Order under which the claim
arose, or for expenditures made pursuant to the Act of
June 18, 1931.; (I48 Stat. 9814), save expenditures made
under section 5 of that Act, or for expenditures under
any emergency appropriation or allotment made subsequent
to March h, 1933, and generally applicable throughout
the United States for relief in striclen agricultural
areas, relief from distress caused by unernplojmsnt and
conditions resulting therefrom, the prosecution of public
work and public projects for the relief of unemployment
or to increase ernployment, and for work relief (including
the Civil Works Program} shall not be a proper offset
against any award.

8

e __,'.
3}: -'
--«I.

In considering the various items presented ‘by defendant as offsets
against the award in this case the Commission has measured. each item
against the following requirements:

(1)

expenditures made to or for the Seminole Nation without a J obligation

Were the disbursements made by the United States gratuitous

on the part of the Government to make them and without obligation on
the part of the Seminole Nation to repay them?

(2) Were the gratuitous expenditures for the benefit of the
entire tribe? i

(3) Do any of the gratuities come within the scope of any of the
excepted categories?

(h) Does the nature of the claim and does the course of dealings
between the petitioner and the United States in good conscience warrant

.1e offset?

If  of the claimed items fail to meet all these criteria, it must
be denied as an offset. With this brief statement concerning the test of
an allowable offset; we now turn to the items claimed in this case.

The largest category of offsets includes those items which defendant claims were paid directly to the Seminole Nation. The items of
offset falling within this category total $3h,Oh3.39. As detailed in
Finding of Fact No. 17, defendant asserts that gratuitous expenditures
totaling $10,180.39 were made during the period from August 1, 1920, to
June 30, 1951, for the benefit of the Seminole Nation.

Of the disbursements made during this period the Commission has

found only two allowable offset items--piayrents of $375.00 and $85.00

’*~r funeral expenses of indigent Indians {see Finding of Feet No; l7(d))..

Gratuitous expenditures by the United States for funeral expenses of
indigent Indians have been consistently held to be allosatle offsets.

Pottewatomic Tribe of Indians, et al., v. United States, 3 Ind. Cl.

Comm. 530; The Quapav Tribe of Indians. et al., v. United States, l

Ind. Cl. Comm. bhh, affirmed 128 C. Cls. b5. The funeral expense expenditures satisfy the criteria for offsets allowatie under the Act,
and these items, totaling $160.00, will be offset against the award
in this case.

Of the remaining items claimed by defendant as allowable offsets,

‘most involved payments made to individual Indians. The question of

gratuitous expenditures for individual members of a tribe was discussed

in detail in our decision in.the case of The Kiowa. Comanche and Apache

Tribes of Indians v. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 297. After dis 

cussing the legislative history of the Act and the relevant court
decisions on offsets we stated in that case, “at no place in any of the
bills that we have examined were payments to individual members of a
claimant suggested as an offset nor does the present act expresslyimake
such outlays deductible from.asards (page 301) . . . it is only
gratuitous expenditures for a tribe, as distinguished from gifts to
its members, that can be offset against an award in.any case." (page 305)
The $19.00 and $8h.OO items listed.under the heading "Agricultural
aid" (Finding l7(a)) were paid from the appropriation “Support and Ram
habilitation of Ieedy Indians.“ This clearly indicates that these funds
were expended for the use and benefit of individual needy Indians. In
19h3 and 19kb, when these payments were made, there were 2,000 Seminole

Indians. The distribmtion of such small amounts, $19.00 in l9h3 and

.4'§‘£‘?I§"_'-,5.

..00 in l9hh,.for agricultural aid to a tribe of 2,000 members can;
scarcely be said to be a tribal gratuity. These payments were gifts
to individual members of the tribe and cannot be offset against the
award in this case.

The $9,125.35 disbursed in cash payments during the period from
19h; through 1951 were liket»:-ise made to individual, indigent Indians.
(Finding l7(b)). The payments were not made on a tribal basis for the
benefit of the 5eminole'Nation. As defendantis witness from the G.A.0.
testified, the vouchers for these payments showed the names of individual
Indians and the case number opposite each name. as enunciated in the
Kiowa case, supra, such gifts to individual members of the petitioning
tribe are not allowable offsets.

The $70.00 item.expended in 19h? for fuel came from.the "Welfare

, Indians" appropriation and it is listed in the G.A.0. report as a
payment to indigent Indians (Finding l7(c)). This item was a gratuity
to individual Indians and cannot be allowed as an offset. in '

The $721.08 disbursement described in our Finding of Fact No. l7(e)
appears to have also been an.individual gratuity since the payments
were listed as having been made for the benefit of indigent lndians.
Since those payments were not made for the benefit of the Seminole
Nation, they are denied as offsets.

The 96 cent item for feed and care of livestock was paid from the
aPPT0FTiatiOn "Support and Rehabilitation of Needy Indians.“ The source
of these funds and the anwmmt clearly indicate individua_ use, and it is

denied as an offset.

6 35‘  

\/’

The final items under the first class of clalmed offsets are p::=.y-ments made during the period frorrz 1952 through l9S6 totaling $23,863.00
(Finding 2'2 . These disbursemnts are listed as relief grants to indigent Seminole Indians. Again the evidence indicatespthe payment of
funds to individual indigent Indians. The payments were not made on
a tribal basis, and, in fact, the Indians paid under these claimed disbursements could only be identified with the Seminole Nation by checking
the names against other lists of the Five Civilized Tribes Agency. In

the absence of any evidence that these payments were tribal gratuities,

these payments to individual Indians should be denied as offsets.
The second category of claimed offsets includes payments made in

19143 and l9h6 as subsistence payments to the Seminole and Greek Indians.

-'-vs‘-if‘-3-A-L.bH-' \irzs 15.5% of't}.1e total disbursements of ‘,-1.-, since that

is the percentage of Seminole Indians to the population of the two tribes.
Thus the total claimed under this category is $10.67. These payments
were made for the support and rehabilitation of needy Indians indicating
their use for individuals rather than the tribe. Further ,' such small

payments which total but $10.67 for two years cannot be said to have

constituted a tribal benefit. Accordingly, these payments are denied as
offsets.

The third class of claimed offsets represents those payments made
to or on behalf of the Five Civilized Tribes Agency whichdefendant
asserts should be offset according to the proportion of the population
of the Seminole Nation to the total Indian population of the Five
Civilized Tribes Agency. The total of the claimed offsets under this

category is $1,290.72.

The first group of disbursements, as detailed in our Findinf 05
Fact no, 19: totaled s50,2l?.82 of which defendant claims 2.L% as the
offset against petitioner. Defendant did not introduce any evidence
indicating that any portion of these funds were distributed as s
gratuity for the Seminole Ration. The source of the fnnds as well as
the items themselves indicates their use for either (1) individual
indigent Indians, (2) educational use, (3) administrative expenses of
the Five Civilized Tribes Agency, or (h) t?335P0?t3ti0n 05 items P?3'
viously disallowed as offsets. Funds expended for ah? 05 these PETP9593
are not available for offset against an award by this Commission.

The final group of claimed offsets totals $53,023.70 expended for
'1'-T‘3.T‘9POT‘+-?.'{'-5.01’? PYPQDRPS relating ‘I‘.r_'s ‘var-jn~n.c:. 1°'§*'.¢_='r:1.¢_: f]j_.¢:'{‘.:==.r'3 in 011?‘ Ffi ndi ‘rags:
of Fact Nos. 20 and 21. The proportionate share which defendant would
attribute to petitioner is 2.h% or $73.1h. The items with resP9°t to
‘which the transportation charges pertain have either been disallowed
as offsets or clearly indicate a non-tribal use. Accordingly, these
charges are disalloeed as offsets.

In summary, defendant is allowed to offset $160.00 against the

award of $3h,2l3.66, leaving the sum of $3h,053.66 for which amount a
judgment will be entered for petitioner.

Vim. K. 

Associate Eommissioner
We concur:

Edsar .. Witt

Ehief Commissioner

V"N
H.

