3 526
BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TILLAMOOK BAND OF TILLAMOOKS,
ET AL.9

Plaintiffs,

v. Docket No. 2&0

THE UNITED STATES,

"h-—’\-I‘iuu-I‘:-uo’\uu"Iun"'|nu-n’\aunP\unl"\n-.J

Defendant.

Decided: June 10, l955i

FINDINGS 93 FACT

The Commission makes the folloning findings of fact:

_ 1. That the plaintiffs herein, the Confederated Tribes of Siletzd
Indians and the Confederated Tribes of the Grand Ronde Community, Oregon,
include the descendants of the Hehalem band and Tillamook band of Tillamook Indians is admitted, and, as such, they are entitled to maintain this
action on behalf of said descendants.

2. Although the amended petition in this case includes as plaintiffs
the_Clatsop Tribe, Kathlamet Band of Chinooks and Nuc—quee~clah-we-muck
Tribe, no evidence has been submitted in support of any claim by such
plaintiffs and consequently this action is considered to be dismissed as
to these plaintiffs. I

3. The two remaining plaintiff bands were not a part of the same
tribe or group of Tillamooks who occupied the coastal area of Oregon
to the south. The claim of this latter group of Tillamooks, along with

others, was presented in the case of the Alcea Band_g§ Tillamooks, §t_§l3.

3,_Th§_United States, 103, c. cls. hgh.

 

_. _ ~__.“ .... ._ .., ......._. ,_,_ .__ __

-. v---. --up-u-a.-nun -nu -.M (a). The_Nehalem and Tillamook ands of Tillamook Indians have from
time immemorial used and occupied a section of the coast of what is now
the State of Oregon from Tillamook Head on the north to Cape Lookout on
the south.

(B), There has been great uniformity among those who have written
of aboriginal occupancy by the plaintiff bands. They have been consistently
located by travelers, historians, and ethnologists within the above
boundaries.

(c)‘ There is evidence that the Tillamook Indians (for convenience
the plaintiff bands will be referred to as Tillamooks in these findings)
had been contacted by white men prior to 1775 but the first specific
account of them is to be found in the writings of Haswell, a mate on an
American vessel, which put in at Tillauook Bay in 1788.

(d). The next contact of which there is a record is that of the
Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1805-06. During the course of their stay
they made rather extensive notes on "The Killamucks, Clatsops, Chinooks,
and Cathlamahs, the four neighbouring nations with whom we have had
most intercourse......“ They located the Tillamooks south of Tillamook
Head.

(e); The next person to mention the Tillamooks was Alexander Henry,
the younger, in 1814. He places them southward on the coast from the
Clatsqps, who had in turn been located on the south side of the mouth of
the Columbia River by Lewis and Clark.

(f)» The Tillamook were mentioned by Douglas in 182%, by Townsend
in 1839, and by virtually every explorer and traveler in the l8¥O‘s and

l850‘s, and they were always placed in the same relative location.

Superintendents Dart and Palmer also located these bands in the same area
in the late 18U0's and early l850*s.

,5 (8). On June 5, 1850, Congress passed an Act (9 Stat. N37)
anthorizing.the negotiation of treaties with the Indian tribes of the
Territory of Oregon for the extinguishment of their clains to lands lying
west of the_Cascade Range, the appointment of Commissioners for that

purpose, etc.

_H _(bZ, In pursuance of that act, Anson Dart, Superintendent of Indian
Affairs for Oregon Territory, negotiated a series of thirteen treaties

during 1851. Among those thirteen treaties are two unratified treaties,

one of which was negotiated with the Tillamook band on August 7, 1851,
and the other with the Naalem (1-Iehalem) band on August 6, 1851.

(c). The boundaries of the land ceded to _the United States by the
Tillamook band in the treaty of August 7, 1851, are as follows:

Art. 1. The said Tillamook tribe of Indians hereby cede to the
United States the tract of land included within the following
boundaries, viz: beginning at the point of rocks claimed as
the southwestern corner of lands lately owned by the Naalem
band of Tillamooks, on the coast of the Pacific ocean: running
thence southerly along said coast to the south side of the
first headland north of the Neastocka river; thence east to
the summit of the coast range of mountains; thence northerly
along the summit of said range to the southern boundary of
land lately claimed by said Naalem band; thence westerly
following their said southern boundary to the place of beginning. The above described land being all that is claimed by
the said tribe of Tillamook Indians.

(d), The boundaries of the land ceded to the United states by the
Nehalem band in the treaty of August 6, 1851, are as follows:
Art. 1. The said band of Indians code to the United States

the tract of land included within the following boundaries,
viz: beginning at the mouth of a certain stream called the

3 523

Yocklespahta, and running thence along the coast of the
Pacific ocean in a southerly direction to a certain point

of rocks south of the Naalem river, which point of rocks

is claimed as the southwest corner of lands belonging to

said band; thence east to the Summit of the coast range of
mountains; thence northerly following said range of mountains
to the southern boundary of land lately claimed by the Clatsopt
tribe of Indians; thence westerly following said southern
boundary of the Clatsops to the head waters of the Yocklespahta;
thence down and along said stream to the place of beginning.
The above described land being all that is claimed by the said
band of Tillamook Indians.

(e); The above boundaries include the land sued for by plaintiffs
herein, with but a slight variation in order to conform to natural water?
sheds.

(f): In his letter of transmittal which accompanied the thirteen
treaties, Superintendent Dart states that the treaties were negotiated
at Tansey Point, near the mouth of the Columbia River and that the area
ceded was more than 6,000,000 acres. He further states that the land
was owned by tribes numbering about 320 Indians and that certain of
the tribes were incensed at their treatment by the Government and were
reluctant to part with their land. It is also mentioned that at the time
of signing each of the treaties the entire bands were present.

(s).

$10.50O each in goods and money.

The treaties with plaintiff bands called for a consideration of
These two treaties were never ratified
by Congress.

(h), Congress passed two acts, one on June 7, 1897 (30 Stat. 78) and
one on August 2Q, 1912 (37 Stat. 535) under which the Nehalem and Tillamook
bands were paid the $10,500 each, less attorneys‘ fees, for which the

treaties called. These payments were made in full settlement of any and

all claims which the respective bands might have against the Government.
6 (a), The journal of the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1805-06 lists
the population of the plaintiff bands at 1,000 during that period.
Dr. Herbert Taylor, plaintiffs’ ethnologist, estimates that at the height
of the Tillamook population there were one and one-half to two_times as
many Indians_as when the Lewis and Clark figure was made.i The report of
Haswell indicated that smallpox was already known among the Tillamooks
in 1788 and an epidemic of fever in 1829-30 further reduced the number of
Iillamooks. By the time of the negotiation of the treaties in 1851 there
were only 88 members of plaintiff bands left. according to Superintendent
Dart's reports.
(b), The above population figures and estimates indicate that some
1,500 to 2,000 Indians used and occupied the same area which it is nowy
claimed was used and occupied by 88 Indians in 1851. As indicated in a
previous finding, there has been general agreement by all who have written
of these Indians that they occupied this same area since aboriginal times.
It is not contended that any greater area than that ceded was ever needed
to support these bands at the height of their population.
7 (a), In the area claimed by the Nehalem band of Tillamooks at least
six villages existed; and in the area claimed by the Tillanook there were
These villages were located upon Nehalem Bay and

at least six villages.

$il1amook:Bay and at the mouths of the principal streams flowing into such

bays. (Substantially such finding is requested by defendant in its finding

29).
(b). Excursions by the Indians for hunting and gathering purposes
9‘.

went only into the lower slopes of the mountains. (Defendant's requested

3 530

.- _.. .. ._.........._._... --__. 

finding 32).

(C): Their extent of exploitation inland would be approximately
10 miles along the river course. (Defendant's requested finding 33).

(d), As a matter of common knowledge and as indicated by the
evidence herein, these people were a marine economy people. They lived
along the coast and their principal diet was confined to seafood. Thqy
also used roots, berries, fruit, birds and animals, as did all aboriginal
peoples. However, as compared with seafood, these latter items were
only a small portion of the diet. This appears to be especially true
of the animals.

(e), The journal of Lewis and Clark indicates that game was not
widely used by the Chinooks to the north of plaintiff bands, nor by
the Clatsops who were immediately north of plaintiffs. They also state
that while elk were plentiful in the mountains, the Tillamooks could
not kill many with arrows. The evidence herein also indicates that
game in the form of elk and deer was plentiful along the coast, especially
during the winter when the animals came down from the hills.

(f)

the area would tend to diminish the necessity of hunting. Products of the

9 The relatively brisk trade carried on between the Indians of
coast were exchanged with the Indians from farther inland for meat, skins
and camas.

8 (a), The evidence herein indicates that the plaintiff bands ranged
from Tillamook Head on the north to Cape Lookout on the south and that
their area of principal exploitation, due primarily to the comparative
ease of obtaining subsistence along the coast, would not be over 10 miles

inland. While it is very probably true that Indians roamed over the area

ceded from time to time and very possibly hunted over it on occasion,
there is still insufficient evidence to justify a finding that the whole
of the claimed area was used, occupied; and controlled by two bands of
Indians whose total numbers were only 88 in 1851 when the treaties herein were negotiated.

(b): The evidence justifies a finding, and such finding is here

made, that the plaintiff bands used, occupied, and controlled the follouri

ing described area, to-wit:

From Tillamook Head at a point on the Pacific Ocean; thence
east along the high ground north of the Nehalem River drainage
to a.point 10 miles inland from said coast; thence south in a
straight line to a.point due east of Cape Lookout; thence due
west to the ocean at a‘p0int on said Cape Lookout; thence north
-along the coast to the place of beginning; being an area of
approximately #5 miles by 10 miles in size.s

9. The Indians from the various villages of the Nehalem band and

the Tillamoqh band of the Tillamooks intermarried and exchanged their
places of residence within such territory so as to make it impossible
at this time to fix the liability of defendant to the separate bands
but such liability must accrue to the plaintiffs jointly as one entity.
(Justified by the evidence and defendant‘s requested finding 35).

10. Ever since the aforesaid treaties were negotiated the land
therein described has been treated by the officials of the Government
as public land and open to settlement by whites, under the laws of the
United States. It was not until after the passage of the Oregon Donation
Act of 1850 (9 Stat. #96), however, that the whites began to encroach
(Defendant‘s requested finding 8).

upon the Indians.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. O’darr

*: 
Associate 0 mmissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Kssociate Commissioner

3 532

