8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1136

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

UPPER CHEHALIS TRIBE, ET sis, )
Plaintiffs, 3
v. 3 Docket No. 23'?
THE UNITED STATES, 3
Defendant. ;
Decided: March lb, 1960

AMENDED FINDINGS Q2 FACT

The Commission, in accordance with the instructions contained in

the opinion of the Court of Claims rendered on October 9, 1957, in Upper‘

hehalis Tribe et al.

The United States, 1140 C. C13.‘ 192, makes the
following amended findings of fact which amended findings shall supersede
the findings numbered 1 to 25, inclusive, heretofore made in the prior .
decision of the Commission, filed on June 25, 1956.

.1. (a) The petition in this case was filed with the Indian Claims

Commission on August 8, 1951, by the following named plaintiffs: Upper

Chehalis Tribe, Lower Chehalis Tribe, Chehalis Tribe, Satsop Tribe, Humptulip

Tribe, Upper Chinook Tribe, "Lower Chinook Tribe, Chinook Tribe, Hoquiam Tribe ,
Clatsop Tribe, Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation and portions
and descendants of such tribes and bands.

(b) The petition was amended by plaintiffs to omit “The Upper Chinook,
Lower Chinook, Chinook and Clatsop Tribes“ as plaintiffs and added “Ralph A-.

Heck, Frank F. Pete and Murphy Secena, who are members of the Chehalis Tribe

1136

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 36 ' n37

and subordinate bands not members of the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis

Reservation.“ The plaintiff, the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reserwation is organized and recognized by the Secretary of the Interior.

(c) Plaintiffs, that is both the organized group known as The Confederated
Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation and the individually named petitioners, have
ytheicapacity to maintain this action for and on behalf of descendants of the
aboriginal tribes or identifiable groups known as the Upper Chehalis Indians
and the Lower Chehalis Indians.

2. Plaintiff Indians, together with the ”Clatsop” and “Chinook” Indians,
originally alleged joint and several occupancy of certain lands in what is
now the State of'Washington. In their amended petition plaintiffs apparently
allege joint ownership to the following described land: I

BEGINNING on the coast of what is now the State of‘washington

at a point north of Gray's Harbor, which point is now called
Copalis Rock; thence in a northeasterly direction to the headwaters of the Copalis_river, and from the headwaters of the
Copalis river in a northeasterly direction to headwaters of

the Humptulips river; thence in a general easterly direction
_from the head of the Humptulips river to the head of the
Wynoochee river; and thence in a southeasterly direction from

the headwaters of the Wynoochee river to the headwaters of

the Satsop river; thence in a southeasterly direction following the watershed between the Satsop river and Puget Sound to

the watershed between the Chehalis river and the Deschutes river,
and following the watershed between the Chehalis river and the
Deschutes river to a point east of what is now the town of
Centralia, where the Chehalis river bends; thence in a southwesterly direction, following the watershed between the Newaukum.
river and the Cowlitz river to the Willapa Hills; thence, following the northern edge of the Willapa Hills to the Pacific Ocean
at a point now called Graylands, above the northern reach of what
is now called'Willapa Bay.

3. E. L. Crawford, of-Salem, Oregon, is the duly authorized attorney

for the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reserv*tion, under contract duly

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 535 ' 438

approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on March 21, l9S1. That

E. L. Crawford, on July 5, 1951, made an assignment of interest of said
contract to Garland 8. Ferguson, III, and Joseph W. Creagh, attorneys of
Arlington, Virginia, and that said assignment of interest was duly approved
by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Historical

O

D. The first white contact made with the Indians of what is new
the State of'Nashington occurred in 159? when Juan de Fuca, a Spanish
Captain, reached the Straits named after him. Vancouver in 1792 visited
the area and the Hudson Bay and Northwest Companies soon became active
in the region. Lewis and Clark, in 1806, mention the “Chilts“, probably
Chehalis Indians.‘ In 1821 Stuart located the Chehalis along the coast

b0 miles to the north of the Columbia River. John'§ork, 182b, explored

_ the area and mentions the "Halloneena“ tribe on Black Lake and Black

River. Hofras, 18kb, reported the "Chekilis et Quinayat" were located
on Gray‘s Harbor and the Chehalis river. ‘Hole, who accompanied the
United States Exploring expedition, 1838-18b2, reported in IBE6 that
"Among the‘Tsihailish are included the Awaintl and Kwenaiwitl a a a who
lived near the coast, thirty or forty miles south of Cape Flattery

* * *." Lt. George M. Colvoeoresses in 1852 wrote of risiting part of
the claimed area where he net the “Sacha1" tribe (probably on Black
river). He stated: “They are all of the wandering habit and change
their residence in search of food, which consists principally of fish

and clams * *'*u According to the Chief's account, the Sachals are “Qt

8 Ind. C1. Com. H36 539

more than forty in number, and live chiefiy on the camas root and salmon,
which fish they capture in great quantities in the Rivers Sachal and
Chickeless * * *. The next day we arrived at the point where the Sachal
and Chickelees unite % * *. About dusk we had a visit from some Chenooks,

who had encamped three or four miles down the river. * * * On the first
day out he met some Indians of the Squamish Tribe * * *. The Indians
who inhabit the shores of the.Arbor‘£Eray‘s Harbo:7 call themselves
Chickelees and their number is about 200 * * *. Live principally by
fishing * * * they are much dreaded by their neighbors the Sachals and #
Sachaps. * * *“ i

S. Joseph Lane, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Oregon
Territory reported in 18h9 that the "Quenoit and Chehaylis tribes live
on_the—Chehaylis river; total number about 300; well disposed, live by
hunting and fishing." (Def; Ex. 131). In the report of the Secretary of
‘War for 1855 is contained the report of 185k by George Gibbs who was
Secretary of Governor Stevens’ treaty comission on the Indians of Washington.Territory and of the Chinook Indians it is stated that "Of the Loner
Chinooks there are six or seven settlements, most of whibh consist of
single families. The one on the Chinook tract is the largest, and
amounts to 66. Almost all these are, however, intermingled with the
Chihales." The report further narrates:

As this last named locality (Shoalwater Bay) has only recently

been much known, a rather more particular notice of it is not_

out of place. % % % The southern half of the bay belonged to
them (Chinooks); the country on the Willapah river to the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 2:36

tribe of that name; and the upper end to the Chihalis.
*-* %»At present but few Indians remain here, the smallpox having nearly finished its work during the past year.
* e e s

The‘Willopahs % e-* may be considered_as extinct, a few

women only remaining, and these intermarried with the Chinooks
and Chihalis.

Part of the Chihalis Indians still frequent the bay for
fish, clams and oysters, and, with the Chinooks living there,
_are employed by the whites in taking the latter for market.
*'*-4 They have some horses, and this beach is a favorite raceground. The number of the tribe on Gray's harbor, and that

part of the river from the Satsop down, is supposed to be
one hundred and fiftyu %~*-*

There are said to be several other bands inhabiting the
northern branches of the Chihalis, the Whishkah, wynoochees,
etc., between whom and the whites there has been no intercourse whatever, and who have never been included in any
estimate. "For the present purpose they may, with sufficient
probability, be reckoned at three hundred. The Indians of

the Upper Chehalis'eill be considered in connexion with the
Cowlitz.

-If--K--It

The Cowlitz likewise, a once numerous and powerful tribe,
are new insignificant and fast disappearing. The few bands
remaining are intermingled with those of the Upper Chehalis.
According to the best estimates obtained, the two united are
not over one hundred and sixty-five in number, and are
scattered in seven parties between the mouth of the Cowlitz
and the Satsop. (Def: Ex. lla)

Agent Starling reported in 1852 that the ”douelitz and Chehalis or
Chicalees speak the same language and are much intermixed.“ (Def. Ex.
122). Spier, Def} Ex. No. 5, page 31, states of the village recorded
as Talal, at Fordis Prairie, as a "willapa“, that: “It is quite
Possible that this group joined the mixed Chehalis—$oxl;tz peoples
during the first half of the last century." Gibbs in 1536 prepared a

map of the uestern.part of‘Hashinguon Territory in which he locates

hho

1--.:' «vu~-.._' ..

-- .-1.,
.-4.

4--o

35"

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 535

the "Chihalis“ on Gray's Harbor and south of the harbor along the coast
between Shoalwater Bay and Grayis Harbor; the “Nan-nool-chie" are located near the mouth of the wynoochee river; the "Satsupsh” on the
southern part of the Satsop river; the ”Satsall“ near the mouth of the
Black river and the Stak-ta-mish located northwest of the Skookumchuck

river and north of the Chehalis river. (Def. Ex. 176) See also the

following maps showing Indians on the various rivers north of the
Chehalis: Def} Er. 137, p. 56; Def. Ex. lll (Satsop); Def. BX. 109
(Satsop); Def. Ex. 108 (Satsop, Wynootchee,'Whiskah); Def. Ex. 85
(Copalis, Oyhut). .

C 6. On March 22, l8Sh, Colonel U. T. Simmons was appointed special

Indian Agent for'Washington Territory. Governor Isaac Stevens of

,‘Washington Territory instructed him to make a tour of the various

' 

tribes within his district to prepare the Indians for future negotiations.
Simmons uas further instructed to "organize small hands, not at present
united, by gathering them into tribes, having reference to their general
affinities, and by procuring the selection of head Chiefs &.of assistant
or lesser types, over the larger existing tribes you will also direct
the appointment of head and sub Chiefs, *f* *. To these respectiuely
you will issue commissions of the forms enclosed, *-% *." (Def: En. 31).
Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs Charles E. Mix, on.August 30, 185k,
notified Governor Stevens that the latter had been designated by the
President to conduct treaty negotiations with the Indian tribes in the
Territory of'Washington."Hix instructed Stevens to “endeavor to unite

the numerous bands, and fragments of tribes into tribes & provide for

8 Ind. 01. Com. 1.36 0 4*“

J

the concentration of one or more of such tribes upon the reservations which

may be set apart for their future homes.” (Def. Ex. 32).

7. In February 1855, Governor Stevens commenced treaty negotiations

at a point on the Chehalis river with Upper and Lower Chehalis, Cowlitz,
Lower Chinook, Quinault and Quests Indians. James G. Swan, a settler in
the area, who was present at the negotiations later wrote ZIBSZ7:
“Around the sides of the square were ranged the tents and wigvams of

the Indians, each tribe having a space allotted to it. The Coast
Indians were placed at the lower part of the camp; first the Chenooks,
then the Chehalis, Queniult and Qdaitso, Satsop or Satchap, Upper Chehalis, and Cowlitz. These different tribes had sent representatives

to the council and there were present about three hundred and fifty of

them, and the best of feelings prevailed among them all." (Def. Ex. 12)

Governor Stevens proposed to the Indians that they cede their lands

and move on to a single reservationtxate selected for them but the
Indians were adamant for reservations in their respective territories.
The Upper Chehalis wanted their reservation to include Mound Prairie

and Smith's Prairie. The Lower Chehalis desired “three niles above

and below 'Wahnoolchie' for a reserve on the Chihalisl“ ‘Yowannus spoke _

as head chief of the Upper Chehalis while fu-leh—uk spoke as head chief
of the Lower Chehalis. Chah-lat “a sub chief from the North side of
Gray‘s Harbor" expressed a desire to speak "of his land“ which he
wanted to retain. Tee—whit of “Satsop and Squatsen“ wanted part of

his land for a reserve. later Anannata, “sub chief Upper Chihalis“

-_ cr8 Ind. Cl. Com. 535

stated he spoke for the "Cowlitz and Satsop too“ and that they would

give up all their land for a reserve from “the mouth of Black River
down to the lower end of Smith‘s prairie.“ Yowannus stated "We have

finally settled on a place for these five bands, the Cowlitz, Upper

Cowlitz, Upper Chehalis, Satsop, and Mountain Indians (a remnant of the

Kwalk wi o quas)." Tusleh-uk said “We give up all our lands to you but

All those

a small piece. ‘we Kwinai-utl speak a different language.

won this river from wan col chie down are willing to go together."

Mak-an-hu, "North side of Gray‘s bay" stated he wanted the Governor to

look out for those north of the Chehalis and “they are willing to give

up their lands and go over on the west side with fuéle-huk. They have

four rivers on the Northern side which they give up.“ The Satsop and
Gcwlitz expressed a willingness to give up their lands and go on the

reserve asked for by the Upper Chehalis. Mo-te—lis, “a sub chief from

north side of Gray's Harbor" claimed to own a large country on the

north side of Gray's Harbor and stated he wanted to remain there. Kishkok, Cowlitz chief, said they were willing to move to the Satsop country. .

Yowannus, Upper Chehalis chief, stated the Governor had given him.a

paper *on.Mr. Ford's recommendation. He gave up all the country that
had belonged to him and came down to the Satchel, and wanted-the place
to extend to a small creek below it, for the five or six hands he had
spoken of." .Governor Stevens would not accede to the requests of the
Indians for the reservations they desired and no treaty was consummated.

As the council ended, Governor Stevens reprimanded Tu-leh-uk, of the

Lower Chehalis, for not controlling his Indians who had been drinking

hh8 Ind. Cl. Com. h36

the night before and firing their guns, and tore to pieces the paper
which had been given him to show that the government recognized him

as chief (Def; Ex. 78).

'2”?

8.

James G. Swan in his book, "Three Years at Shoal—Water Bay"
(1857) stated that George Gibbs in 1855 had inquired of him the names

"15

of the coast tribes. Swan said “the names given him by the Indians

and by which the tribes *-e * are known" included the "Chenooks", the

“Kar-wee-wee, or Arts-milsh, the name of the Shoal water Bay tribes,

in

which are now nearly extinct, and are usually considered as Chenooks,"
the “Che-halis, on Gray's Harbor and Chehalis River," the “Copalis, on
the Copalis River, eighteen miles north of Gray's Harbor,“ and the
"Queni-ult, at Point Grenville.” Swan narrates of a journey to “Quenuilt
country” which required passing through the lands of the ”Chehalis and
Copalis tribes.” Swan wrote in part "Carcowan and his son Tleyuk, the

chiefs of the Chehalis Indians insisted that, as we would pass through

_their lands first, they were entitled to let the horses and canoes for the

whole distance; but the Copalis said they had better horses than Carcowan,
and ue must take theirs; opera” (Def. Ex. l2). Special Indian Agent

Ford, uestern district of“washington Territory in his l8S? report wrote
that the Upper and lower Chehalis tribes were-embraced'within his district.
He stated further that: “The lever Chihalis consist of the Clickauanmish,
Satsop, and'Wanoolchie Bands, as well as the Indians'living at Gray's
Harbor, which latter are the Lower Chihalis, properly so called.“

Ford recommended a treaty be made with the Indians in his district and

‘him

‘l_,.....:.

«-46.

"3.
‘:.«

8 1na..‘e1. Com. 1135

that two reservations be set aside for them - one upon the coast north
of Gray*s Harbor and one on the Chehalis river at the nouth of Black
river (Def. Ex. 33). Indian Agent M. T. Simmons of Washington Territory in his annual report dated June 30, 1858. also recommended a
treaty be made with the Chehalis Indians and that it provide for two
reserves.i Simmons reported that "Te-la-ek, the head man of the lower
or salt water band, refused to sign or allow his people to sign a
treaty when Governor Stevens, some four years since, attempted to treat
with them. Since then, all, with the exception of this Te-la-ek and

some that he influences, have become eager to sell their land. I have

just returned from visiting these Indians. At Ford Prairie I met and

talked with the upper band, they expressed a willingness to treat, and

specified the land they wanted set apart for a reserve." Simmons

I further stated that "The Indians on the Satsop and at Gray’s Harbor
expressed their good wishes towards the whites, and their willingness
to go on a reserve.i I mean all but those who are influenced by Te-la-ek,
they will number about one hundred“ (Def. Ex. 79). The same agent in
1860 reported he had selected a piece of ground adaptable to the wants
of the Cowlitz and Upper Chehalis tribes and upon which he believed it
advisable to settle these Indians while the Chinook and Lower Chehalis
should be located somewhere near the seashore.(Def. Ex. 67).‘

9. On May 1?, 186b, the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs wrote to

the Secretary of the Interior with respect to a proposed reservation

for the Chehalis Indians. The Commissioner stated in part as follows:

(I KaPp- 901)

11145

'72

8 Ind. ‘Cl. Colt. 1436 . 1,1,5

I
?

1'
I
I

*‘* s It will be seen by Superintendent Hale's letter of
July 3, 1862, that the country claimed by these Indians is
large, comprising some l,SOO square miles; that they have
never been treated with, but that the Government has suru
veyed the greater part of it without their consent and in

‘the face of their remonstrances, and the choicest portions

of their lands have been occupied by the whites without any
remuneration to them, and without their consent or having
relinquished their claim or right to it. They have been thus
crowded out and excluded from the use of the lands claimed bythem and those which they have heretofore cultivated for their
support. This has caused much dissatisfaction and threatens
serious trouble, and they manifest a determination not to be
forced from what they claim as their country. ,After various
propositions made to them by Superintendent Hale, looking to
their removal and joint occupation of other Indian reservations,
to all which they strenuously objected, they expressed willingness to relinquish all the lands hitherto claimed by them,
provided they shall not be removed, and provided that a sufficient quantity of land shall be retained by them at the mouth
of the Black River as a reservation.

The Commissioner stated the reservation would consist of about six sections

of land. On July 8, 186b, the Secretary of the Interior approved the setting

aside of h,22h.63 acres as a reservation.

- g

10. In the report of the Secretary of the Interior for l8?3 (Def.

Ex. 175) with regard to the Chehalis reservation it is stated that:

The Indians for whom this reservation was set apart,
being parties to no treaty, number at least 600, and consist of the Chehalis, Chinook, Shoal Hater Bay, latsop,
Humptolops, Cakoklan, and Cowlitz tribes. The Chehalis
is_the largest of these tribal remnants, and reside mostxy

' on the reservation, which contains about 5000 acres, * * #.

* *-% These tribes when first discovered by the white man
were in peaceable possession of, and had the just right to,
all the country around Grayis Harbor, and from about ten
miles north of that bay, south sixty miles along the Pacific
‘coast to the mouth of the Columbia River, The rich valley of
the Chehalis and all the country south of that valley to the
Pacific; the valley of the Conlits and all the country west
of it to the Pacific; % s % in all nearly two million acres
of land, which our Government, rithout treaty, purchase, or
contract, or right of any kind, save that which is governed

Ti -‘ .>
"-55% 114""

In 1879 the Indian Agent for Washington Territory in listing Reservations,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h36

by might, took from these weak, powerless barbarians and appropriated to her own use. After years of complaining, the
protest against the injustice of this wholesale absorption

of their country was so far heeded that in 1860 Superintendent
Geary directed to be set apart to them a tract of about 5,000
acres, (out of a country all justly their own,) which constitutes the present Chehalis reservation. The Cowlitz, Chinook,
Shoal-water Bay, and Humtolops, have never recognized this re_servation as their home, and refused to come and reside on it;
nor have they ever consented to receive a_present of any kind
from Government, fearing it might be construed into a payment
for their lands. 0

s-%-* Chinoose, chief of the Humtolops, and about seventy of
his people arrived on the llth, *-* *. They declined taking
anything, saying that they had come to talk about their lands;
that they never had taken any goods from the United States,
and that, though they were poor, they wanted nothing from the
Government but a paper that would enable them to hold their
land.against white men who were threatening to drive them away
from it. I told them to come to the reservation with their
people, where there was plenty of room and good land for all.
They replied that was not their home; that they had always
lived at the mouth of the Humtolop and Chinoose Rivers, where
their fathers had lived and died from time imnemorial, and they

wished to live and die there; that they did not know how to live

away from salt water, where they could always get plenty of
fish and clams. *-* % d

0 Tribes and Bands mentions the Chehalis.and Shoal Water reservations, and

the Gray*s Harbor Band, "situated on Gray's Harbor and tributaries,

about 60:mi1es southwest of Olympia, and consisting of 16h Indian men,

women and children." The agent further reported that "the Chehalis and

Shoal'Water Bay tribes and the Gray's Harbor band all talk the same

language.“ (Def; Ex. 71) Remnants of the Chinook Bands and lower

Chehalis had a reservation established for them of 335 acres by Executive

Order of September 22, _l§66 (I Kapp. 92h). (See 79 c. Cls. 608).

Indians lived on the reservation on the Chehalis River where the lands

11. In I885 Indian Agent Edwin Bells reported that the Chehalis

hh?

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1:36

had been allotted to them in severalty but there being no way for them

to get patents he recommended that the executive order establishing the

reserve be so changed that the Indians residing thereon be allowed to
tahe the lands they occupied under the Indian homestead laws. Eells

also reported the following tribes or remnants of tribes and population

of each which came under the jurisdiction of the Quinaielt Agency:

_]_._8_8_§_' 1886
Hohs 61 61
Queets 85 85
Quinaielts 102 10?
Chehalis S 5
Oyhut 35 35
Hoquiam l6 l6
Humptulips 16 8 l6
Montesano l6 l6
Satsop 12 12
Georgetown 71 59

The Agent stated that the last seven of the above tribes “have their
villages more or less distant from the reservation, and are widely
scattered. * * e The Hohs are 25 miles north of the agency, the Georgetowns 50 miles south, and the Satsops h3 miles southeast of the agency,

* * *” (Def. Exhibits 73, 7h; see also Def. Exhibits 76, 173). IEells J
reported in 1889 that the Indians on the Chehalis reservation had received patents for their allotments (Def. Ex. 75). In 1907 the Secretary of the Interior caused an investigation to be made by the Commissioner.
of Indian Affairs into the claims of the Chehalis tribe. The Commissioner
reported in part: "There is no evidence on file in the office that any

of the Indians belonging to the four bands [including Chinook band§7
specified in the act er June 21', 1906, are now living, except the Chehalis for whom a reservation has been set aside. If it be true that
3

M8

8 Ind. Cl. Com. H36

I
some of their descendants are alive, they have married and intermarried

with other bands until it would be impossible to determine with what

tribe they affiliated in 1851." The Court of Claims found (Finding XXVI)

I in Duwamish, et al., v. United states, 79 c. c1s. 530, SSb, SSS, that

_ by'Executive Order of October 1, 1885 (I Kapp. 903), 3,753.63 acres of

the Chehalis reservation were restored to the public domain for Indian
homestead entry and h7l acres set aside for school purposes and that
thirtyesix of the Indians on the reservation made homestead selections
covering all the land not reserved for school purposes.

Ethnological

12. Hodge in Handbook of American Indians, Bureau of.American

 

Ethnology, Bulletin 30, Part 2, includes the Chehalis group as part of

” ,the Salishan family. Under “Coast Dialects" he lists the "Chehalis

group, embracing six dialects, which show considerable variation. These

. are the Quinault and Quaitso of N. W. Washington; the Humptulips of

the N. Part of Grays Harbor; the Lower Chehalis of Grays Harbor and
Shoalwater bay; the Satsop e. and n.e. of Grays Harbor; the Upper
Chehalis e. of Shoalwater bay; and the Cowlitz on the river of that

name southward to Columbia r.“ (Def. Ex. 6h). "Chehalis" according_

to Hodge is: (BAE 30, page Zhl)

A collective name for several Salishan tribes on Chehalis r.
and its affluents, and on Grave harbor,'Wash. Gibbs states
that it belongs strictly to a village at the entrance of
Grays harbor and signified ‘sand.’ There were 9 principal
villages on the river, and 7 on the N. and 8 on the s. side
of the bay: there were only a few villages on the n. end of
Shoalwater Bay; By many writers they are divided into Upper
Chehalis or Kwaiailk (q.v.), dwelling above Satsop r. and
the Lower Chehalis from that point down. The following sub~
divisions are mentioned, some of which were single villages,

hh9

8 Ind. Cl, Como L35

while others probably embraced people living in several:
Chiklisilkh, Cloquallum, Hoquiam, Hooshkal, Humptulips,
Kishkallen, Klimmim, Klumaitumsh, Koalekt, Nickomin, Nooachhummilh, Noohoovltch, Nookalthu, Noosiatsks, Nooskoh, Satsop,'Wenatchi, Whiskah. The Satsop speak a dialect distinct from the otherso In 1806 Lewis and Clark assigned to
them a population of 700 in 38 lodges, In l90b there were
lb? Chehalis and 21 Humptulips under the Puyallup school
superintendent,'wash.

Of the Lower Chehalis, Hodge wrote that the name is a collective tern for
Salish tribes on the lower Chehalis river and its tributaries as well

as those about Grayis Harbor and the north end of Shoalwater Bay, Washington. Included within this collective term, according to the writer, were
the Satsop, Wenatchi, Humptulip, and other small tribes. The handbook

states: "According to Ford (Ind. Aff. Rep. l857, 3hl, l8S8) the term

is properly restricted to the Grays Harbor Indians, and Gibbs confines

it to those about the n. end of Shoalwatcr bay" (B.A.E. 30, page 755).

The Upper Chehalis, called Kwaiailk in the Handbook, were a Salishan body
an the upper course of the Chehalis river above the Satsop river and on
the Cowlitz, Washington, and in "1855, according to Gibbs, they numbered
216, but were becoming amalgamated with the Cowlitz" (B.A.E. 30, page
7hh). Swanton, "The Indian Tribes of North America,“ Bureau of American
IEthnology, Bulletin lh5r(l9S2), states that “Chehalis", meaning sand,

“was the name derived originally according to Gibbs (1877), from a village
at the entrance of Grays Harbor." Swanton states further that the Chehalis were intimately related to the Humptulips,'Wynochee, and Quinault
and that they were located on the “lower course of Chehalis River, especially on the south side, andton the south side of Grays Bay. In later

times the Chehalis occupied territory to and about‘willapa.Z§hoalwate§7

LSO

8 Ind. Cl. Com. L36

hay that had formerly been held by the Chinook.” Swanton lists
thirteen villages for the Chehalis listing seven as being "earlier
in territory occupied by the Chinook" and of these seven villages,
six are not within the territory now claimed by plaintiffs. According
to Swanton the village at Ford's Prairie on the Chehalis River near .
dentralia was "far outside of the Chehalis territory proper.“‘
13. In 1936 the University-of'washington Publications in Anthro- pology (Vol. 6, No. 1) published a study of "The Quinault Indians“ by
Ronald Lu Olson. In speaking of the neighbors of the Quinault, Olson
stated that "The peoples of the southern part of the Puget Sound region
were not wholly strangers, for the Quinault had intimate contacts with
the several Chehalis tribes who occupied the territory between Grays
Harbor and the southern extremity of Puget Sound." Olson found that
’ ?§he tribe nearest to the Quinault on the south was the dbpalis who
.~T“occupied the coast from the limits of Quinault territory to the entrance to Grays Harbor and a portion of North Bay within the harbor.
In addition they seem to have claimed the valley of the Copalis.river..
lhe largest village was N1-shal, now called Oyhut after the Chinookl

ii . 7“ jargon name." .According to Olson, the Humptulips lived to the east

37ef the Copalis tribe and held the north shore of Grays Harbor from.
“somewhere near the middle of North Bay eastward probably to Junction

City. They had several villages on the Humptulips river and perhaps

claimed the whole valley. They may have held the valley of the Hoquiam

A.

river as well, though the Hoquiam may have regarded themselves as a

distinct group.” To the east of the Humptulips lived the'Wynoochee and

hSl

8 Indo‘ Clo  
Satsop tribes according to Olson who further stated: "It seems probable,
however, that these minor tribes to the south and east of the Quinault

are but subdivisions of Lower Chehalis. The lack of interest in tribal

units and the particularism of the village units (i.e., family groups)

make it difficult to determine tribal affiliations with any exactness.“

Olson states that the “tsahe'ls (Chehalis) tribe_[the Lower Chehalis
according to Spie§7 seems to have occupied the district between the
Chehalis river and the'Willapa river. They had villages on the northern
arms of Shoalwater bay as well as along the southern shores of drays
Harbor“ (Def. Ex. 52). I ‘ __
lh. Dr. Leslie Spier in l§36 had published a study entitled “Tribal

llistribution in Washington" (Def. Ex. 5) in which be reviews the ethnological material on the Indians of that state. ‘With respect to the

Chehalis Indians he wrote:

It is reasonably certain that Lower Chehalis should be
separated from Upper Chehalis. ‘What Swan wrote would seem at
.first glance to imply no distinction (simply "Che~ha-lis, on
Grayis Harbor and Chehalis River"), but "e must bear in mind
that he was enumerating only the coastal tribes, hence this
must refer to the Lower Chehalis alone. " ’

s.However, there is another question whether the tribelets
north of lower Chehalis River are to be included with Lower
Chehalis. Earlier writers do include them, but Curtis and
Olson express a clear conviction that the grouping is artificial. Curtis, in fact, states that the name Chehalis was
extended by the Indians following white example, until it
came to include the people from Westport “along the south
shore of Grays harbor, up Chehalis river to'Wynoochee river,
and on Whisaal river at the head of the bay.“ Gibbs uses the
term in its extended sense, writing in 1856: “The Lower
-Tsihalis, or those from the mouth of the Satsop down, including the villages cn.t_e Whishkah and'wanulchi /§¥n%oche§7,
and the few on Shoalwater Bay /Qillapa Harbor7, numbered in
all 21? .... There were formerly five principal villages

1:52

‘-‘ ‘: - 9' }"
‘4.1;;;;..,',I.*-'f

a Ind. cl; Com. L36

of the tribe on the /5hehalis7 river, seven on the north,
and eight on the souh side of the bay /evidently Gray's

e Harbor7, and even within the recollection of.American settlers
the population was very considerable."

Spier then quotes Agent Ford (see Finding 8) and continues "It seems preferable then to map the tribelets north of the river separately from’
Lower Chehalis proper." Spier stated it seemed advisable to map the
Humptulips, Wynoochee and Satsop, as distinct entities and cites Olson

wr(see Finding 13) and also Haeberlin and Gunther who wrote: "The Satsep,

«sometimes regarded as a distinct tribe, are a band of Nisqually who

lived on Satsep Creek and intermarried with the Chehalis and Skykomish
* *-*3“ ‘W. F. Tolmie in writing to George Gibbs in l85h of a census

of the tribes living on the western inlets of Puget Sound states that
the census of the "Nisqua1lies“ includes "some scattered families living
on the grand or mound Prairie.“ (Def. Ex. 81) Of the Upper Chehalis,
Spier wrote:

Upper Chehalis_[Kwaiailk, Stak-ta-mish (stagmtubc, “inland people"), Nueso—lupsh, Kwu-teh-ni7} A distinction was
made between Lower and Upper Chehalisqby early writers which
it would be well to follow. Gibbs writes of the Upper Chehalis: "Their territory included generally all that drainedby the Tsihalis above the mouth of the Satsop,“ evidently

. excepting the southwestern headwaters on which were the
Kwalhiokwa. Harley writes: “The Staktomish inhabit the
country between Nisqually and Cowlitz, and the headwaters of
Chehaylis river.“

A division the Cloquallum, residing on the creek of this
name above the Satsop River, were perhaps the Clickquamish
of Ford (1857) and by him assigned to the Lower Chehalis.

Gibbs (1856) also wrote: "A few miles to the north lies Gray Harbor

*** *. This also is in the country of the Tsihalis Indians who extended
up the river to the Satsop, where they were met by bands to whom the name

of Upper Tsihalis is collectively giwen“ (Def. Ex. 6).

L53

8 Ind. 01. Com. b36

' 15.

writes that she spent two summers with the Upper Chehalis and Cowlitz

In "Folk-Tales of the Coast Salish“ (l93h) Thelma Adamson

Indians studying their folk tales one year and the general cultnre of
the Upper Chehalis who were then living on the Chehalis reservation at
dakville, Washington, the next year. According to Miss Adamson "The
Upper Chehalis call themselves Q‘waya'sl. Approximately, their territory formerly extended along the Chehalis River from thehalis to a_
little west of Oakville. This territory embraced Oakville and Rochester
Prairies, large parts of Hima and Grand Mound Prairies, besides various

,-...-u. in?

smaller prairies." Miss Adamson further reported that one group of
Cowlitz lived along the Newaukum River (which is just within the area
now claimed by the Chehalis). (See also Def. BX. 151, transcript of
hearings in Docket No. 218, The Cowlitz Tribe of Indians v. The United‘

States.) Indian witnesses for petitioner therein testified that the

I Cowlitz occupied the Newaukum River Valley gfr. 13, i§7 and that the

Skookumchuck River was the boundary line between the Nisqually and

the Cowlitz zjhu 20, §§7. (See also Pl. Ex. 1 in Docket No. 218).
Miss Adamson also stated that she had made a small collection off
Wynoochee and Satsop tales during a short visit to Montesano, Washington, from informants living there and her Humptulip tales were obtained

from a “Humptulip - Grays Harbor" woman living on the Upper_Qhehalis

0

reservation and who was married to an Upper Chehalis Indian (Def, Ex. 55).

l6. .Edward S. Curtis, in "The North.American Indian" (l9l?),

reported with respect to the Lower Chehalis as follows: (Def. cg. L?)



8 Ind. Cl. Com. A36

The name Tshels, whence the Anglicized Chehalis, was
applied by the natives to Point Hanson, the projection of

4'1

_land at the southern side of the entrance to MFEYS harbor,

at which place, near the site of‘Westport,‘Eashington,

was a principal settlement of the Lower Chehalis. From

here the country along the south shore of Grays harbor, up
Chehalis river to'Wynoochee river, and on Hhishkal river at

the head of the bay, was occupied by villages whose inhabitants used a common dialect, very similar to that of the Shoalwater Bay people and to that of the Quinault. There formerly
was no collective designation for these bands, but, influenced
by the white men's usage of the word Chehalis, the natives have
adopted the term Cht'shels, that is, People of the Sandy Place.‘
+% * * Their activities were almost altogether concerned with
obtaining a livelihood from the sea. *““

In describing the territory occupied by the Quinault tribes, Curtis states
it extended along the coast from.Hoquiam river to the Quests river and that
"In the three settlements on the north shore of Grays harbor -- Hoqiamk,
Humtulips, and Qiyaanuhl (Damons point), - as well as in Kpels (Copalis)

on the coast, the language possessed a difference noticeable to the
Quinault proper. The variation however is negligible." "It'would appear
that Curtis includes the Hoquiam, Humptulip and Copalis Indians among the
”Quinault tribes." In Docket Nos. 155 and 2L2, the Quileute and Quinaliet
cases before this Commission, Dr. Verne F. Ray, a recognized authority on
the tribes of the northwest, testified for plaintiffs therein (Tr. Sh)
that the group generally referred to"as Quinaielt, including the Queets
and Copalis, constituted an Indian tribe; that the Copalis were a subdivision of the Quinaielt Tribe ('15-. 55); that it is entirely possible
that the Quinaielt Tribe included the people of the Humptulips drainage
and also the peoples of the Hoquiam and Whishkah rivers although there

was an uncertainty about thisiaffiliation and so their territory was not

included in the Quinaielt claim (Tr. 56) ; that the Quinaielt had a camp

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h36

site at Damon's Point at Grays Harbor ocenpicd at times in the course of
exploiting the resources of Grays Harbor (Tr. lh6); that the "peninsula

or arm" on the north side of Grays Harbor was Quinaielt-territory (within
area claimed by the~Chehalis herein), (Tr. lbs); that “if the Humptulips _
were a separate tribe, then we would have a portion of Crays Harbor tnat
they could use, or joint usage of Grays Harbor, and also we have the lower
Chehalis on the south side of GraysHarbor and they certainly used Grays
Harbor” (Tr. 1H9); that fragmentary data suggests the Satsop were a tribe
(Tr. ISO) (Def. Bx. 1h6). Plaintiffs‘ witness herein, Dr. Taylor, testified (Tr. 298) that there is now no living Satsop Indian. ‘This Commission

in The Quinaielt Tribe vs. United States (Docket 2h2), 7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1,

 

found the Copalis Indians were not part of the Quinaielt Tribe.

Population

 

17. Lewis and Clark in l806 reported the “Chilts" to have a populdtion Of 700 (Def; Ex. 3h);the Clamoitonish (on the south side of
Gray's Harbor?) 260, (see Hodge‘s Handbook Vol. I, p. 7l5i3.the-f0t3Sh89S,
north of the Clamoitomish, numbered 200 souls (see Handbook, Vol. II,

p. 293), and the Pailsk, apparently the Copalis River Indians, at 200
souls (see Handbook, Vol. I, p. 3h3). Jedidah Horse in 1820 reported .
there were lhOO ”Chih1eesh" Indians fortymiles north of the Columbia
river. (Dei. Ex.CI§O). Farnham in 1839 reported 700 Hchihelis and
Pugetts Sounds Zfiéans. (Def. Ex. 83, p. 99).. Hale reported as of l8hO
that the ?Tshihai§ish," including the ”Kwaiantl" and “Kwenaiwitl" Indians
had a population. of 2,000. (Def. ex. 21, p. 212). Dr. 2-1. F. Tolmie

who took a census in l8hh found: "Stak-ta—mish * s e 207 % %=* living

8 Ind. Cl. Com. H35

on Cowlitz Prairie between Chute river and Nawakum." (A census of Indian bands “on Pugets Sound and the Inlets, Chehalis River, etc. Feby.

- 185b,” accompanying the above census does not include the Staktaimish).

(Def. Ex; 81, pp. l2~l3). In l8Sh, Gibbs estimated 100 Chehalis loicated at Gray‘s Harbor and the Lower Chehalis river; he also estimated

200 on the northern forks, Chehalis river; and the Coslitz and Upper
Chehalis whom he reported to be located on the Coulitz river and the
Chehalis above the Satsop river to number 165. Of this group he
stated “the two have become altogether intermixed.“ (Def. Ex. llb).
At the time of the treaty negotiations of 1855 with the Chehalis and

other Indians a census taken showed 21? "Lower Chehalis" and 216

“Upper Chehalis” (Def. Ex. 72). Dr. Herbert C. Taylor, Jr., anthro, pologist, expert witness for plaintiff, estimated that;the Chehalis

ginumbered “around l,§DO to 2,000 people, possibly even more“ in abori' ginal times prior to the "great smallpox epidemics of the 1810's and

the so-called intermittent fever epidemics of 1829 and 1830“ (Tr. 77-78).

Location of'Villages

 

a 18. The exact location of the villages in the claimed area in which
the Indians were living at thegtime of the alleged taking of their lands
is not ascertainable from the evidence. Apparently in the early 1850's
there were villages at or near the mouths of the Humptulip, Hoouiam,
‘Wynoochee and Satsop rivers, a village of the Upper Chehalis near Porter,
Washington, at Ford's Prairie, and a village or villages of the Lower_

Chehalis at Gray*s Harbor probably near westport on the south side of

the harbor (according to the rough draft of the council notes in 1855

0

b5?

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1135

there were 82 Lower Chehalis proper and 120 on the "north side" of

the harbor which probably would include the Satsop, Humptulip, Wynoochee
and Hoquiam river Indians). The difficulty in attempting to locate. the
residences of the Indians in the claixhed area during the period involved
is further complicated by the movement of the , Chehalis- speaking people
into the Shoalwater (Willipa) Bay area and into the ‘alillipa Hills 8
section south Hofithe lands I10‘.-I claimed by the plaintiffs. Dr. Taylor,
plaintiffs’ ethnologist, testified that ‘in the -early part. of the 19th
century the Shoalwater Chinooks were virtually destroyed and the Willipa
Indians seemed to have been destroyed by smallpox, intermittent fever,
and other "blessings of civilization." 8 As a result "The Chehalis moved
into areas. formerly occupied by the 1-Jillapa and the Shoalwater Day
Chinooks.“ Taylor testified "The area around Willapa and Shoalwater
Bay was occupied by the Chehalis between I820 and 1850 or '60. The
area of the 1-Iillipa Hills was occupied at that same time." _(Tr.. 95,

9_6; see also Pet. Ex. 12 - Taylor‘s Map - broken shading shot-ring movement).

Dr. Taylor also testified that seven villages are recorded for the Che'halis Indians in this territory which was prior Chinook country and that

“Inferentially there were more ,' but  only have the names of these ,

seven" (Tr. 200). In the case of The Chinook Tribe an.dBa‘nds of‘ Indians

 

 

V. The United States, Docket No. 5311, before this Commission, Dr. Taylor
testified (Tr. 65, 69 therein) that "in the period between 1800 and 1850
the Lower Chehalis moved into the Chinook area after the Chinook died

out."' In that case Taylor further testified. to a movement of the Upper

Chehalis into the Cowlitz area. Plaintiff s‘ expert further testified

1:58,

without question.“

0

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h3:§

. in theichinook case that he did not include the area into which the

Chehalis expanded as Chehalis territory for two reasons: "Firstly,

because the base year l8OQ seemed a much better year to use than 1550,

before the white man began to work his will on the Indian. Secondly,

because the tribal groups themselves maintained the tradition of those
belonging to the previous owners" (Tr. 69-70, therein). Dr. Verne F.
Bay in his “Lower Chinook Ethnographic Notes“ also noted this movement
and wrote that "Before 1850, when the Chinook numbers were already
thinning, Chehalis began to drift into the northern bay region. This
resulted in a great confusion among early writers as to what people
held this territory. But Chinook chiefs continued to represent the
various villages and to the native mind it remained Chinook territory

l9. (a) Coctor Jacob Fried, anthropologist appearing for defendant,
lists in his report (Def. Ex. 1, page II-8) the following camp or village
sites and exploitation areas in the Upper Chehalis area given by informants: Chehalis Prairie; Cedarville; Oakville; Gate City; near
Gate City on Black River; at mouth of Black River; Grand.Hound on'west°
bank of Chehalis.hiver; a prairie, village site on Linooln Creek;
Centralia, a small prairie near Centralia; and a prairie on banks of
the Chehalis some thirty miles from Oakville.

(b) For the Lower Chehalis area the following areas of economic
importance were given to Doctor Fried by informants: Humptulips River,

Wynoochee River and Damonis Point especially near Chenois for fishing;

Damon's Point, the Humptulips channel and North Bay for shell fish;

8 Ind, Cl. com... 236

Oxford Prairie, three miles below Humptulips City and everywhere along
the Humptulips River for berries and hunting in the drainage of the
Humptulips River.

(c) An informant gave Doctor Fried the following camping, household
or village sites as being in the Lower Chehalis area: near Chenois
Creek on North Bay, at mouth of Humptulips River; a place 10 miles west
of Humptulips River; Hoquiam, a place one mile north of the wyanoochee
River and another a half mile above said mouth; households located upstream on the Humptulips River as far as 10 miles above the mouth 3 on
the south side of Chehalis River about 2 miles above Aberdeen; and at
the mouth of Copalis River.

20. The Commission, based on the findings of fact herein made
and the record as a whole, finds that the tribe or identifiable group
known as the Lower Chehalis Indians, living in the vicinity of Gray*s
Harbor and along the lower Chehalis River and its tributaries upstream
to the Satsop River region, consisted of the Lower Chehalis (proper)
Indians and the Humptulip,*Hoquiam, wynochee,‘wiskah and Satsop Indians.
The Commission further finds that the Indians of the Lower Chehalis
Tribe or identifiable group, who may be generally classified as “saltwater Indians,“ depended primarily for their subsistence on fish and
shell fish, although.they did supplement this diet with berries and

roots. Hunting was not important in the economy of the Lower Chehalis

Indians.

21. The Indians living along the Chehalis River and its affluents

above the Satsop River became known generally in historic times as the

héo

8 Ind. Cl. Com. L36

Upper Chehalis Indians. This tribe or identifiable group consisted of

several bands or villages apparently. As.distinguished from the Lower

Chehalis Indians they were an inland people more dependent upon game

than the sea oriented Lower Chehalis. They possessed a number of horses

but were primarily a riverine, canoe people. The Upper Chehalis subsisted on a diet of game, fish, roots and berries.

22. The Copalis Indians living in the vicinity of the Copalis _

River and using and occupying part of the north shore of Gray's Harbor

and the peninsula on the north side of Gray's Harbor were not a part
of the Lower Chehalis or Upper Chehalis Tribes or identifiable groups.
The Copalis Indians were a separate land holding entity.

23. The Comnission finds that the Lower Chehalis Tribe or identimmgfiable group of Indians held original Indian title to the following

Jfhescribed area of land:

Commencing at a point on the shore of North Bay of

Gray‘s Harbor directly south of Saddle Hill; thence in

a generally northeasterly direction along the divide
separating the watersheds of the Humptulips and Copalis
Rivers to a point directly west of the town of Hunptulips,
‘Washington; thence due east to said town of Humptulips;
thence in a direct line southeasterly from the town of
Humptulips to the_southern extremity of Simpson Lake (in
Sec. 17 of Township 19 North, Range 5 West); thence in a_
direct line southwesterly to the town of Brooklyn,‘Hashington, thence in a direct westerly line to the Pacific coast
just west of Gray1ands,'Hashington; thence in a northerly
direction along the coastline and then following the shoreline of Gray‘s Harbor to the place of beginning.

2h. The Commission finds that the Upper Chehalis Tribe or identifiable group had original Indian title to the following described lands:

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:36

Commencing at the northeastern corner of the eastern
boundary of the Lower Chehalis Tribe's lands at the
southern extremity of Simpson Lake (in Sec. l? of Township 19 North, Range 5 West); thence in'a direct line
southeasterly to the town of McCleary3‘Washington; thence
in a direct line to Capitol Peak; thence in a direct line
. to the town-of Bordeaux,'washington; thence in a direct
southeasterly direction to the town of Tono, Washington; ;
thence in a direct line to the town of Mendota,'Washington;
thence in a direct line to the city of Chehalis; thence in
a northwesterly direction to the town of Brooklyn,'Washington;
thence northeasterly along the eastern boundary of the Lower
Chehalis Indians to the place of beginning at Simpson Lake.

25.

with either the Lower Chehalis or Upper Chehalis Tribes or identifiable

The Commission finds that no treaty of cession was ever executed

groups. Following the abortive treaty negotiations in 1855, the United
States on and after March 3. 1855, dealt with the lands of these Indians

as public lands, thereby depriving said Indians of their original Indian

title without their consent and without the payment of compensation

therefor.

Edgar E . Witt

Chief Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

1:62

