BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAEOMA,‘pnd GUY FROKAN on behalf
of the PECEIA NATION, FEED EESWORTH
on behalf of the KASKASKIA NATION,
AMOS—ROBINSON SKID on behalf of the
REA NATION, and MABEL STATON PARKER,
on behalf of the PIAEKESHAW NATION,
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA.TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAHOMA, and FRED EDSWORTH on behalf
of the KASKASKIA NATION,

Petitioners,

EEE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOMA, and MABEL STATON PARKER on

behalf of the PIANKESHAW EATION,
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA.TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOHA, and HABEL STATOD PARKER on

behalf of the PIAEKBSEAW NATION,
Petitioners,

TEE PEORIA TRIBE O? INDIANS OF
OKLAHOMA, GUY FROKAN on behalf of the
PEORIA NATION, and FPED mzsvroawa on
behalf of the KSKASKIA NATION,
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF IEDIAHS OF

OKLAHOILA, and AMOS ROBII-3503:? sm on

behalf of the EBA NATION,
Petitioners,

{rm PBORIA name or INDIANS ore
omaaomg: FRED EIJSWORYIH, as the

representative of the KASKASKIA NATIOE;

AHO3 ROBINSON_SKEE, as the representative of the WEA NATIOE: MABEL STATON
P333333 as the representative of the
PIANKE3EAW’NATION,

Petitioners,

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defenéanta

Docket No. 65 ‘

Docket No. 66

Docket No. 99

Docket No. 289

DOC1:C8t N0 9 

Docket No. 3114

DUCKS t NO 0 

Decided: March 26, 1956

FINDINGS 9§_rdcr

EXPLANATORYFSTAEEHENT

As will be seen by the titles set forth in the caption, the “Peoria
Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma" is one of the petitioners in each of the
dockets shown. In the original petitions, that petitioner was designated
as “The Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma,” however, by order made on 26th of
March, 1956, the petitioners were permitted to amend the respective
petitions by changing the name, as it appeared in the various titles
and body of the petitions to "Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma,"
which is the real corporate name of the tribe as set forth in the approved
and ratified charter of said petitionero (Pet, Ex. H2).

Inasmuch as the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma is a partyclaimant in each of said dockets and sues as a corporation organized
under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (H9 Stat. 1967)
and is asserting claims for or on behalf of the wee, Kaskaskia, Pianke—
sham and Peoria tribes or nations of Indians, and the defendant having
challenged the capacity of said corporation to maintain suit on such
claims, or either of them, an issue common to all of such cases has
been raised. In order to have a determination of such common issue,
the parties hare agreed, with the approval of the Commission, to submit
the same and have offered evidence thereon as is set forth in the findings of fact which follow this statement.

While, as appears from the case—titles shown in the caption, there

are in each case named individuals alleged to be members of the separate

tribes and who sue on behalf of the respective tribes, no proof has been

offered as to the identity or membership of such individuals in the
tribes they purport to represent, and the corporate claimant has seen
fit to rely entirely upon the right of such corporate claimant to

maintain the various claims.

FINDINGS pg FACT

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. On October 12, 195“, the parties to the above—entit1ed cases
entered into the following agreement with respect to the issues common to
said cases:

NOW, THEREFORE, IT IS HEREBY STIPULATED AND AGREED, by and
between the petitioner, the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma,
by its attorney of record, and the defendant, the United States
of America, by its Assistant Attorney General, subject to the
consent and approval of the Indian Claims Commission:

A.O That the cases assigned Docket Nos. 65, 66, 99, 289, 313,
31h and 338 be consolidated for a single hearing, but only for
the purposes hereinafter stated.

B. That the purposes of said consolidation be limited to
trial and determination of the following specific issues, which
are common to all the aforementioned cases:

1. Whether the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma is
an “Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of
American Indians residing Within the territorial limits of
the United States" entitled to file claims pursuant to
Section 2 of the Act of August 13, 19h6 (60 Stat. 1on9,

25 U.S.C. 70a), and Section 1(a) of the General Rules of
Procedure promulgated by the Indian Claims Commission.

2, Whether the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma

(a) is, and was previously known as, the Confederated Tribe

of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians, or Variants
thereof; (b) is composed of the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and
Piankeshan Tribes or Nations of Indians; and (0) is, as now
constituted, a consolidation of the aforesaid Tribes or Nations.

3. Whether the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma

(a) is the successor in interest to, and rightfully
represents, the Peoria, Kashaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw
Indian Tribes or Nations; and (b) is a proper party
plaintiff and entitled to sue on the claims of the aforesaid Tribes or Nations.1 1

_ 2. During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the Peoria,‘
Kaskaskia, Piankeshaw and Wee Nations were independent, identifiable

tribes of American Indians, and were so treated by the United States

Government. On August 13, 1803, for example, the defendant concluded a

treaty (pa. EX. 3), with "the head chiefs and warriors of the Kaskaskia
Tribe of Indians so called, but which tribe is the remains and rightfully

represent all the tribes of the Illinois Indians, originally called the

Kaskaskia, hitchigamia, Cahokia and Tamaroi." (Ho other Indian tribe or

nation was a party to said treaty). Again on September 25, 1818, the

United States entered into a treaty (Pet.'EXi 7), with the Kaskaskia
Nation and “the Peoria Indians, a tribe of the Illinois nation, who then
[E8837 did, and still do, live separate and apart from the tribes abovementioned, and who were not represented in the treaty referred to above

11

Similarly, the Federal Government recognized the independent existence of the Piankeshaw Nation in the separate treaties of August 27. 180”
(Pet. Ex. h), which states that it is "a treaty between the United States
of American and the Piankeshae Tribe of Indians,“ and of December 20,
1805 (Pet. Ex, 5), which contains an identical recitation. The Wee Nation

was once closely affiliated with the Miami Tribe, but subsequently separ

rated therefrom and was recognized by the United States as an independent

entity.

M 226

Although sovereign and autonomous at this time. however, the Peoria,
Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Tribes or Nations also were ethnically
and politically allied,_and further maintained a close and harmonious
relationship. The Treaty of Greenville of August 3, 1795 (Pet, Ex, 1),
for example, was signed by the Wea “for themselves and the Piankeshaws,“
On June 7, 1803, the Miami agreed to a treaty (Pet. Ex, 2): "on behalf
of themselves and Eel River, Weas, Piankeshans and Kaskaskias, whom they
represent,“ and, as is noted above, on September 25, l8l8, the Peoria
and Kaskashia Tribes, both described as part of the Illinois Nation of
Indians, joined to relinquish certain lands to the United States, In
this regard, in Hodge, Handbook of American Indians, Bull, 30, Eur, of
«Amer. Ethnology, the Kaskaskia are characterized as "Once the leading

tribe of the Ellinois Confederacy" (Pt. I, p, 661), and the Peoria as

“One of the principal tribes of the Illinois Confederacy” (Pt, II, p, 228);

the Pianheshaw and Wes are reported to have moved to Missouri together
(Pt. II, p. 230) and jointly to have "endeavored to come into friendly
relations with the Whites" (Pt. II, p. 925).

3.

(Pet. Ex. 10), at Castor Hill, Missouri, with “the Kaskaskia and Peoria

On October 27, 1832, the United States concluded a treaty

tribes, which, with the Mitchigania, Cahokia and Tanarois bands» HOW
united with the first two named tribes, formerly composed the Illinois
nation of Indians," which recited that

“WBEREAS, the Kaskaskia tribe of Indians and the bands aforee
said united therewith, are desirous of uniting with the Peoriasa
(coaposed as aforesaid) on lands west of the State of Missouri,
they have therefore for that purpose agreed with the commissioners
aforesaid, upon the following stipulations:

I3 13 I3 ID

ff"...

M 22$

dnrticle IV: ‘The United States cede to the combined tribes
of Kaskaghias and Peorias, and the band§_aforesaid'united with
them...[gertain lands delineated in part] by the western line
of the reservation made for the Piankeshaws, Weas and Peorias;
and east by lands assigned the Piankeshans and Weas.
“Article V: In consideration of the fgregoing cessions
and relinquishnents of lands the United £Stateé7 agree to pay
to the said United Kaskaskia and Peoria tribes (composed as
aforesaidd La stated annuity and other considerationg/....”
Thus, by this treaty, which called for a cession to, and the payment of
annuities and other consideration to, a united tribe, the United States
recognized and approved the complete merger of the Peoria and Kaskaskia
Nations.
On October 29, 1832, only two days later, the defendant entered into
a treaty (Pet. Ex. ll) with the Piankeshan and Wee Nations. Under this
treaty, the Government jointly ceded to these Indians lands in Kansas
in common ownership, for their permanent residence, the borders of which
in part were marked “west by lands assigned to the Peorias and Kaskaskias,
and south by the southern line of the original tract surveyed for the
Piankeshaws, Weas and Peoriasy-—said tract being intended to include thejpres"
ent villages of the said PiankeshawsennlWeas." The United States thus
recognized the previously existing association of the Wea and Piankeshan
Nations, and explicitly approved a continuing close relationship between
these groups.
M. On December 26, l8h8, certain Indians, headed by one Baptiste
Peoria, wrote to Major Harvey, Superintendent of Indian Affairs at
St. Louis, in part as follows:
“We write to you to inform you, that on yesterday we held
a general council composed of Weas, Piankeshaus, and Peorias,

the result of which was that we resolved all to meet around
one council fire, and henceforth we wish to be known as the

United Tribe of Weas, Piankeshaws, and Peorias. 5 * s»we think
now that we are stronger, and it will be more convenient for
our great father to do business with us.“ (Peta Ext 12)

On Januany 6, 18”9, Superintendent Harvey transmitted this letter to the
Honorable William Medill. Gommissioner of Indian Affairs, in Washington,
together with a report which read in part as follows:

I have the honor to enclose a paper this day reed, signed
by the principal men of the Wea, Piankeshaw &.Peoria tribes
of Indians, in which they have determined to unite as one
people, live in the same country, & divide their annuities as
one people.

The Peorias from their small number & isolated condition,
being exposed to depredations from the Osages, Kansas & Sacs &
Foxes are compeled to move down among the Weas, &:Piankeshaws
for protection, they are the same people (originally) speaking
the same language with the Weas, Piankeshaws & Miamiso

I3 III C! It I3

I need not point out to you the advantages of small tribes
uniting, both for their own interest, and the convenience of
the Government.

1 am in hopes that the union of the Weas, Piankeshaws, &
Peorias may lead to the union of other small tribes. It is
desirable that the Miamis may unite with them; the man they
have selected as principal chief (Baptiste Peoria) is one of
the most influential men among our border Indians, & one of the
most faithful men in the employment of Government (Interpreter)e

It is proper that I should here remark that while I have
advised the union of the Peorias &c I have not held out an order
that the Government would purchase the Peorias‘ land. (Peta Ext

13).

On February 1”, 1839, Commissioner Medill advised Superintendent
Harvey that the union of the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians
had his approval:

I have received and duly considered your letter of the 6th
ultimo and its enclosure, in relation to the union that has been
formed between the Peorias, Weas and Piankesh.ns. I fully concur
in your views of the propriety and expediency of encouraging small
tribes, like these, in forming such unions, which will promote
their interests and Welfare, and the convenience of the govern”
ment in managing our relations with theme

A 229

a With respect to the mode of confirming and giving effect
to the union between the Peorias, Weas and Piankeshans, I
am of the opinion that it should be done formally by a quadruple treaty, the United States being the fourth party thereto.
This will give permanency to the act and prevent any of the
parties from hereafter withdrawing therefrom, and will V
definitely and specifically define and settle their relations,
in their united capacity, with the United States. The Department also prefers this course in consequence of the difficulty,
perplexity and embagesment it has had to contend with in con»
sequence of disputes and claims growing out of arrangements

of an informal character, affecting the relations and interests
of different tribes.

It is therefore proposed, as soon as it can conveniently

be done, to enter into a treaty with the three tribes mentioned,
by which a tract of country, sufficient and suitable for this
accogpdation, will be assigned them for a permanent residence
out of the lands belonging to the Piankeshaws, or partly to them
and those of the Peorias, as may be found most suitable; and the
balance to be surrendered to the United States. * * 3

If you.think such an arrangement, as that generally indicated,
practicable, and easy of accomplishment in the form of a treaty,

and will suggest the best time and mode of consummating it, the

Department will endeavor to concert the proper measures for the
purpose. (Pet. Ex. 1“).

Thereafter, the defendant fostered and encouraged the union of the

Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshan Indians into a single tribe. (Pet.

Ex. 16). Subsequently, on October 3, 1853, George W. Manypenny, then
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, held a council with the Peoria, Kaskaskia,
Wea and Piankeshaw chiefs "to see if they were disposed to sell a part
or all of their lands,“ at which a.Peoria leader again declared that
"WE have agreed to unite with the Wea and Peankeshan nation and become-—
one United Nation," (Pet, Ex, 1?),

Beginning in 1839, therefore, the Peoria, Kashaskia, Wea and
Piankeshaw Indians had consolidated into a single tribe, and the United
States affirmatively approved that merger. From that time on, in all of

its dealings with these Indians, the Federal Gouernnent treated them as

a single unit,

1} 230

It 23:.

5- In hisletter of February 11+, 181+9, Commissioner Medill officially

had recommended that the dg_facto union of the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea

and Piankeshaw Indians be formally recognized in a treaty binding upon all
parties, including the United States. (Pet. E33 lug quoted under Finding
No. M, supra). Pursuant to this recommendation, on May_30, 185”, the

defendant concluded a treaty (Pet. Ex. 18) with the_Confederated Tribe of

Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians, Article I of which reads

as follows:

The tribes of Kaskaskia and Peoria Indians, and of Piankeshaw and Wea Indians, parties to the two_treaties made with
them respectively by Wm. Clark, Frank J.-dllen and Nathan Kouns,
commissioners on the part of the United States. at Castor Hill,
on the twenty~seventh and twenty-ninth days of October, one

thousand eight hundred and thirty—two, having recently in joint
council assembled, united themselves into a single tribe, and

having expressed a desire to be recognized and regarded as such,
the United States hereby assent to the action of said joint

council to this end, and now recognize the delegates who sign

and seal this document as the authorized representatives of said
consolidated tribe.

In transmitting this treaty to Secretary of the Interior McC1elland on
June 8, 185M, Commissioner Manypenny observed in part:
I have the honor to transmit to you.herenith, the Articles
o£ Agreement and Convention, made and entered into at this
city on the 30th ultimo, by me as Commissioner on the part of
the United States, with the United tribes of Kaskaskia and
Peoria, and Wea and Piankeshaw Indians.
These fragmentary tribes, having recently met in convention
and united themselves to form a single tribe, the convention
now entered into recognizes the consolidation. (Pet. EXJ 19).
Thus, in clear, unequivocal and convincing language, the United States
specifically acknowledged the union of the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and
Eiankeshaw Indians into a single tribe.

Under the treaty of October 27, 1832 (Pet. Ex. 10), the United

Feoria and Kaskaskia Nation was granted 150 sections of land in Kansas

forever, and an annuity of $3,000 for ten years;_under the treaty of
October 29, 1832 (Pet. Ex. 11), the Wea and Piankeshaw Nations were
granted 250 sections of land in Kansas for their permanent residence,
and the annuities to which these Indians were entitled pursuant to
earlier agreements with the defendant remained in full force and effect.
By 185” the Peoria~Kaskaskia annuity had expired, and the landholdings
of the two groups were unequal in size.

Article VI of the 185“ treaty, however, expressly stipulates that
the only continuing obligations of the United States then existing,
1.e., permanent annuities of $3,000 and.$800 due to the Wea and Piankeshew Nations respectively, be relinquished and released, and in consideration of that and other releases and relinquishnents the defendant
agreed to pay the united tribes, including the Peoria and Kaskaskia
Indians $65,000. Similarly, under Articles II, III and IV, the United
Peoria.and Kaskaskia Tribe and the Wca and Piankcshaw Nations also
separately ceded unequal areas of land in return for allotments and
funds to be distributed equally to members of the United Tribe or to be
held by the Government in the name of the United Tribe. Thereafter,
the United States always treated the constituent parts of the United
Tribe of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshan Indians as being a single
entity, and at every subsequent distribution of tribal funds, the de~
fendant divided said funds equally to all members of the consolidated
tribe, regardless of their blood or the original source or date of

acquisition thereof.

Thus, pursuant to the treaty of May 30, 185¥, the United Peoria

and Kaskaskia Tribe came to share in annuities and lands which previously

1:. 232

the Wea and Piankeshaw Nations alone had enjoyed, while the latter
Indians became entitledtnzcomparable rights in the funds of the
formerggroup. In addition, although the original property contributions of the parties to the treaty were unequal, after 185” the per
Oapita shares of every Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indian
in the combined funds of the Confederated Tribe were identical, The
l8Sh treaty, therefore, clearly effected the formal consolidation of
the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians into a single tribe.
6. On February 23, 1867, the United States concluded a treaty,
(Pet, Ex. 20) with the Confederated Tribe of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and

Piankeshaw Indians, among other Indian groups, the Preamble of which
recites:
5 3 ” it is desirable that arrangements should be made by
which portions of certain tribes, parties hereto, now

residing in Kansas, should be enabled to remove to other
lands in the Indian country south of that State * * *0‘

Article &3 of said treaty, relating specifically to the Confederated
Tribe, further states:

?.?.?The said Indians agree to dispose of their allotments
in Kansas and remove to their new homes in the Indian country
within two years from the ratification of this treaty. ° * $0
The Confederated Tribe of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw

Indians moved from Kansas to Oklahoma. (Findings 7, 8 and 9, infra.)

In this regard, the Comnilation of Materials Relating to the Indians of

 

the United States, (Serial No. 30, June 13, 1950, H, Res. 55, 81st Congo,

Ed Session) states:

Kaskaskia
An Algonquian group which was once the leading tribe of

the Illinois Confederacy on the Upper Illinois and Wisconsin,
They removed in 1832 west of the Mississippi to Kansas, in
i867 they took a reservation in Oklahoma with the Peoria,

° ¢ °, (p, 23)

Peoria or Cahokia H
n An Algonquian tribe living in the 17th century on the west

side of the Mississippi River in Iowa. Later they moved to
Illinois and in 1332 to Kansas where they were joined by other
tribes such as the Wea and Piankashav. They have been settled
on a reservation in Oklahoma for many years. (p. 37)

Piankashaw v

3 * * Early in the 19th century they moved westward across
the Mississippi and united with the Peoria, Kaskaskia, and Wea
to move to Peoria Reservation, Okla. (p. 37)

Flea J

An Algonquian tribe very closely related to the Miami.
* * 3 In l832 they moved to Kansas and in 1868 to Oklahoma with
the Peoria and Piankashaw. (p. 53)

Similarly, Hodge. Handbook of American Endians, contains the quotation:

In 185” the Wee and Piankeshaw united with them Lfeoria
and Kaskaskié7, and in 1868 the entire body removed to Indian
Ter. (Oklahoma), where they new reside. (Pt. II, p. 228)
7. In Swanton, The Indian Tribes of North America, Bull. lh5.
Bureau of American Ethnology (1952), it is stated at page 300:

In 1868 the surviving Illinois Indians, principally Peoria
and Kaskaskia, previously united with the Miami bands? Wea and
Piankeshaw, moved to Oklahoma and occupied a reserve in the
northeastern part of the State under the name Peoria.

To the same effect is the following quotation from Hodge, Handbook of

American Indians:

 

About 185M the consolidated tribe Lea and Piaakesha§7
‘united with the remnant of the Illinois, then known as Peoria
and Kaskaskia. and in 1867 the entire body sold their lands
in Kansas and removed to the present Oklahoma. where they are
now known under the name of Peoria. (Pt. II. p. 240)

After removal to the State of Oklahoma, the Confederated Tribe Of Peoriaw
Kaskaskia, Wea andJPiankeshaw Indians eventually came to be known as

simply the Peoria Tribe.

1; 231;

An examination of the statutes enacted by Congress and also the
Interior Department reports concerning the Confederated Tribe of
Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians after the 185” treaty n
of consolidation shoes in substance hoe this change dncnandeteek place.
Petitioners‘ Exhibit No. 21, for example, is a compilation of refer»
ences to the united tribe in the Annual Reportaof the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs after 1851:; similarly, Petitioners‘ Exhibit no. 22 is a
compilation of all references to the united tribe in laws passed by
Congress after 185”. A study of these exhibits discloses that, over a
period of many years, agents of the United States officially referred to
the Confederated Tribe of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians
under a wide variety of names. On occasion, in identifying the united
tribe, the Peoria are mentioned first, whereas on other occasions one of
the other three groups is placed at the head of the list; at times, only
two or three of the original tribes are named, ands even more frequently,
only one is designated, while the others are described by the term “etcs”
Apparently, the Federal Government did not attach any particular signim
ficance to the exact title of the Confederated Tribe, and the order and
number of names given resulted purely from accident or administrative
convenience.

Over a.period of years; therefore. the official names of the Con»
federated Tribe appears in a multitude of forms, and, for the sake of
simplicity or through chance, eventually was abbreviated to the Peoria

Tribe aloneo In the light of the aforementioned statutes and reports,

1.however, these changes in name by agents Of the d8f€3da3t 13 30 W83

indicate a change in the composition or organization of the tribe; there

E 235

-Hations.

is no less reason for subsequently calling the Confederated Tribe the

Kaskaskia Tribe, the Wea Tribe or the Piankeshaw Tribe than the Peoria

Tribe, for the consolidated group is as much composed of Kaskaskia, Wea

and Piankeshaw Indians as it is of the Peoria, Thus, the fortuitous
designation of the united tribe as the Peoria Tribe does not obscure
the fact that this entity was formed from the complete merger of the

Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Nations, and is so constituted

today. (Findings 6, 8 and 9).

8. Since the treaty of May 30, 185% (Finding 5), the Executive
and Legislative Branches of the United States Government consistently
have recognized and acknowledged that the Indian parties thereto then
formed a single tribal entity through the full consolidation and merger
of the original Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wen and Piankeshan Indian Tribes or
Indeed, the express provisions of the treaty so stipulate, and

the various subsequent appropriations acts carrying out its terms are

based upon the continued existence of one united tribe. Similarly, as
an analysis of the statutes and reports cited in Petitioners’ Exhibits
21 and 22 further reveals, after 185M Congress and the Department of the
Interior never again officially referred to four separate groups, but
rather at all times uniformly described and treated these Indians as
composing a single identifiable tribe.

As has previonsly been noted (Finding 7), the united tribe first
was known as the Confederated Tribe of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Pianke"
shaw Indians, or variants thereof, and eventually as the Peoria Tribe.

In the aforementioned official statutes and reports, the Peoria,

Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians are sometimes called "united" and

1:» 236

sometimes ”confederated,“ and on occasion their designation as a single
tribe resulting from a merger is wholly assumed. Thus, the generic
terns applied to the whole group by the defendant are not consistent,
and the_u1timate description of the confederated tribe as the Peoria
Tribe apparently resulted from happenstance. One pattern which emerges.
however, is that the agents of the Federal Government always were referring to one entity, and that this single identifiable entity composed of
the united Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and Piankeshaw Indians continued to be
officially recognized by the United States.

An examination of the annuity rolls (Pet. Ex. 23Ar23H) further
demonstrates that the annuities formerly paid out separately to the
Kaskaskia, Piankeshaw, Wea and Peoria tribes were “lumped together“ and
paid out after 1853 on the basis of the enistence of a single tribe as a
successor to the aforementioned individual tribes.

9. The corporate charter of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma authorizes. (Pet. Ex. U2) it to "sue and be sued; to complain and
defend in any court“; and “to protect all rights guaranteed to the
Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma by treaty."i It also provides that:
"No property rights or claims of the Peoria Tribe existing prior to the
ratification of this charter shall be in any way impaired by anything
contained in this charter."

10. That the petitioners are represented by the law firm of Brown,
Dashow and Ziedman who are acting under contract" with said petitioners.
dated October 18. 1938. and approved by the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs on December 2%, 1948.

That while said contract was in the name

of Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma, it was understood by the parties thereto

)3, 23'

land the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to have been executed by and for
the benefit of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, the petitioner
in each of said dockets.

11. Finally, the Commission finds that the petitioner, Peoria
Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, is duly incorporated under the Act of
June 26, 1936 (H9_Stat. 1967) and has been recognized by the Secretary
of the Interior as having authority to represent the respective tribal
groups which, prior to the incorporation of said petitioner, were known
and recognized as the Peoria, Kaskaskia, Woa and Piankeshaw tribes or
nations, in the prosecution of the claims set forth in said respective
dockets.

pgggar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

1; 23

