.:'l;i5{§*_J.=

SPORE THE I§DInB CLAIES CGMMISSION

THE SIOUX TRIBE or ENDIANS or THE
CHEYENNE szvsa RESERVATION,
SOUTH naaora,
Plaintiffs,
v. Docket No. 192

THE UNITED STATES or AM;~.'I.-'-ZICA,

\..J\._2\._/\../x./‘-.../\../\../\_./\-o/Na.’

Defendant.
Decided: March 29, l9S7

rnnmcs 93 not

9

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
1. The plaintiffs herein are Simu: Indians referred to in We "on"

of Congress approved March 2, 1889 as the Indians, or their descendants _,

receiving rations and annu'ties at the Cheyenne River Agency, South

p Dakota. as such they constitute am identifiable group of American '

lndians entitled to prosecute actions authorized by the Indian Claims
Commission Act (60 Stat. 1019).

2. By the not approved March 2, 1889 (25 Stat. 888) six separate
reservations were carved out of the Great Sioux Reservation. - The lands
lying outside of the separate reservation were restored to the public

domain and opened for settlement. One of thesesix reservations was

.3. " " ! o II-cl‘ 4 -I an . . a
se». apart for the Sioux Indians receiving-rations and annuities at the
Cheyenne River Agency. Section 1; of that Act reads as fell oars:
Sec. ii. That the follor.-:.'._ng tract of land, being a. part
oi‘ the said Great I-":.ese*~v.. ation of the Sioux Nation, in the
'.F.‘err:T-to:-gr of Dakota, is '£*.ere‘o;.* set apart for a permanent
reseration for  Indians receixine, rations and annuities

at the Cheyenne River Agency, in the said Territory of
Dakota, namely: Beginning at a point in the center of
the main channel of the Missouri River, ten miles north

of the mouth of the doreau River, said point being the
southeastern corner of the Standing Rock Reservation;
thence down said center of the main channel of the
Missouri River, including also entirely within said
'reservation all islands, if any, in said river, to a

point opposite the mouth of the Cheyenne River; thence
west to said.Cheyenne River, and up the same to its intersection with the one hundred and second.meridian of longitude; thence north along said.meridian to its intersection
with a line due west from a point in the Missouri River ten

,miles north of the mouth of the Moreau River; thence due
_east to the place of beginning.

3. By the Act approved May 29, 1908 (35 Stat. h60) a portion of

the Cheyenne River Reservation aggregating l,6l2,S27.86 acres ‘as

described and the Secretary of'the Interior was authorized to allot,

Act provided:

to reserve and to dispose of the unreserved,'unallotted lands within

\

the descrihed area, upon the issuance of a Presidential Proclamation

and conformahly with the terms stated in the.Act. Section 2iof the

%-n-& That the Secretary of the Interior be, and he is
hereby, authorized and directed to cause to be surveyed
all the lands embraced within said reservation, and to cause
an examination to be made of the lands by experts of the Geological Survey, and if there he found any lands bearing coal,
the said Secretary is hereby authorized to reserve them from
allotment or disposition.until further action by Congress.

“Section 3 of the.Act provided that the lands opened for settlement
should.be classified and appraised by three Commissioners: one a resident citizen of South Dakota, one a representative of the Indian Bureau

ni

and one person holding tribal relations with the Cheyenne °‘ner Sioux;

that the price of the lands entered as homesteads should be fixed

bY'th€ appraisement.



Sections E, S, 6 and 8 provided for payment, and that the exoense

m

of surveving, allotment, classification and appraisement should be
«no ‘He T ‘ie «* ‘re net roceeds received should be credited
O4. La-nu y ‘EJ»A\...p  3 LAC1 U U ‘D

to their account in the Treasury and section 9 said that the United

States was acting as trustee for the Indians in the sale Of the lands
and was not otherwise obligated.

E. On October 28, 1908, the Secretary of the Interior requested
the United States Geological Survey to examine the area in order to
determine the location of the coal lands. On April 10, 1909, the
Secretary of the Interior promulgated Regulations entitled "Classification and Valuation of Coal Lands." These Regulations provided so far

as material:

\
e In

1. For the purpose of classificction and valuation,
coal deposits shall be divide into lour classes:

(a) Anthracite, semianthracite, coking, and
blacksmithing coals;

' (b) High-grade bituminous noncoking coals
having.a fuel value of not less than 12,000 B.T.U.
£1‘ '31" ‘£1’ 3

(C) Bituminous coals having a fuel value of less
,than 12,000 B.T.U. % a-n, and higi-grade'subbitnninnus
coals having a fuel value of more than 9,500 B.T.U.3

(d) Low-grade subbituminous coals having a fuel
value below 9,500 B.T.U., and all lignite coals.

Classification of Goa. Lands

2. Lands underlain bv coal beds, none of which contain
lh inches or over of coal, exclusive of partings, of
Class a, b, or c, or over 36 inches of class d, shall be
classed as noncoal land. (The lignite deposits which
constitute the basis of the present claim fall into Class d.)

-5

Valuation oz Coal.Lands

9.
minimum provided by law
miles of a railroad and $10 per acre
distance.

The coal price of lands of Class d shall be the
$20 per acre when within fifteen
when at a greater

The foregoing Regulations were formulated, not with special re§erence to the Cheyenne River Reservation or for particular application
to Indian reservations. They were regulations a,plicable to all public
lands of the United.States opened for settlement.

5. As directed.by section 3 of the 1908 Act three commissioners
classified the land.by legal subdivision and appraised it at prices

ranging from $2.50 to $6.00 per acre. By proclamation dated August 19,

l909 the President declared the lands embraced.in the 1908 Act (exceptin; land: allotted or re " "'- entry effective April 1, 1910.

0|
0|
|.i
4
(‘n
12..

.As of June 30, l92S almost all (l,S8h,S7l.l6 acres) of the area
covered by the l908 Act had been either allotted, reserved, granted as_
school land.to the State or disposed of, leaving an unsold remnant of
°nlF'27,9S6,70 scattered acres available for entry.

6. The area defined by the l908.Act consists primarily of rolling
grass-covered.prairie land. .All or parts of eighty numbered townships
were involved, or almost 2600 sections containing more than 1,600,000
acres. Calvert, the geologist who examined the area in l909, reported
that the terrain was grass-covered, that outcrops were rare, that exposureswere meager and.that none attained.the 36 inch minimum.standard

prescribed by the governing regulations.

pa
( I\
(1)

the Indians would have cost than an estimated.million to a million and

‘I

a half dollars. The barrenness of drilling results is confinned'oy the

experience of the past L15 years. Of the 80 townships covered by the
l908 Act, commercially'mineable coal discoveries, recoverable even with
modern machinery, have been limited to isolated spots located within
only two of the townships; T. 1? R. 22 and.T. l? R. 23.

7. The Dewey County Coal Company is a small strip mine near the
town of Firesteel, South Dakota. It is virtually the sole commercial

producer of lignite in the area involved. The company is owned by Mr.

Ben Dollarhide who was formerly general superintendent of a North Dakota
eoal company; Upon his retirement in l9h6 he purchased the company and
ran it along with his two sons.

The lienite in t.e Firesteel area lies in pockets rather‘than a
continuous bed. ‘The coal thiohness is variable, averaging 3% feet under
an average 35-foot overburden. The annual production of the Dewey County
Coal Company'has varied.with the weather. For the past three or four
years prior to 195k it has been.close to 25,000 tons, but there have
always been from five to six thousand tons left over annually. at the
tine of his testimony in September 1951:, Mr. Dollarhide estimated that
his operation.would cease in 1957 or l9S8 because the coal was running
out.

iMr» Dollarhide also stated.that at the going price of $3.50 per ton

he and his sons made only a "salary" fro

the business and that a drop
of 50 cents in.price per ton

to operate the mine.

would.make it doubtful that he could continue

F.)
(I\

8. Under the mining techniques of 1909 the presence of lignite
under a 32 foot overburden, even if known, was economically worthless.
The horse and scraper method was not capable of being used to uncover
the lignite at that depth. An overburden of l0 -— l2 feet was the most
that could be economically removed. With the modern methods of today
the cost of equipment to strip mine at a depth of 25 to 30 feet was
estimated at $125,000 to $150,000. To get to a depth of 35 feet the
cost of equipment was estimated at close to $200,000. Anything below
that depth was said not to be recoverable. Mr. C. E. Lesher, a con»

sulting engineer and a man of wide experience in the coal industry

stated on page 1:? of his report-prepared for defendant and introduced

Q

herein as defendant‘s exhibit No. 67, ‘that,

The handicap of thin beds and irregular occurrence
prevents the lignite oper tions in the Chegrenne -reservation from becoming a profitable coal mining industry.
9. Mr. Robert Curtiss a geologist with the State Geological Survey of South Dakota testified forplaintiffs that there remained in the
ground within the area shown on plaintiffs‘ exhibit No. 1.; (map) as the
Isabel-Firesteel Coal Area, a total of léé million plus tons of coal.
This estimate did not take into consideration the areas of w ter, roads ,

houses, etc. which could not be mined. Neither did it consider the over9

burden which could not be moved economically. The estimate was admitted

to Curtiss to be useless as a basis for determining the amount of commercially recoverable coal in the area. I
10. The only testimony offered by the parties herein ".-.-ith reference

to the increased value of the land in the area in question due to the

S 170

. .. . . - _ .1.‘ '. ' “‘ ‘ 4-“
presence of uncerlging lignite was to the effect that it added nothing

-9U

W

to the land values. hr. Mathews. a realtor from Isabel, testified th
the result of his experience as a correspondent for insurance companies

in.making locus on property in the area had.been that the known presence

0
F‘)
'-é6J
IJ
00
B
P o
cf’
(0
I3‘

ad added nothing to the value of the land. Mr. Lesher, a
coal expert and engineer, Stated in his report that had the present
day knowledge of the coal deposits been available in l909 it still would
not have added to the then market value of the lands which were being
sold as grazing or agricultural lands.

ll. Pursuant to the authority conferred by section 3 of the Indian
Reorganization Act (h8 Stat. 98h) the Secretary of the Interior on

June l2, l9Ll restored to the Cheyenne River Sioux all lands covered

_y the l908.ect remaining nndisposed of and all lands and mineral rights

which had.reverted through forfeiture by defaulting purchasers.‘ Subsequently, additional lands and.mineral rights revested through default,
cancellation.or relinquishnent. By Restoration Order dated January l2,
1952, all lands and.mineral rights so reacquired were restored to tribal

WC

ownership.
acres), 5h,96h.7h acres of land and the mineral rights in 7,676.58 ad'tional acres, or an aggregate of 62,6hl.32 acres were restored to the
Cheie .e River Sioux by the two restoration orders. Within the sane
lh-township area hO,3l9.9O acres previously had been allotted to the

The total acreage within the claimed territory.allotted and

-L " / -o a 5 9
?9S~Or8Q aggregated lO2,9ol.22 acres or almost one-third of tne area an

_:U_:'__ ’‘ :.— Q _- 9 —-= 90 an 1
some 0; Uhc llgnite discovered unc rlies Indian allotments or tribal land.

Of the total area comprising the fourteen townships (320,2lS.24

l2. The evidence in this case does not indicate that the actions
of the Secretary of the Interior were arbitrary or capricious with
regard to the classilication of the lands of the Cheyenne River Reservation as non-coal lands. He applied the same criteria to this land
that were “pplied to all the public lands. On the contrary, the
evidence does indicate that the Secretar; acted well within the limits

of hisrrights and.performed.hi5 duty toward the Indians'with due regard

to their welfare.

Based.upon the preceding findings made herein it is the conclusion

of this Commission that the plaintiffs are not entitled to recover of

the defendant.

Edgar 1?‘ -=-=-'-*...a-o u..:...\.:'u

Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. H. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

72

