S Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 815
EEEORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

I MINNESOTA CHIPPEWA TRIBE WHITE EARTH )

BAND, LEECH LAKE BAND,‘MILLE LAO BAND, )

ED NILSON, JAMES DAvIs, JOHN OOREON, ) -.
NILLIAM MORELL, HAROLD EMERSON, JOSEPH ) '
MORRISON, OLE SAM, MONROE SRINANAY, )

EUGENE REYNOLDS, FRANK LA ROSE, JOSEPH )

MONROE, ARCHIE LIBBY AND JOHN SQUIRREL,)

A >
Plaintiffs, )

vs. Dooket No. 18-B

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\u/\u/5a/\.—/\-/‘av’

Defendant.

Decided: June 28, 1960

Appearances:

Jay H. Hoag, with whom

was Marvin J. Sonosky,
Attorneys for plaintiffs

Sim T. Carmen, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General, Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION‘g§ Egg COMMISSION
Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Comnission.
..The petition in this case, Docket No. 18-B, was filed by the aboveentitled petitioners. The Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, a Wheeler-Howard

Act Indian corporation, is entitled to maintain this action in a repre.sentative capacity on behalf of all descendants of those Chippewa Indians

cu,‘

who were parties to the Treaty of February 22, 1855, (10 Stat. 1165) and

have an interest in the claim arising under that treaty.

8 Ind. Cl.‘ Comm. 781 816

After a complete study of all evidence now of record in this proceeding, the Commiscion is of t‘e opinion that our previous finding, in
the matter of Docket No. 18-N, that the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe is the
successor in interest to all of the Chipper: Indians in Minnesota with
the exception of the Chippewa Indians on the Red Lake Reservation was
ill-advised. Any_recovery which may result in this case should be for
the benefit of all descendants of those5Chippewa Indians who were parties
to the 1855 treaty regardless of their present day membership in this
Wheeler-Howard Act Corporation; There is no c:Ldence that the claims of

the Indians, parties to the 1855 Treaty, were ever merged or consolidated

with the bands and groupd now comprising the Minnesota Chippewa Tribe.

Many of the descendants of the aboriginal Mississippi bands and pillager

and Lake Winnibigoshish bands are now memncrs of the Minnesota Chippewa

.Tribe, and that organization may maintain this action in a representative

capacity. But this does not mean that it has become the successor in

interest to the claims of the descendants of those aboriginal bands.

we have found the individual named petitioners to be descendants
of original members of the Mississippi, Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish

cu

bands and, as such; they are, of course, entitled under the act to maintain

this action on behalf of themselves and in a representative capacity for

all descendants of the aboriginal bands.

While this case was consolidated for trial with Docket No. 18-N, on
both the issues of title and value of the lands involved, we are only.
deciding the title question in the matter of Beclet Ne. l8-B at this
time, as agreed to by counsel for all interested parties at the hearing

on June 16, 1960.

817

\

The petitioners have alleged that they were paid an unconscionable
consideration for the cession of their lands. The land was ceded to

ithe United States by the Treaty of February 22, 1855 (10 Stat. ll65).

The ceded tract (which is referred to as Royce area 357) extends across

north-central Minnesota including the headwaters of the Mississippi

River with a triangular shaped portion reaching the Canadian border:

.The area, as described in Finding of Fact No. 3, less the seven reservations, contains about 10.1 million acres.

It is petitioners’ contention that they were the owners of Royce

area 357 both by oboriginal Indian title and by recognized title. We

will discuss the recognition claim first.

To maintain a claim based on recognized title there must have been

scongressional action granting or according the petitioner Indians an

ownership right in and to the lands involved. It is well established

that Congress has the exclusive right to dispose of public lands. As

the Supreme Court stated in Hynes v. Grimes Packing Co., 337 U. S. 86,

.103, 104:

"When a reservation is established by a treaty ratified
by the Senate or a statute, the quality of the rights thereby
_secured to the occupants of the reservation depends upon the
language or purpose'of the congressional action. Since Congress,

under the Constitution, Sec. 3 of Art. 4 has the power to dispose of the lands of the United States, it may convey to or

recognize such rights in the Indians, even a title equal to
fee simple, as in its judgment is just," citing Northwestern
Bands of Shoshone Indians v. United States, 324 U- S. 335.

 

In Tee-Hit-Ton Indiang v. United States, 3&8 U. S. 271, 278, 279,

the Court stated:

8 Ind. C1. Comn.781 818

"It irecognized.titlg/‘may be established in a variety of
ways but there must be the definite intention by congressional
action or authority to accord legal rights, not merely permissive occupation.”

.Petitioners”maintain that the United States recognized their:title

1. _The Prairie du Chien Treaty of August 19, 1825;

2. The pattern of dealings with the Chippewas subsequent to the
Prairie du Chien Treaty; and

3. The February 22, 1855, Treaty of cession.

The stated purpose of the Prairie du Chien-Treaty was to establish

boundaries between the the tribes and to promote peace. By Article 5 of the

Treaty a partial boundary was established between the Sioux and Chippewa.
By Article_10 of the Treaty the United States agreed to recognize the

boundary thus established. We do not find any congressional intent to
accord to the Chippewas any permanent right to the lands in Royce area

357. .The mere establishment and agreement to recognize a boundary line

between these two tribes did not‘result in a recognition of title in

.Chippewa Indians to the vast areas of land lying to the north of that

line, which area was left undefined and unlimited as to the Chippewas.
‘We find nothing in the subsequent pattern of dealings with the

Chippewas to give support to petitioners‘ claim that their recognized
title was thus confirmed. The Commission is aware of the fact that the
United States subsequently dealt with Chippewas for country north of
the Prairie du Chien line. It is true that the United States honored
its agreement to recognize that line as the boundary between the Sioux
and Chippewa but this does not indicate that Congress intended to grant

or recognize title in the Chippewas to lands north of the line.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 I 819

The actions or statements of government officials, no matter how numerous

or positive, are insufficient to accord recognized title in the petitioner Indians.

6

The Treaty of February 22, 1855, was a treaty of cession and did

not constitute a congressional recognition of title in the petitioners.

.As the Qommission stated in The Iowa Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in

 

Kansas and Nebraska, et al., v. The United States, 6 Ind..Cl. Comm. 464,
501, “Generally speaking, we know that the setting of boundary lines in

a treaty of cession is somewhat arbitrary. The government's main concern in establishing these lines is to be doubly sure that every conceivable claim asserted by the Indians, regardless of merit, is included

within the ceded area; so that is it quite immaterial what portion of

the ceded area the Indians may have exclusively occupied and controlled

9

as long as it passes under the terms of the treaty." See also Qgapaw

Tribe v. United States, 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 469, Aff‘d 128 C. Cls. 45.

   

We have found that the United States did not recognize title in

“I"‘
.3. -I-I

either the Mississippi bands or the Tillager and Lake Winnibigoshish
bands to any portion of Royce area 357.

we turn now to a consideration of petitioners’ claim of original
Indian title to Royce area 357. Original Indian title is the Indians’
right of occupancy of lands based upon their aboriginal possession. To
sustain this claim petitioners must establish the area or areas of land

which the Mississippi and Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands of

Chippewa Indians exclusively used and occupied within the claimed Royce

area 357.

This Commission has previously held that the date upon which the

United States became sovereign over the area in question is material

8 Ind. C]... Comm.  

because original Indian title could be no greater than that held when

the United States sovereignty attached. The Iowa Tribe of the Iowa

   

Reservation in Kansas and Nebraska v. The United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Comm.

464; Red Lake Band, et al., v. The United States, 7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 576.

.Defendant has maintained that United States sovereignty attached on

.Ju1y 4, 1776, to that portion of Royce area 357 east of the Mississippi

River, and on April 30, 1803, to that portion on the west side of the

Mississippi River.

Petitioners dispute the nateriality of the sovereignty date since
they argue that an Indian tribe could obtain original Indian title even
after the United States became sovereign over the area. Further, they
argue that if any date is material it should be the date upon which the
United States obtained title to the area and not thevdate upon which sovereignty attached. As to the area east of the Mississippi River,

petitioners maintain that title to the land remained in the State of
Virginia after the Declaration of Independence until it_was ceded to
the United States by deed of March 1, 1784.

In our Finding of Fact No. 4'we have outlined the early history

concerning the United States’ acquisition of the area. However, we find

no reason to belabor this question since we find substantial evidence
from which to conclude that the Chippewa Indians involved held Indian

title to a certain portion of Royce area 357 east of the Mississippi

River prior to 1776 (the earliest possible date of ’nited States’ acQuisition) and that they held Indian title to a certain portion of

Royce area 357 west of the Mississippi River prior to 1803 (the Louisiana

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 751 821

Purchase). Since the evidence does not indicate that the Chippewa

Indians involved increased the area which they exclusively used and

occupied after the 1776 and 1803 dates, we have considered the material
period to have extended from these dates until the area was ceded to

the Bnited States by the Treaty of February 22, l§55. We have, accordingly,
carefully considered all the evidence and made detailed findings covering

this critical period.

The Chippewas were one of the larger groups of Indians of that

-Algonquin linguistic stock located in the northern section of the United

, of the village, lake, or river near which they resided. fTheSMississippi'¢“

States. When first contacted by white explorers in the seventeenth

century, the Chippewas were in the area around Lakes Huron and Superior.
Beginning'in the early part of the eighteenth century, they started S"
pushing their way westward 803088 Minnesota, gradually displacing thee
Sioux and driving them.across the Mississippi and south to the Minnesota
River. By the end of the century they had extended their occupation
through northern Minnesota and across the Red River into northeastern
Earth Dakota. They had a large number of villages, bands, and local
divisions scattered over a region extending a thousand miles fron east

to west, and many‘of these bands or'groups came to be'knowh‘byltheyhame

bands ofwthippewas and the Pillager and”Lake‘Winnihigoshish bands of{:'v
Chippewas were the two groups which'petitioners allege had original '
lndian title to all of Royce area 357 at the time of the l855icession
and for many years prior thereto.

We have detailed in our findings of fact the evidence upon which have

been based our ultimate findings of the areas exclusively used and occupied

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 822

-n

by petitioners. That evidence consists of writings of historians;
reports of early explorers, scientists, traders and missionaries» and
the writings and reports of various government agents and military men
who had occasion to report on the Indian occupation-of the territory
involved.
Historians Warren and Neill wrote of the early Chippewa actions

against the Sioux in the early part of the 18th century. The traders

and explorers in the area prior to 177C then told of the Chippewa occupation and hunting activities about the sources of the Mississippi
River, in the eastern portion of Royce area 357.

The occupation and use of the eastern portion was followed by a
westward expansion across the area. Traders Cardotte and Perrault referred to various Chippewa locations in the eastern and central portions
of the tract. Perrault wrote of the Leech Lake Pillagers hunting to

the west on the prairies at the western edge of the tract.

Following the Louisiana Purchase in 1803 American explorers entered

the area, the first of whom was Lt. Zebulon Pike. Pike described the
Chippewa territory and distinguished the different Chippewa groups or
hands in the region in question.

Memhers of the Cass expedition in 1820 described the Chippewa
settlements in Royce area 357 and stated the limits of the hunting.
grounds of the various Chippewa bands. The following expenditions of
Beltrami and Long confirmed the Chippewa locations in the area.

At the Prairie du Chien treaty council the various Sioux and

Chippewa chiefs stated the limits of their respective countries. The

8 Ind. Cl. (mm. 78L 823

only portion of R yce area 35? claimed by the Sioux was in the Otter TailPine Lake region. The Sioux and Chippewa agreed on a partial boundary
between their territories, and that line, described in Artticle 5 of the
Prairie dn Chien Treaty of August 19, 1825, constitutes the southwest
boundary of the subject tract.

Schoolcraft's expedition in lC32 confirmed the continuing occupation
of the various Chippewa groups in Royce area 357. Nicolle: in 183 ,
Owen in 1848 and Efed in 3845 reported on the occupation and use of the
area by the Chippewas.

Various government officials also reported that the Chippewa
Indians were divided into various bands nith each'band claiming exclusive

title to a separate and distinct portion of land. In 1850 Governor

Alexander Ramsey reported the Chippewas to be divided into three groups:

n_ 1. Mississippi Chippewa
2. The Pillagers
3. The Northern or Red Lake Divisio.

While Governor Ramsey inclnded Cass and Winnibigoshish Lakes as two of
the principal residences of his third group, he went on to distinguish
the subsistence habits of the Cass and Winnepeg (Winnibigoshish) bands

from the Red Lake and Penbina groups. And he noted that the Pillager

bigoshish groups and that the latter's chief had agreed to abide by Flat
Month's experience and advice.

Although the names "Chippewa Nation" or "Chippewa Tribe" were used

.~.

in some of the early treaties made with Chippewa Indians, they were never

organized as a single political entity with a central authority to act

for all Caippavas. Ehe C-ippewas were rather divided into vari as bands

or groups which in zany instances were grouped under larger divisions

Q

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 824

or sub-tribes, each of which occupied separate and distinct areas of

land.

"3

Following the l825 Prairie du Chien Treaty the United States dealt
with various Chippewa bands for cessions of territory north of the

Article 5 Sioux-Chippewa line. The United States assembled representatives
of those bands which were believed to have any interest in the area to

be ceded. Actually Chippewa Indians from.various bands or groups in

Royce area 357 signed several other treaties of cession, as indicated
in our Findings of Fact Nos. 37 through 40.

The negotiations leading to the Treaty of February 22, 1855, were
conducted in Washington, D. C. The principal spokesman for the Mississippi
band of Chippewas was Hole-in-the Day. Chief Flat Mouth was the spokesman for the Pillager and Winnipec bands. Throughout the negotiations
both chiefs refrained from entering into any discussions concerning

the territories of the bands other than those whom they represented.

The treaty commissioner stated to Hole-in-the-Day that he did not think

the Chippewa had any distinct interests and he therefore addressed himr

self not to the Pillagers alone but to the Chippewa Nation and that he
did not think there existed any rival interests between the different
bands of the Chippewa Nation. Chief Flat Mouth replied, " There is truth,
Father, in everything you have said. We feel that it is all true. We

ishould have no conflicting interests; but we are in this respect like

the white. We have separate and distinct interests. We know our own
possessions. We know what property we own ....” Commissioner Manypenny

replied that he was aware of their separate interests and did not wish

He requested that they define amrag themselves their
b-tndaries and to say uh 2 quantity of land they wished reserved and
The Crmmissieser met separately with the Pillager and Wineepec

delegation and with the Mississippi band delegatian. Chief Plat Month,

on behalf of the Pillage: and Winnepec delegation, requested reserves

.at Lake.Wineepec, Cass Lake and Leech Lake. Hale-in-the-day never

specified the reserves which the Mississippi band desired out of the
area to be ceded. However, there were five areas set apart far the

permanent homes ef the Mississippi bands, which were described in

r-1,.

Article 2 ef the rreaty as Fills Lac, Rabbit Lake, Gull Lake, Pokegama

Lake and Sandy and Rice Lakes. Three separate reserves were set aside

for the Pillagers aed Lake Witaibigoshish bands. These were the three

reserves which had been reqeested by Flat Mcuth, naiely Leech Lake,

Lake Wianibigashish and Cass Lake. The treaty provided for the conisideratioa to be divided between the Mississippi hands and the Pillage:

and Lake Winnibigeshish bends and payments of annuities were ta be

distributed to the Mississippi bands at see of their reserves and ts the

D‘
- av

fl

:hish bands at their reserve at Leech Lake.

I

Pillage: and Lake Winaibige

Petitioners‘ expert etheologist, Dr. Stewart, listed 27 centers

These

-.

of population for the Chippewas df Royce area 357 as of 1857.

localities were concentrated mainly in the central and southern portions

O

0% the area. His northezarest ieealities were at Turtle Lake and Lake

C!

Bowstring and his westerarest locations were

at Otter

south border and Rice Lake to the north.
Dr. Stewart testified that Royce area 337 was aborigiealiy occupied

of Ship_ewa Indians, the Mississippi bands

8

5

8 Ind. Cl. Comma 781 826

the Pillager bands. He stated that the Pillager bands included the

Otter Tail Pillagers, the Cass Lake Pillagers, the Leech Lake Pillagers
and the Winnibigoshish Pillagers and others. He testified that the
Mississippi bands likewise contained a number of such groups.
Defendant's expert historian, Dr. Hickerson, testified that Royce
area 357 was occupied in oboriginal days by three divisions of Chippewa.

They_were:

(a) The Mississippi Bands, occupying the area designated subarea 357-A on his map 2;

(b) The Pillager, occupying sub—area 35?-B, on his map 2; and
(c) The Northern Bands, occupying sub—area 357-C on map 2.

The descriptions of‘the three areas of occupation are set forth in detail

in our finding of Fact No. 45.

Based on all-the evidence the Commission has concluded that Royce
.Area 357 was occupied in aboriginal days by two groups of Chippewa
Indians. The Mississippi bands, which at the l855 Treaty council were
represented by Chief Hole-in—the Day, occupied an area about the upper

Mississippi River. One of their principal locations was at Sandy Lake

and their area of use extended generally to the southwest along the
streams and lakes on both sides of the Mississippi River. There is,
however, evidence that the Mississippi bands did extend the area of their
use and occupation €o'the north to Pokegama Lake and Trout Lake. The
evidence clearly establishes the following locations as the principal
sites of the Mississippi bands? use and occupation: Pine River, Whitefish Lake, Cedar Lake, Rabbit Lake and River, Gull Lake, Crow Island,

Rice Lake, Trout Lake and Pokegama Lake. All of these sites are included

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 327

in the area found by the Commission to have been held by the Mississippi
bands under original lndian title.

The evidence indicates that the Mississippi bands collectively used
and occupied the area described in Finding of Fact No. 48. The contemporary reports on the Indians in Royce area 357 clearly show that
the Mississippi bands were a distinct Chippewa division occupying the
area found by the Commission to have been held.by them under original
.Indian title. Both experts for defendant and petitioners have recognized
this division. As previously stated the proceedings at the treaty

council clearly indicated the separate and distinct interests of the
two Chippewa groups.

The second aboriginal group in Royce area 357 was the Pillage: and '
Lake iinnibigoshish bands. The Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands,
who were representediat the 1855 Treaty council by Chief Flat Mouth,
had their main residences at Leech Lake and Lake Winnibigoshish from
which location their hunting grounds extended to the west and southwest.
The evidence established that the principal sites of the Pillager and
Lake Winnibigoshish bands‘ use and occupation included: Round Lake,
Bowstring'Lake, Cass Lake, Turtle Lake, Bemidji Lake, Rice and Upper
Rice Lake, Wild Rice River, along the Crow Wing River, Lake Itasca,
Otter Tail Riwer and Otter Tail Lake.

,.While some authorities have reported the Pillagers'Winnibigoshish
bands to have been separate divisions of Chippewa, the Commission believes,
after carefully weighing-all the evidence, that these Indians in fact

collectively used and occupied the area described in Finding of Fact No. 49.

8 1nd. Cl. Comm. 781 828

The evidence indicates that, in aboriginal days, the Pillager Chief

Flat Mouth, exercised a great influence over the Cass and Winnibigoshish
Lake bands. The Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands joined in

hunting parties and in war parties. At the 1855 Treaty council this
combined group was represented by Chief Flat Month. The group was

usually referred to in the council minutes as the Pillagers although it

is clear that at all times Chief Flat Mouth acted on behalf of the Pillager
and Lake Winnibigoshish bands. Although Flat Mouth insisted that his

group had separate and distinct interests from the neighboring Mississippi bands, there was never any mention ot a division of Interest

between the Pillager and Lake Winnibigoshish bands. They sought and

were granted three reservations for their common occupation, at Leech

‘Lake, Lake Winnibigoshish, and Cass Lake. Their annuities were provided for apart from those of the Mississippi bands.

The Commission has excluded from the total area claimed an area
in the eastern and northeastern portion of Royce area 352 and the area
extending north of Round and Bowstring Lakes to the Canadian border.
The evidence does not establish any continuing exclusive use and occuPation of these areas by either the Mississippi bands or the Pillager
and Lake Winnibigoshish bands until the cession date.

Almost invariably the reports in the 1800's referred to the
nississippi bands’ hunting and using the area to the west and southwest
of Sandy Lake and north along the Mississippi River to include Pokegama

Lake and Trout Lake. The evidence does not establish their original

Indian title to the area east of those locations.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 829

with respect to the area north of Round and Bowstring Lakes, there

is likewise no evidence to indicate an exclusive use and occupation by
the Chippewa bands involved in this action. Therefore, their claim of

original Indian title to this area must fail. There is evidence that

petitioner Chippewas did travel over the area to the British outposts
at Rainy Lake to obtain ammumition for warfare against the Sioux and

liquor. However, this is not sufficient proof of Indian title. Further,

there is evidence of use of the area by other Chippewa groups not a

‘part of either the Mississippi bands or the Pillager or Lake Winnibigoshish

3

bands. It is, of course, not sufficient proof of petitioners Indian

title to merely rely on evidence that only Chippewa Indians were in the
area. As we have previously stated the Chippewa tribe or Nation was
not the aboriginal land-using group. Rather each distinct group or

band of Chippewas which collectively used and occupied a seaparate and

definable area of land was the aboriginal land-using group. Joint use
of an area by two or more distinct groups of Chippewas would defeat a
claim.of Indian title as much as use of an area by both Sioux and
Chippewa. C
.This case must now proieed for determination of the acreages of

the two areas found to have been held under original Indian title by
the respective Chippewa groups, the value of each of the two areas on
the date of taking, the value of the consideration provided for in the

Treaty of cession for each of the areas, and the amount constituting

the United States‘ payments on the claim made to each of the respective

Chippewa groups.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 781 '1 830

The parties have presented their evidence of value of the entire
Royce area 357. In view of our findings of the areas held under original
Indian title certain revisions will be necessary. The acreages of the
two tracts must be determined and the parties may have other revisions
or amendments to the evidence to present and there may be additional
material which should be introduced in the light of this decision. The

parties are instructed to advise the Commission of whatever further proceedings they consider necessary in this regard.

‘ Wm. M. Holt
s % Associate Commissioner

I concur:

Edgar "E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

‘-5

Commissioner Watkins took no part in the consideration and decision
of this case. '

