42 Ind. C1. Com. 1

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

ALEUT comnmmr or s'r. PAUL ISLAND,

Plaintiff,

v. Docket No. 352

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

THE ALEUT TRIBE, by Iliodor Merculieff
as Representative of the said Tribe
and all members thereof; and THE

ALEUT COMUNITY OF ST. PAUL ISLAND,

Plaintiffs,

v. Docket No. 369

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\-/\J\uI\-/\J‘-/‘u/\.JN-l\.I\nJ\u?\—/Nu/\-IS/\/\.I\/\/N/‘hi

Defendant.

Decided: June 9, 1978

Appearances:

Donald H. Green, Stephen M. Truitt,
Leslie 8. Bretz, Wald, Harkrader &
Ross, Attorneys for the Plaintiffs.

Alexander J. Pires, Jr., with whom was
Acting Assistant Attorney General
James W. Moorman, Attorneys for the

Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

 

Yarborough, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
This is a claim brought under clause 5 of Section 2 of the Indian

Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. 1049, 1050) by the Aleut Community of

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 2

St. Paul Island, a subdivision of the Aleut Tribe, in Docket 352, and by
the Aleut Tribe, as captioned above, in Docket 369. The Aleut Community
of St. George Island, a constituent band of the Aleut Tribe, presents its
claims in Docket 369.

The original petition in Docket 352 was filed August 11, 1951, and
amended by order of the Commission on January 26, 1970. Plaintiff in
Docket 369, with the permission of the Commission, amended its original
petition of August 13, 1951, on November 13, 1951. Both the Aleut
Comunity of St. Paul Island and the Aleut Community of St. George Island,

bands of American natives residing on the Pribilof Islands of Alaska,

now are recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having the authority
to represent the tribal interests of their members.lj

The essence of these claims is that the plaintiff communities were
established as colonies, by the Russians,on the remote and inhospitable

Pribilof Islands of the Bering Sea, to kill and skin the fur seals that

bred there in great numbers, and that the United States over the period

1870 to 1946 continued these colonies to exploit the fur seal trade,
reaping enormous profits for it and its lessees from the labor of the
plaintiffs, while keeping the plaintiffs in a condition of impoverished

near-peonage. Plaintiffs argue from the evidence presented that the

United States had a duty, derived from its statutes, to pay plaintiffs

 

if The Aleut Community of St. George was not so recognized at the onset

of this litigation. See the First Amended Petition in Docket 369 (filed
Nov. 13, 1951).

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 3

a fair compensation for their contribution to the fur seal enterprise,
that the United States did not provide for plaintiffs adequately although
there were ample profits from which it could have done so, and that
damages should be awarded. As will be seen in the necessarily lengthy
opinion and findings that follow, we agree.

The issues arising from plaintiffs‘ claims in these two dockets
have been the subject of a number of Comission orders and two Court of
Claims opinions. The initial issue tested was whether the Commission had
jurisdiction to hear and decide claims by Aleut and Eskimo groups (as
distinct from Indian tribes) in Alaska. This question, posed in a
certification of a question of law by the Commission to the Court of
Claims, was answered in the affirmative. United States v. Native Village
of Unalakleet, 188 Ct. C1. 1, at 13 (1969). In that same opinion, the
court rejected defendant's argument that plaintiffs failed to state a

cause of action, and rejected the argument that the claims were barred

by a prior court decision, Aleut Community of St. Paul Island v. United

States, 127 Ct. C1. 328 (1954).

Subsequent to the congressional enactment of the Alaska Native Claims
Settlement Act of 1971 (85 Stat. 688), the Commission and the court were

again asked by defendant to dismiss the claims in these two dockets.

The Commission, at 27 Ind. Cl. Comm. 179-80 (1972), viewed the

plaintiffs‘ claims as fourfold. There were claims based upon:

(1) aboriginal title to lands and adjacent waters; (2) recognized

title to lands and adjacent waters; (3) fishing and hunting

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 1 4

rights; and (4) lack of fair and honorable dealings. The Comission held that the first three causes of action were extinguished

by the Alaska Native Claims Settlement Act, and that under the Commission

decision in Gila River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community v. United States,
20 Ind. Cl. Com. 131 (1968), aff’d, 190 Ct. Cl. 790 (1970), cert. denied,

 

400 U. S. 819 (1970), the fair and honorable dealings claim was noncompensable. The cases were therefore dismissed.

On appeal, the Court of Claims affirmed in part and reversed in

part the Comission's decision. Aleut Community of St. Paul Island v.
United States, 202 Ct. C1. 182 (i973). The court affirmed with regard

to the issues of aboriginal title, recognized title, and hunting and

fishing rights -- albeit on somewhat different grounds -- but reversed

on the issue of fair and honorable dealings. Considering the pleadings

in a light most favorable to plaintiffs, the court concluded that plaintiffs
should be given the opportunity to present evidence at trial on this issue

(202 Ct. Cl. at 195). The court went on to distinguish the case of Gila

 

River Pima-Maricopa Indian Comunity, supra, by finding that in this case

a "series of statutes . . . placed the appellants in a ‘special relationship‘

to the Government" (202 Ct. Cl. 201). Since a "special relationship" is

present, the court stated, plaintiffs should be allowed to attempt to show

that "the obligation was to the Tribe, that the United States failed to
meet its obligation, and as a result the Tribe suffered damages" (202 Ct.

Cl. at 196).

52 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 5

In proving these assertions it is essential, said the court, that
it be shown that the "ecological condition of the islands made the

natives dependent upon continued access to traditional hunting and

fishing grounds" (202 Ct. Cl. at 198), and that the hunt was a "community
endeavor" with payment made to the entire community, to be divided in part
into individual portions and to be used in part for comunity needs (202

Ct. Cl. 198-99). Another important element in plaintiffs‘ case, the

court stated, is the allegation that plaintiffs were paid minimal

compensation for their labor over the 76 years in question (202 Ct. Cl.

at 200). Finally, the court instructed the Comission to

allow the profits of the sealskin monopoly to be shown, with

a view to determining whether they sufficed for adequate
protection, care, and education of the Aleuts. as well as

to pay the costs and reasonable profits to others in the

chain of distribution. It [the Commission] should inquire
whether the Aleuts had their comfort, care, maintenance

and education provided for, as the Congress in 1870 prescribed.
If they were not, and if there were profits not used for that
purpose, that could and should have been used, these profits
would establish the measure of damages. [202 Ct. Cl. 200]. gj

 

2/ The Commission hereby includes in the definition of "sealskin monopoly"
activities, such as fox skinning, which were inextricably bound with
the sealskin trade and which were carried out by the same concerns that

operated the sealskin trade.

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 1 6

Following the Court of Claims decision, defendant moved for judgmnt
on the pleadings in Docket 369, charging that.the St. George Island
plaintiffs had not pleaded the two statutes relied upon by the court as
the basis for a "special relationship." The Commission, at 35 Ind. Cl.
Comm. 30, denied defendant's motion. Subsequently, the Commission ordered
the severance from Docket 369 of the St. George Island claim and its

consolidation for trial with Docket 352 (36 Ind. Cl. Com. 252). The
Commission found that the pleadings in Docket 369 were sufficiently
inclusive to be deemed to include as a basis for recovery the two statutes
relied upon by the Court of Claims.

Because of the unusual nature of this claim. a brief history Of the

Pribilof Aleuts will be helpful.

Plaintiffs in these dockets, the Aleuts of St. Paul and St. George,

Alaska, are of Asiatic heritage. Their forefathers migrated to

the New World from Siberia over the Bering Strait land bridge

approximately 10,000 years ago. Following the Alaska coast south, these

people eventually came to the Aleutian Islands, an archipelago stretching

over 1,100 miles from Port Holler on the east to Attu Island in the west.

Living in the Aleutians -- 70 treeless islands with high, snowbcovered

mountains -— the Aleuts became dependent upon, and proficient at, sustaining

themselves from the sea. This was, in fact, a matter of necessity since

the islands are so agriculturally poor that there is no record of any

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 7

substantial food crop ever being grown. Vegetation is limited to grasses,
lichens, mosses, flowers, and small bushes. Very few animals made their
home on the islands and of those that did probably only the sea birds were
of significance to the Aleuts. In contrast to the land, the sea surrounding
the Aleutians was an area teeming with life. Sea mammals -- hair and fur
seals, sea lions, sea otters, and whales —— existed alongside the fish -salmon, halibut, cod and smelt -- and the marine invertebrates.

Becoming expert boatbuilders, navigators and fisherman, the Aleuts
caught the marine animals of the islands and put to some use almost every
part of the animal. During the period of Aleut stewardship of the Aleutians
the numbers of animal species became stabilized, and no species became
extinct. Approximately 16,000 Aleuts lived on the Aleutian Islands
prior to the Russian discovery in the mid-18th Century.

An important characteristic of Aleut communities in the "pre—contact"
period was the extent to which cooperative behavior existed. Most of the
important community functions were carried out by the Aleuts as a group.
Aleuts hunted as a group and upon return to the village would share the
catch with the community as a whole. An individual Aleut's ties to the
comunity group were very strong.

In 1741 the Russians discovered the Aleutians and, with their firearms,
began a slaughter of marine animals. At the same time, as a result of

mistreatment and exposure to European diseases, the Aleut population was

decimated.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 8

Forty-five years later Gerasim Pribilof sighted what are now known

as the Pribilof Islands. Not a part of the Aleutian chain, the Pribilofs
lie approximately 200 miles to the north of the Aleutians, The two main
islands, St. Paul and St. George, are separated by #0 miles of sea. (There
are also three small, uninhabited islets in the Pribilofs.)

The Pribilofs were known to the Aleuts prior to their discovery by
Russia, but there is no record of any Aleut habitation. The reason for
this may have been the inferior living environment on the
Pribilofs as compared to the islands in the Aleutian chain. The Pribilofs
are significantly colder than the Aleutians,and, in addition, the climate
is extremely cloudy, windy and wet. Because it is colder, ice conditions
are more severe and this hampers fishing. There is no record of agricultural
production of any kind on the Pribilofs,and only grasses, lichens, mosses,
flowers and small bushes grow. Unlike the Aleutians the Pribilofs have
relatively smooth coastlines, depriving the islands of the protected bays,
protective reef systems, and good harbors that encourage fishing and provide
a haven'for varied food sources. Due to a lack of fresh, running streams,
salmon (a mainstay of the Aleut diet) are not found on the Pribilofs.
Finally, even though the Pribilofs were, and are, one of the world's major
fur seal rookeries, this source of food is not an unmitigated advantage for

Aleut inhabitants. The swarming presence of fur seals on the islands for

4 to 6 mnths each year makes it difficult for the Aleuts to use the

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 9

coastline for fishing and for collecting marine invertebrates.
In addition, Aleuts have never considered seal meat to be the most desirable

variety of foodThe Russian traders were more interested in the seal rookeries than
in the deficiencies in the Pribilofs as an Aleut habitat, and settled
Aleuts from.the eastern Aleutians in the Pribilofs to kill and skin fur
seals. The taking of fur seals on the Pribilofs continued under the
fishing and trading monopoly granted by the Russian Government to the
Russian-American Company in 1799. The Russians often pressed Aleuts into
Russian-American Company service for years at a time, paying them for their
labor, but otherwise giving the Aleuts little more freedom than slaves.

In keeping with the Aleuts' communal tradition the amount earned by the
Pribilof Aleut communities was distributed at the end of a year to each
community as a whole. Shares in the community fund were determined by
work classification,and work classification was determined by the type of
work done.

Although the period of Russian administration was destructive to
Aleuts and the Aleut environment, Aleuts were partially assimilated into
Russian culture, most converting to the Russian Orthodox religion and
many learning the Russian language.

In 1867 under the Treaty of Cession, Alaska became an American

territory, and a "free trade" period with regard to the killing and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 10

skinning of Pribilof seals ensued. In 1869, Congress took the first
step in controlling the seal kill on the Pribilofs by making the islands

a "special reservation" (15 Stat. 348). All sealing and landing on the

islands was prohibited except by the authorization of the Secretary of

the Treasury.
On July 1, 1870, Congress passed an act relating to the sealing

industry and the Pribilof Islands (16 Stat. 180L5which the Court of

Claims found to be one of the two statutory pronouncements evidencing an
obligation by the United States toward the Pribilof Aleuts. The Act of

1870 provides in part:

* * it * *

Section 1

***natives of said islands shall have the privilege of killing
such young seals as may be necessary for their own food and
clothing during other months, and also such old seals as may

be required for their own clothing and for the manufacture of
boats for their own use, which killing shall be limited and

controlled by such regulations as shall be prescribed by the
Secretary of the Treasury.

it it * * *

Section 4
*** And in making said lease, the Secretary of the Treasury shall

have due regard to the *** comfort, maintenance, and education
of the natives ***.

it * * * *

Section 6

*** and the Secretary of the Treasury is hereby empowered and
authorized to make all needful rules and regulations *** for the

comfort, maintenance, education, and protection of the natives of
said islands, ***.

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 11

The court found it evident from the above that "the United States
recognized the dependence of the appellants [plaintiffs] upon fishing
and seal hunting for their continued existence. And that the United
States undertook to protect appellants [plaintiffs] in securing their

comfort, maintenance, and protection" (202 Ct. Cl. at 197).

The ac: assigned to the Secretary of the Treasury the power to lease
out to a private concern the exclusive right to conduct the process of
taking sealskins on the islands. A newly—formed concern, the Alaska
Commerical Company (hereinafter the ACC) was subsequently selected as
the monopolist. The 20-year lease signed by the ACC and the Government

provided for the payment of an annual rental, a tax on each sealskin taken
and shipped, and a tax on each gallon of fur seal oil obtained for sale.
The lease also obligated the ACC to provide the Pribilof Aleuts with
firewood, dried fish, salt, and barrels.

In l890,_when the first lease expired, the Government chose the North
American Commercial Company (hereinafter the NACC) as new lessee. This
second lease provided for increased rental and tax payments to the
Governent and increased obligations by the lessee to the Aleuts. The

lease stated, in part, that the NACC

. . . will furnish to the native inhabitants of said islands of
St. George and St. Paul annually such quantity of dried salmon
and such quantity of salt, and such number of salt barrels for
preserving their necessary supply of meat as the Secretary of
the Treasury shall from time to time determine.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 12

That it will also furnish to the said inhabitants 80

tons of coal annually, and a sufficient number of comfortable
dwellings in which said native inhabitants may reside; and will
keep said dwellings in proper repair; and will also provide and
keep in repair such suitable schoolhouses as may be necessary,
and will establish and maintain during eight months of each year
proper schools for the education of the children on said islands,
the same to be taught by competent teachers who shall be paid

by the company a fair compensation, all to the satisfaction of
the Secretary of the Treasury; and will also provide and maintain a suitable house for religious worship; and will also
provide a competent physician or physicians, and necessary

and proper medicines and medical supplies; and will also provide the necessaries of life for the widows and orphans and

aged and infirm inhabitants of said islands who are unable to
provide for themselves; all of which foregoing agreements will
be done and performed by the said company free of all costs

and charges to said native inhabitants of said islands or to

‘the United States.

During the first lease period (1870 to 1889) the ACC annually
harvested almost 100,000 seals, the maximum number permitted by statute.
Profits during this period were enormous. As a result of such excessive
harvesting, however, the size of the seal herd was declining. By 1890,
when the NACC took over the lease, the diminishing number of seals was of
serious concern. In addition to the excessive harvesting, the prolific growth
of pelagic sealing (the killing of seals on the open sea) was taking its
toll on the herd. Overall, the NACC harvested fewer than one-fifth the
number of seals harvested by the ACC during the first lease period, and
profits declined.

On April 21, l9l0, Congress ended the system of leasing the
Pribilof Islands to private concerns, and the United States assumed

complete control over the seal harvesting operation. The Pribilof seal

population had diminished to a small fraction of its 1870 numbers. The

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 13

herd began to increase, though, as commercial killing was temporarily
halted and pelagic sealing declined. This growth was slow, however, and
the average take of sealskins in the government period lagged far behind
that of the first lease period.
Since 1910, the United States has been the sole administrator with

full authority to harvest and market the furs taken on the Pribilof

Islands. The 1910 Act, section 3, provided that

whenever seals are killed and sealskins taken on any of the

Pribilof Islands the native inhabitants of said islands shall
be employed in such killing and in curing the skins taken, and

shall receive for their labor fair compensation, to be fixed

from.time to time by the Secretary of Commerce and Labor, who

shall have the authority to prescribe by regulation the manner

in which such compensation shall be paid to the said natives or

expended or otherwise used in their behalf and for their benefit.

Section 9 of the act provided, in part, that the Secretary of Labor
and Commerce "shall likewise have authority to furnish food, shelter, fuel,
clothing, and other necessaries of life to the native inhabitants of the
Pribilof Islands and to provide for their comfort, maintenance, education,
and protection."

The Court of Claims viewed this act as the second official pronouncement evidencing an obligation or special relationship undertaken
by the United States for the protection of the Aleuts (202 Ct. Cl. at
193)- The act also continued the policy of making the Pribilofs a

special reservation: No person could lawfully land on the islands

without government authorization.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 14

The plaintiffs contend that the Government was obligated under all
the circumstances of the fur sealing operation to provide to the Pribilof
Aleuts, from 1867 to 1946,;/fair compensation for their labor, adequate
food, clothing, housing and furnishings, fuel for heating, sanitation
and utilities, medical care, and education. It is plaintiffs’ position
that the statutes of July 1, 1870, and April 21, 1910, "recognized, but
did not create, the special relation between the parties" (Pl. Post-Trial
Brief, at 5).

Plaintiffs argue that the measure of damages in this case is the
difference between what was provided the plaintiffs during the 76-year
period~l870—l946, and what should have been provided. Both the profits
of the private lessees of the Pribilof Islands and the profits of the
Government should be considered to be available to satisfy the unfulfilled
obligation to the plaintiffs, say plaintiffs. Plaintiffs further assert
that these profits total $50,150,100. Damages due the Aleuts for inadequate food, clothing, housing and furnishings, fuel for heating,
sanitation and utilities, and education is computed by plaintiffs to
total $4,528,790. Damages for the amount owed the plaintiffs for fair
compensation for labor is calculated by plaintiffs as $33,752,139 on the
"share basis" and $9,398,847 on the "wage basis." The "share basis"

figure derives from the theory that plaintiffs should have been paid

wages equalling 50 percent of the gross revenues of the Pribilof

_§/ Although the Government's obligation is alleged to have begun in 1867,
no damages are claimed for the period 1867-1869.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 1 15

Island operations. The "wage basis" figure is computed on the theory
that the Pribilof Aleuts should have received wages equalling those paid
to contemporary workers in the western United States.

Defendant objects to plaintiffs‘ contentions and interposes several
defenses as complete or partial bars to a recovery by plaintiffs. First,
defendant asserts that the Commission has no jurisdiction to decide this
case because the claims are individual in nature rather than tribal.

Alternatively, defendant contends that the Government fulfilled its

obligation to plaintiffs from 1870 to 1946. This obligation, according to
defendant, did not include the guarantee of fair compensation to the
Aleuts until so mandated by the Act of April 21, 1910.

Third, defendant disputes plaintiffs‘ position as to the funds to
be considered available to compensate plaintiffs if defendant is found
to have failed to fulfill its obligation. Defendant's view is that
recovery is barred for any year in which the Government made no profit on
the Pribilof Islands operations. In addition, profits, according to
defendant, cannot include tax revenues received on Pribilof Island
sealskins or foxsklns. By defendant's calculations, no profits accrued
to the Government for 31 of the 76 years in question. Defendant also
disregards profits made by the third-party private lessees on the ground
that these profits were not funds that "could or should have been used"

for plaintiffs‘ welfare.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 16

Consistent with its contentions, as outlined above, defendant finds
no need to rebut plaintiffs‘ comprehensive profit figure for those parties
reaping benefits from the Pribilof Island operations. Defendant does
dispute, however, plaintiffs‘ estimate of expenses borne by the Government.
Defendant's two experts judge expenses to be $48,992,142 and $35,052,236.27,
respectively, as compared with plaintiffs’ expert's estimate of $25,088,540.
The major difference of opinion in the experts’ reports concerning expenses
is whether or not to treat as Government expense the cost of naval patrol
in the North Pacific Ocean. Predictably, the defendant sees the naval
patrol as a direct cost of maintaining the Pribildf Island sealing operations, while the plaintiffs see the naval patrol as an indirect governmental
service that would have been provided in any case and no more chargeable
against the Pribilof sealing operations than the cost of maintaining
territduial rule in Alaska.

In order to buttress their claims each party has submitted into
evidence a substantial amount of information. Each side employed experts
in various fields to analyze and prepare reports dealing with the Pribilof

Aleut comunities.

Plaintiffs’ primary expert report (introduced as P1. Ex. 701, Vol.
I) was prepared under the direction of economists Dr. Roger H. Willsie
and Dr. Herschel F. Jones of the Bellvue, Washington, firm CHZM Hill.

This report utilizes a topical approach to analyze the profits made by

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 17

the Pribilof Island operations and the damages due plaintiffs for
inadequate goods, services, and compensation provided. The report is
comprehensive in that it estimates money values for all the issues in
controversy,£!and arrives at a final sum said to be due plaintiffs.

Plaintiffs havealso submitted materials, designated Pl. Ex. 1.,
written and compiled by Dr. William S. Laughlin, an anthropologist at
the University of Connecticut. These materials deal only with the
anthropological and sociological aspects of this case.

Defendant has submitted a number of expert reports, none of which
is comprehensive in the same sense that Pl. Ex. 701, Vol. I, is. The
report most relied upon by defendant is Def. Ex. G-1, a report prepared
by the General Services Administration (hereinafter the GSA). This
report, which is organized around the three management periods in question,
1870-1889, 1890-1909, and 19l0—19&6, is primarily an attempt to define,
through the use of charts, the receipts and expenditures of the Pribilof
Islands operation. The GSA report concentrates on government receipts
and expenditures, and defendant uses this data as the foundation upon

which it estimates profit to the Government for each year in the 76-year

period.

 

.£/ Pl. Ex. 701, Vol. I, estimates the cost of providing housing, fuel and
other services and then compares these figures with what plaintiffs should

have received in these areas. Likewise, the report compares compensation
actually realized with what should have been realized.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 18

Dr. George Rogers, an economist presently associated with the
University of Alaska, submitted an expert report on economic and
sociological issues, designated Def. Ex. R. This report contains a
number of calculations concerning the Pribilof Islands operations, and
contains some comparisons between the Aleuts' economic position and that
of a mainland United States worker. Def. Ex. J, authored by Dorothy M.
Jones, a professor at the University of Alaska, details Aleut history
and sociology from the period prior to Russian control through the end
of the period in question in this case. Defendant's final expert report
is a four-page economic rebuttal by Dr. Allan G. Gruchy, professor of
economics at the University of Maryland.

We shall begin our examination of the parties‘ contentions by
considering the defendant's assertion that the Commission lacks jurisdiction under our Act, 25 U.S.C. §70(a) (1976), to hear this claim
because the claim is individual and not tribal. The Court of Claims has
set out two assertions whose proof is essential to a showing that this
claim is tribal. It is necessary to show that: (1) "[T]he hunt was
traditionally a community endeavor," and (2) "[P]ayment for the hunting
of seals for both the Alaskan [sic] Comercial Company, and the United
States was made to the entire community to be divided in part into
individual portions and to be retained in part by the community to care

for those too old or infirm to care for themsel“es and for other
community needs” (202 Ct. G1. at l98«99). Plaintiffs have Pkoven both

of these assertions.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 19

we have found that the Aleuts treated the hunt and other important
group functions as community endeavors. The burden of these community
endeavors was borne by the whole community, and the rewards of these
activities were enjoyed by the group (§gg_finding of fact Nos. 8, 9, 25,
26, 35, 36, 51, 53). This was true from the time of Aleut stewardship
of the islands until 1946, the end of the period in question. we have
also found that payment of compensation was made to the comunity as a
whole and was distributed not only to individuals but also applied to
community needs (§gg_finding of fact Nos. 26, 36, 53, 70):2/

During the first portion of the 1870-1946 period the Aleut chiefs
apportioned the money among the community. Later, government agents
assumed a great deal of authority in the distribution of the community
fund. Portions of the community payment were, at times, given to widows
and orphans, to the priest, to the church, and used for minor community
needs.

In addition to satisfying the criteria set forth by the Court of
Claims for this particular case, the facts here satisfy the criteria

developed by the Commission in other cases in determining whether a

claim is tribal or individual. The overall amount of pay to be distributed

 

§/ In some years there were some activities for which Aleuts received
compensation as individuals. Payment for miscellaneous labor was made
to individual Aleuts as was, at times, payment for the taking of fox.

This compensation was minor, however, when compared to comunity-distributed
compensation.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 20

to the Aleuts was based on the total furs taken and represented pay for
the production of the group as a whole, and not compensation for any
individual's labor. The compensation and other benefits actually provided
were considered as payment in return for the whole communal endeavor.
The claim is that the communities did not receive the compensation and
other benefits to which the communities were entitled. The rights
allegedly violated are, therefore, tribal and not individual rights,
although individual rights may incidentally have been violated. ‘S53
Creek Nation v. United States, 201 Ct. Cl. 386, 409-10 (l973),_g§§:g.
Docket 272, 26 Ind. C1. Comm. 410 (1971).

The extent of the Government's duty to the Aleut colonies on the
Pribilofs is to be found in an obligation of the Government to the tribe
created by treaty or statute. In cases involving claims under the fair

and honorable dealings clause of our act, such as this case, the

defendant's conduct must be measured against the self-imposed "special

relationship." See Gila River Pima—Maricopa Indian Community v. United

States, supra, 20 Ind. Cl. Comm. 131 (1968). As previously pointed out

by the Court of Claims in this case, the Acts of July 1, 1870 (16 Stat.
180), and April 21, 1910 (36 Stat. 326), concerning the United States
regulation of the Pribilof Islands, their native Aleut inhabitants, and

the fur seals, establish a "special relationship" with these plaintiffs

from which a duty is definable.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 21

The parties are in agreement that these two statutes (16 Stat. 180,
36 Stat. 326) obligated the Government to provide for the comfort,
maintenance, and education of the plaintiffs, and this standard than
obligated the Government to supply adequate levels of (1) food, (2) clothing,
(3) housing and furnishings, (4) fuel for heating, (5) sanitation and
utilities (water, sewer, and electricity), (6) medical care, and (7)
education. (Pretrial order, April 7, 1976, at 3, §4a). The parties also
agree that the Act of April 21, 1910, obligated the Government to provide
"fair compensation" to the plaintiffs (id,, at 54b). The parties disagree,
however, as to whether the Government was obligated to provide "fair
compensation" to the plaintiffs during the private lease period, 18701909.

The Act of July 1, 1870, does not explicitly provide for "fair
compensation" but, as previously stated, it does obligate the Government
to provide for "comfort, maintenance, education, and protection." Had
the statute listed only "maintenance, education, and protection," we
might acknowledge some legitimacy in defendant's argument, which appears
to be that any level of support that at least barely sustained life would
be sufficient. However, Congress added the word "comfort," which must be
taken to mean a standard of support higher than that of bare subsistence.
Comfort at least implies a fair reward for labor, so that the energetic

and thrifty can aspire to the acquisition of consumer goods and the

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 22

accumulation of savings. We find support in the contemporary construction
6/
of the 1870 Act.

After the act was passed, but before the lease was granted to the

ACC, the Government indicated that adequate compensation to the Aleuts

would be required under the lease. The Secretary of the Treasury's

public announcement that proposals would be taken from private firms

"for the exclusive right to take fur seals" required that

[i]n addition to the specific terms prescribed in the act,

the successful bidder will be required *** to pay the
natives of the islands for the labor performed by them
such compensation as may be necessary for their support,
under regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the

Treasury.

The lease the ACC signed did not expressly refer to "fair compensation”
but did bind the ACC to accept "all needful rules and regulations which
shall at any time or times hereafter be made by the Secretary of the
Treasury *** for the comfort, maintenance, education, and protection of
the natives of said island.” The ACC acknowledged that the Government
had the right to set compensation, for in January 1872, the company, in

its regulations, stated that

***[t]he Aleutian people living on the islands will be
employed by the company in taking seals for their skins,
and they will be paid for the labor of taking each skin

 

Q] The legislative history of the Act of July 1, 1870, mentions only
obliquely the Aleut natives. Discussion instead centered on possible
revenue to the Government, and length of the lease period, and other

areas (Cong. Globe, élst Cong., 2nd Seas. b944—4946, 5027-5033).

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 23

and delivering the same at the salt-house, forty cents,

coin, until otherwise ordered by the Secretary of the

Treasury. [Def. Ex. E-32, at 78; emphasis supplied]

There is no record, however, of the Secretary of the Treasury taking any
action to approve the 40 cents per skin wage or to set another wage in
the 1870-1889 period.

In the lease of March 12, 1890, granting the NACC the right to take
sealskins for 20 years, th company agreed to pay the native inhabitants
"a fair and just compensation, such as may be fixed by the Secretary of
the Treasury." During the second lease period the Governent did exercise
its right to set the rate of compensation to Aleuts. In 1891 the Secretary
of the Treasury fixed payment at 50 cents per skin. In 1906 compensation
was increased to 75 cents per skin on the order of the Secretary of
Commerce and Labor.Z!

In view of the official actions of the administrative officers
charged with the implementation of the Act of July 1, 1870, it must be
assumed that these officers believed the act gave the Government the
authority to set a level of fair compensation to the Aleuts. Courts

have given great deference to the interpretation of administrative

officers charged with the implementation of a statute. See e.g., Power

 

Reactor Co. v. Electricians, 367 U.S. 396, 408 (1961); HcLaren v.

312225225: 255 U-5- 477: 431 (1921)- The Commission also takes note

 

%i Th Department of Commerce and Labor assumed authority over the islands
1903.

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 1 24

that through the period 1870-1909 Congress appropriated money to, and
conducted special investigations of, the Pribilof Islands operation.

At no time in this period is there any record that Congress disapproved

of the construction given the act by the Secretary of the Treasury
Department or by the Secretary of the Department of Commerce and Labor.

The Comission also takes notice of the unique circumstances on the

Pribilofs at the time of the 1870 Act. The Pribilof Aleuts had no

means of livelihood other than selling their labor to sealing firms. The
creation of a sealing monopoly coupled with no guaranteed fair wage would
mean that the lessees would have been getting a lease to hold the Pribilof
Aleuts, in effect, as indentured servants. We do not believe that Congress
intended such a plan, and believe that the duty to provide "fair compensation“
to the plaintiffs was required in the 1870-1909 period. Thus for the

whole period in question, l870—l946, the United States guaranteed the

Aleut communities fair compensation and maintenance for their contribution

to the fur seal harvest.
Plaintiffs have argued at some length that the guarantee of "fair
compensation" to the Aleuts means that the Aleuts should have received

50 percent of the gross revenues of the sealskin operations over the 76year period. None of the witnesses in this case have disputed the fact
that payments to the Aleuts constituted a very low percentage of the gross

revenues of the sealskin monopoly. Dr. Rogers, defendant's expert,

42 Ind. C1. Com. 1 25

estimated that the Aleuts' share of gross revenues in the 1870-1889
period was only 3.3 percent of the total. Plaintiffs contend that had
the Aleuts been able to bargain equally with the Government, they could
have negotiated for a 50 percent share of the gross revenues of the
sealskin monopoly. Moreover, plaintiffs argue that economic theory
supports this kind of return for labor in a labor intensive operation.

The Commission takes no position on and does not reach the question
of plaintiffs proper bargaining power or the question of which economic
theory is proper. Rather, the Commission finds that on the basis of the
Acts of 1870 and 1910 -- which have been previously determined to be the
sole basis of the Government's obligation to plaintiffs -— plaintiffs are
not entitled to recover 50 percent of the gross revenues. The Comission
believes that when Congress and government agents used the term "fair
compensation" in these statutes or in their interpretation, the meaning
was that the United States obligated itself to provide an adequate wage
for labor performed.

The Commission deems it extremely unlikely that in 1910 Congress
intended to guarantee the Aleuts a 50 percent share of the gross revenue
when the language of the statute, without further explanation, stated
that fair compensation was to be paid. In the 1870 statute Congress
did not even include the term "fair compensation" and did not explicitly
mention compensation at all. If Congress did intend to provide the Aleuts

Vith a percentage of the gross revenues, or allow the Aleuts to bargain

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 26

for a percentage, it seems likely the Congress would have taken steps
to effectuate this procedure rather than remain silent while the Aleuts
received compensation on a very different basis. We do not find in the
statutes creating this "special relationship" any hint that the plaintiffs
have a claim on the entrepreneurial rewards, a share of the equity in the
enterprise, or any degree of ownership of the seals. The United States
obligated itself to treat plaintiffs as fair1y—rewarded employees, but
not as partners.

Extensive expert testimony and economic data have been offered in
an attempt to put specific numbers on what the plaintiffs should have
received as compensation. we have largely adopted plaintiffs‘ "wage
basis" approach to the problem of quantifying what should have been done
for the Pribilof communities, with refinements as explained below and in
the findings. We start from the premise that the Aleut workers should
have been paid for their labor at a rate comparable to that a United
States worker of equivalent skills at that time and place might have
expected to receive. Starting from data on wages received by eastern
United States workers in each year under study, we adjust to reflect our
conclusion from the evidence that the composition of the Aleut work force

was one-half skilled labor and one-half unskilled labor. We further

adjust to reflect the "frontier factor"-—due to the demand for labor in the
Western United States, and even more in Alaska, a wage premium over those

wages paid to an Eastern United States worker has historically been paid.

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 27

we take judicial notice that the recent average of Alaska wages is more
than 45 percent above continental United States wages for production

workers. Since the "frontier factor" exists because of the difficulties

of transportation and commnication from the economy's centers of production
and population, an "Alaska factor" of at least 45 percent must have

existed over the study period of 1870 to 1946. It might be argued for

the same reasons that an additional "Pribilof Islands factor" should also

be applied, but we are unable to find data to support such an attempt at
fine-tuning. We believe the data supports our calculations as to what

fair compensation for the labor performed should have been, or, alternatively, comes close to representing what wage level would have been required
to recruit continental United States workers to perform this labor in the

_8_/
Pribilofs.

Thus calculated, we find the wages that should have been paid to be
$1,732,560.28 for the first lease period, $1,185,148.44 for the second
lease period, and $6,986,706.83 for the government period. The total
18 $9,904,416.

In addition to fair compensation, the 1870 and 1910 acts obligate
the defendant to provide comfort, maintenance, and education to the

plaintiffs. As in the case of other workers in remote sites, such as

 

§/ The standard of comparison used is that of a year's wages, even though

the plaintiffs‘ only compensation often was based solely on the furs taken
during the short sealing season. However, the plan of the enterprise was
that the communities would be maintained on the Pribilofs on a year-round
basis, using the off-season to maintain company and comunity structures
and perform miscellaneous labor. Additional income after the sealing
season was generated by foxing.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 23

loggers, seamen, and Alaska pipeline workers, the obligation undertaken
was to provide "board and lodging." Plaintiffs have offered evidence
through their expert witnesses in an attempt to construct six specific
standards for what should have been provided. We have adopted this
approach for the most part, with changes as explained below and in the
findings.

I. Housing. The Commission determines, in light of the number of
people in each Aleut family and the climatic conditions on the Pribilofs,
that each Aleut family should have been provided with a small, four-room
dwelling during the lease periods, and should have been provided with a
small, five-room dwelling during the government period. The total expense
for housing construction during the period 1870 to 1946 should have been
$445,223 and the maintenance expenses would then have been $239,049. From
the sum of these two numbers 25 percent must be deducted as that portion of
the cost of housing which would have been payments to Aleuts for labor. This
amount has been previously included in the calculations for comgensation.

The cost of housing that should have been provided is $5l3,204:II. Fuel. The Commission finds that in order to keep Aleut cottages

in the lease periods heated properly 75 lbs. of coal were needed each day
in the coldest month of the year. In other months less coal was needed;
amounts were calculated using climatological data. This quantity of coal

was needed because the type of stoves provided the Aleuts were inefficient,

because the Pribilofs have a very cold climate, and because a low quality

coal was supplied to the Aleuts.

 

2] See findings of fact Nos. 177-188.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 1 29

During the government period the average fuel need per family in
the coldest month of the year rose to ll2.5 lbs. per day. This increase
in coal need was due to the construction of a number of larger Aleut
dwellings. The value of the coal that should have been provided in the

$2]
76-year period was $1.051s204III. Food, Clothing, Household Furnishings. The Commission believes

the Pribilof Aleuts should have received the same level of food, clothing,
and essential household furnishings (beds and stoves, for example) as
were enjoyed by an average wage-earning family in the lower 48 states.
Statistics in the record disclose expenditures for food, clothing, and

household furnishings by American families for 26 of the years in question.

These figures were adjusted to reflect the price level for each year of
11/

the study period and an average found from the 26 series for each year.
Each year's average expenditure was then multiplied by the number of

Aleut families to give an expenditure value. The total expenditure on

food, clothing, and essential household furnishings from 1870 to 1946
12/
should have been $3,822,252.

- 

12/ See finding of fact Nos. 189-199.

11/ The resulting figure is a retail, continental United States average.
Plaintiffs adjust their similar figure downward to get a wholesale figure,
then upward for transportation to the Pribilofs. We are not persuaded of

the reliability of the adjustment factors and decline to apply them; they
are mostly offsetting.

12/ _S__e_e_2_ finding of fact Nos. zoo-210.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 30

IV. School Construction and Maintenance, 1870-1909. The record

shows that the Aleuts should have been provided with adequate schoolhouses on both St. Paul and St. George during the lease periods.
(Plaintiffs do not claim damages for educational deprivation other than
lack of proper facilities in the lease periods.) The cost of constructing

13/
and maintaining school buildings would have been $8,200.

V. Water Supply. Water should have been piped to central locations
in the villages of St. Paul and St. George in the lease periods. In the
government period water lines should have been extended to each Aleut

14/
dwelling. The estimated total cost of a proper water supply is $20,137.

VI. Sanitation System. During the lease periods each Aleut family
should have had the use of an Outhouse. During the government period
sewage lines should have been connected with Aleut houses. The total

15/
cost of an adequate sanitation system would have been $10,140.

Were there profits available to have paid this fair standard of

compensation to the Aleut communities? In answering this inquiry,

defendant argues that only the profits to the United States should be
considered, that no damages are due for years in which the United States

made no profit, and that any revenues that were received as a "tax"

cannot be used in computing profit.

___3_/ See finding of fact Nos. 215-218.
lg] See finding of fact Nos. 211, 212.
15/ ee finding of fact Nos. 213, 214.

a2 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 31

Defendant's position that only the profits of the United States are

to be considered is already partially answered, we think, in the 1973
Court of Claims opinion. The court states that "[w]here the Government
assumes such an obligation [to an Indian tribe, by virtue of a special
relationship], it is liable even if third parties actually inflict the
injuries" (202 Ct. Cl. at 198). We think this statement applies to
government liability for profits realized by third parties as well as
for government responsibility for injuries inflicted by third parties.
This position is particularly apt in this instance, where the United
States had ultimate control over the sealskin trade and its revenues,
and where the very terms of the leases, under which the private parties

16/
realized their profits, were drawn up and signed by the United States.

The court also directed that "*** the Comission should allow the
profits of the sealskin monopoly to be shown, with a view to determining
whether they sufficed for adequate protection, care, and education of
the Aleuts, as well as to pay the costs and reasonable profits to others
in the chain of distribution" (202 Ct. C1., at 200). The court had
previously indicated its understanding that private companies were

involved in the Pribilof sealing operations (id., at 198). Therefore,

 

.19] The terms of the leases the United States signed were not favorable
to the United States (see Def. Ex. R, at 27-30). As defendant's own
expert witness writes, "This was the age of the post-Civil War ‘robber
barons,’ but even in that context the net return [to the ACC] appears
Very high" (Def. Ex. R, at 29). This expert also states that to a large
extent the Government surrendered its responsibilities for assuring the
best financial arrangement for the United States and perpetuation of the
resource yield (Def. Ex. R, at 31). The defendant should not be able to
Escape liability because of its own improvident dealings. Defendant's
contention that the profits of the private lessees should not be considered because these profits would not have been available to benefit the
natives is erroneous in light of the above and is based upon a misreading
of the court's opinion (gee 202 Ct. Cl. at 200).

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 32

the very term "sealskin monopoly" indicates that the court desired the
profits of all the parties involved in the sealskin monopoly to be shown,
not solely the profits of the United States.

Defendant's second position, that the United States should be
liable for damages only in years when the United States realized net
profits,is untenable in light of the court's finding that profits should
include those realized by third parties. Moreover, there is no foundation
for defendant's position that profits should be determined on a year-byyear basis. The court directed that the profits of the sealskin monoply
be shown. This indicates an analysis of profits over the 76-year period
as a whole, not the extraordinarily exacting task of computing profits
for each of the 76 years individually. In fact, the two leases were for

20 years each, and the lessees might reasonably expect profitability only

over the term of the lease, not each year.

Defendant also contends that profits to the United States cannot
include tax revenues received by the United States. This is a claim
unsupported by any authority. The court has directed that profits should
be shown. The court has not indicated that direct revenues should not
be counted towards profits solely because they were termed a "tax."

The monies that defendant would have the Commission exclude from its
purview directly derived from the Pribilof operations, and Provision

for collecting these funds was includes in the leases the Government

signed with the private lessees. We see no reason a direct revenue of

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 33

the sealskin monopoly should not be included because of what it is
called as it enters the possession of the Government.

The commission is of the opinion, however, that some revenues and
expenditures are so indirectly related to the Pribilof Islands sealskin
monopoly that they should not be considered for the purpose of determining
the profits of the monopoly. For instance, plaintiff contends that the
import duties on Pribilof sealskins imported into the United States for
sale after d:ess'ng and dying in Crest Britain should be considered
revenue of the sealskin monopoly. we disagree. Import duties are a
general revenue—producing levy imposed by the United States on many
articles. Some Pribilof sealskins were shipped to the United States
after they were finished and made ready for sale in London. Presumably
the Government collected duties on these skins, but this was after the
product was divorced from the sealskin-taking enterprise. The Commission
feels that these duties have too attenuated a link to the original sealskin operations to be treated as its revenues:£Z/

For a similar reason, the Commission believes to be faulty defendant's
contention that the government's expense of patrolling Alaskan waters

should be treated as an expense of the sealskin monopoly. It is true

that the Government assigned various vessels to patrol the Bering Sea

'13-‘

   

ll] Estimation of revenues from duties would also be extremely

speculative given the information provided. See finding of fact No.
73. footnote 14.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 34

and other Alaskan waters, and it is true that these vessels spent a
portion of their tim in activities related to the protection of the
Pribilof seal herd. The Commission feels, however, that this type of
Governmental law~enforcement activity is one characteristically borne
by the nation as a whole, and that the Government would have patrolled

Alaskan waters regardless of the existence of the Pribilof fur seal

18/
herd. Therefore, the cost of patrolling Alaskan waters will not be

treated as an expenditure of the sealskin monopoly.

The profit of the parties to the sealskin monopoly will now be
19/

stated, as computed in the findings of fact.

The profit to the private lessee, the ACC, during the first lease
period,l870-1889, was $18,697,869 (revenues were $27,473,668 and expenses

$8,775,799). Profit to the Government was $5,851,360 (revenues were
20/

$6,010,566 and expenditures $159,206).—

lg] §£g_f1nding of fact Nos. 78, 79, 80, 118, 119, 120, 155. Even though
the Commission has not attempted to arrive at a comprehensive figure for
Government patrol costs in the 1870-1946 period, it is clear that those
costs allocable to protection of the Pribilof seal herd are far lower
than defendant's estimates. '§gg finding of fact Nos. 79, 80, 120. After
1911 pelagic sealing declined and therefore the necessity of government
patrols to protect the fur seals did also. §gg_finding of fact No. 138.

12/ The findings of fact which accompany this opinion examine in detail
all the revenues and expenditures of the 76-year period. Only the results
of those computations will be restated here. All figures are computed to

the nearest dollar.

_£Q/ See finding of fact Nos. 53 through 77.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 35

The profit to the private lessee, the NACC, during the second
lease period, l890—l909,was $4,422,776 (revenues were $9,720,128 and
expenditures $5,297,352). The profit to the Government in this period
was $2,866,506 (revenues were $3,460,675 and expenses, $594,169).£l/

The profit to the Government during the period of government
operation was $14,579,924 (revenues were $44,352,143, expenditures
$26,320,486, and net treaty obligations under various agreements with
Japan, Russia and Canada were $3,45l,733).££/ Total profit over the
entire period 1870-1946 is the sum of these separate profits: $46,418,399.

The remaining task in this case is to determine the value of
compensation, goods, and services provided to the Pribilof Aleuts by
defendant and defendant's lessees. Although the records are not
complete, there is considerable agreement between plaintiffs and
defendant as to what was expended. By comparing what was provided
with what should have been provided, the Commission will establish

damages, if any. As computed in the findings of fact which accompany

this opinion, the value of compensation, goods, and services provided

 

Zif See finding of fact Nos. 88 through 115.

22/ See fining of fact Nos. 126-156. In finding No. 115, items 6 and 7
were included as expenses. other items in No. 115 were either included
in other figures or deemed to have too tenuous a connection with the

sealskin monopoly and therefore excluded.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 36

53/
in those areas in.which the plaintiffs claim damages is as follows:

Co ensati
Lease Periods $ 972,294

 

Government Period 1,128,515
Housing

Lease Periods 37,437

Government Period V 79,665
Food and Clothing

Lease Periods 320,621

Government Period 1,264,001
Fuel . .

Lease Periods A 105,760

Government Period 173.445
Educational Builgiggg

Lease Periods 3.750

Government Period 15,773
Water 3311 A

Lease Periods g Nfa _

Government Eeriod 12,45D
en 1 _ L

Leash Periods N/Ad

Government Period‘ 3;011

 

uggj These figures are teien from finding of fact No. 167-172 and 174-176.

The Commission is sate of allegations that not all of the funds for

compensation, goods. and services said to have been spent on the Aleuts
were indeed so spent. However; there is no basis in the evidence for
selecting any amount less than what the official reports show the Aleuts

were to have received.

The Commission has totaled the value of goods and services provided
without regard to the quality or type of the goods or services. The
Commission realizes that some food (or other good or service) may have
been of very poor quality or o£_a type disliked by the.Aleuts, but no
discount has head made for these tactors.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 37

Without further information, the money, goods, and services that
were furnished to the Aleuts might be presumed, erroneously, to be enough
to meet some standard of obligation. What the figures do not show, by
themselves, is the sheer misery in which the Pribilof Aleuts lived. The
record shows that compensation to the Aleuts was absolutely minimal and
that the Aleuts suffered terribly because of a lack of proper housing,
fuel, food, clothing, water, and sanitation. The Government was obligated
to provide for "comfort," but "wretchedness" and "anguish" are the words
that more accurately describe the condition of the Pribilof Aleuts.

The accompanying findings of fact, drawing upon reports of contemporary
observers, recite many instances of hardship and suffering; this evidence
alone mandates the conclusion that the United States did not do for

plaintiffs what should have been done.
In order to reach a final damage figure in each area the difference

between what should have been provided and what was provided will be calculated. The Commission is of the opinion that the Acts of 1870 and 1910

obligated the Government to provide adequate goods and services in addition
to fair compensation. A just result decrees that on this remote, wholly~
Owned government reservation-—where the Aleuts worked and made profits for
the United States, but were never allowed to acquire any property rights

01 any of the legal protections of either private or federal employees-the Government should have provided living expenses as well as a fair

Wage.

42 Ind. c1. Com. 1 33

Comparing what should have been expended on the Aleut plaintiffs

against what was actually spent reveals, in summary, the following:

Compensation
Standard Expenditure
Actual Expenditure

Deficit

Housing
Standard Expenditure
Actual Expenditure
Deficit

Fuel
Standard Expenditure

Actual Expenditure
Deficit

Food, Clothing
Standard Expenditure

Actual Expenditure
Deficit

Water Supply

$ 9,904,416

2,100,809
$ 7,803,607

$ 513,204
117,102
$ 396,102

$ 1,061,204

279,205
$ 781,999

S 3,822,252

1,584,622
$ 2,237,630

Standard Expenditure $ 20,137

Actual Expenditure 12,450

Deficit $ 7,687
Sanitation System

Standard Expenditure $ .l0,l40

Actual Expenditure 3,011

Deficit $ 7,129
Educational Buildings

Standard Expenditure $ 8,200

Actual Expenditure 2,750

Deficit $ 5,450
Total

Sum of Standard Expenditures $15,339,552

Sum of Actual Expenditures 4,099,949
Difference $11,239,604

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 39

Computing what the plaintiffs should have received as compared to
what they did receive, the Commission finds that plaintiffs are entitled
to damages in the amount of $11,239,604. In computing these damages the
Commission is mindful of the Court of Claims‘ instruction that damages
should not exceed an amount precluding "reasonable profits to others in
the chain of distribution" of the sealskin monopoly. The Commission has
found that profits to the Government and its lessees were $46,418,399 over
the 76-year period. In the first lease period, from profits of $24,549,193
to the lessee and the United States, the additional amount of $2,563,483
should have been used to compensate and support the plaintiffs. During
the second lease period, with profits of $7,289,282, $1,428,456 more
would have met the standards that the plaintiffs should have received.
During the period of government operation, profits of $14,579,924 would
have created an ample fund from which to draw the additional $7,247,665
needed to adequately compensate and support the plaintiffs.

The Commission believes that an award of $11,239,604 leaves abundant
profits to others in the chain of distribution and therefore the award is
well within the mandate of the Court of Claims.

The odd-dollar figure of our final judgment implies a precision in
fact-finding that would be difficult to attain. Many decisions on data
and thousands of calculations have been made to give proper weight to the
mass of evidence produced here. Although every effort has been made to

Buard against it, it is possible that arithmetical errors may have crept

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 40

into the chain of calculations. Had we the power of an ordinary jury

in a civil case to integrate mentally all the evidence into one conclusive
figure as our verdict on damages, we would have chosen a number very near
to that expressed above, but rounded up or down. The path we have chosen
to reach our judgment adequately documents the reasons for our judgment

as required by statute and case law. (See Seminole Indians v. United

 

States, 196 Ct. Cl. 639 (1972).) Even if minor errors of calculation

 

were shown we would not be disposed to modify our result; it represents
a fair judgment on the whole distressing record.

Plaintiffs have built their case, and our judgment rests, on selected
quantifiable aspects of the United States‘ management of the Pribilof
Islands. No numbers have been put on the effects of the policy of
educational deprivation apparently aimed at keeping the Aleuts from so
much knowledge of the outside world as would excite their aspirations
for a better lot. Damages were not sought for the consequences of
malnourishment and disease which seemed for a time to have doomed the
population to extinction. And no appropriate dollar figure is suggested

or suggests itself to compensate for this history of subjugation and

exploitation. Within the legal guidelines that constrain the case,

however, we find that our judgment fairly reflects the whole record.
The nature of the plaintiffs’ claim is such that it would appear

that any offsets the Government might assert have already been presented

and credited as part of the case-in-chief. we will not, however,

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 41

prematurely foreclose the defendant's right to assert offsets. Therefore,

an interlocutory order will be entered herewith awarding the plaintiffs

damages in the amount of $11,239,604, and providing for any further

proceedings which may be necessary under these dockets.

 
   

Richard W. Yarboro gh, Commiee ner

COIICUI 2

I’ 1.7’ '

, , I I . ,
 ‘ ‘._.4-4’/ M“

me K. Kuykeda 1., vi’ man

J n Ty'Vance, Comissioner

W‘
‘l..IA4... .1’

Margaret . Pierce, Commiseioner

.4. re 2/ 1! ’

an

Brantley Blue, Cemniseioner

