Dec. 27, 1951
BEFORE THE INDIAN CL; CO1-MISSION

THE TEXAS-CHEROKEES, and
ASSOCIaTE BANDS, on the
relation of W. H. ieeler,
Homer L. Smith, Frank M.
Carr, Paul Johnson and
Joe Rogers, members of its
Executive Committee,

Plaintiffs,
v_ Docket No. 26
THE UNITED S ATES OF smsslcn,

Defendant.

\uI\../\./‘*~.J\a-’\~J\./\uI\.a'\-./\..l\.:'\u/\-J\~/

Appearances:

Wilfred Hearn, with whom were
Raymond B. Thomas, Harley Vancleave
and George E. Norvell, '
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Jules H. Sigal and Ralph A. Barney,
with whom was Assistant Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech,

Attorneys for Defendant.

CtiNION OF THE COEMISSION

PER CURIsM: The petition herein purports to state a claim on behalf

of a group of Indians who style themselves “The Texas-Cherokees and

.3.-‘L. .
n_i.I.‘ Associate Bands.“ The claim asserted is f‘?

value of 1,640,000
acres of land located in the present Stat. of Texas and alleged to

have been acquired from the Mexican United States and/or the Republic

of Texas.

690a

690b

On August 29, 1949 the Commission.made an order directing that
there first be determined whether the plaintiffs are entitled to sue,
and that such issue be raised by formal pleading. Thereafter, defendant
filed its answer and hearings were had on that limited issue, at which
hearings evidence was offered by both parties on the question of plaintiffs’
capacity to sue and on the character of the claim asserted in.the petition.
Briefs were filed and the case has been submitted on the briefs, however,
the briefs were confined to the limited issue of plaintiffs‘ capacity to
sue.

Upon consideration of the question thus raised by the pleadings and
the evidence offered by the parties with respect thereto, and upon the
claim set forth in the petition, the Commission is of the opinion that
the question of the capacity of the plaintiffs to maintain this claim
is so closely related to the character of the claim asserted that it L
should be considered in connection.thereuith so that the Commission
can determine the issue of law and fact relating to the right of
plaintiffs to recover. (Section 22(f) of Rules of Procedure.)

The evidence already offered by the parties may stand without reoffering it at future hearings and either party may offer such additional evidence as may be deemed necessary on the question of the capacity
of plaintiffs to sue and upon the claim a1'egcd in the petition.

We believe, further, that inasmuch as some evicencc has already

been received on the merits of the claim set forth in the petition, the

690c
-3‘merits of the claim should be raised by answer rather than a motion
attacking the sufficiency of the pleading or by motion for summary
judgment; also, the defendant may include in its amended answer the
allegations raising the same issue now raised by its special answer,
filed under said order.

Counsel must not assume that by enlarging the scope of the issues
in the above case there has been a change in the policy of the Commission
to first determine, in appropriate cases, the question of claimants‘
capacity to prosecute a claim; we simply believe that because of the
special situation presented here and the unique problems which confront
us both as to the claimants‘ capacity to sue and the kind of claim

presented we should consider both problems at the same time.

