»., _ =
|‘l I I I . ._I ‘
'.T:;E_§§T§"P

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392
BEFORE THE IEDIAN CLAIMS COEHISSION

THE o2~m=;A TRIBE or NEBRAS}~'.A, mm was LARSON,
CHARLES J. SPRINGER, JOHN F. TURNER AND
HENRY F. FREEMONT, E}; REL. OIJEAHA TRIBE or
NEBRASKA, cram. TRIBE mm 1‘z_a.*1*:o:~: II~ICl.UDI1—3G
ALL GROUPS, BANDS AND I~EI-‘EBERS or SAID OI~iA.HA
TRIBE AIID NATI om,

Dockets No. 22S;A,

V. No. 22§—D, to be
known as No. 225

Consolidated

)

)

)

3

)

)

)

Plaintiffs, )
)

3

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, ;
)

Defendant.

Decided: February ll, 1960

Appearances:

I. S. Weissbrodt, with whom
were David Cobb and.Abe'w.

,Weissbrodt, Attorneys for
Plaintiffs.

Ralph A! Barney,'with whom
..cwas'Mr: Assistant Attorney

General Perry'w. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

0PINION_9§ Egg COMMISSION

‘Watkins, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

‘The proceeding before the Commission is a joint motion by the

LO?

No. 225-8, No. 22540,

Plaintiffs and Defendant for approval of the proposed compromise agreement designated, "Stipulation of Settlement” which is set forth in full

4in the Findings.

The agreement is intended to settle Plaintiffs? claims against the
United States set forth in Dockets numbered 22SmA, 225«B, 225-C, and
22S—D. For the purpose of this present consideration the compromise

settlement proceeding is designated Docket Noe 225 Consolidatedo

called upon to approve covering the primary or basic claims of Indianclaimants against the United States pursuant to the Indian Claims

Commission Act, it seems appropriate and timely to make some observation

on the Commission's responsibility and the procedures which it shall
follow with respect to consideration of compromise settlements.

The last paragraph in Section 15 of Public Law ?26 (79th Congress,
2nd Session), establishing this Commission reads as follows:

The Attorney General or his assistants shall represent the
United States in all claims presented to the Commissic

shall have authority, with the approval of the Commission, to
compromise any claim presented to the Commissiono Any such
compromise shall be submitted by the Commission to the Congress
as a part of its report as provided in section 21 thereof

in the same manner as final determinations of the Commission,
land shall be subject to the provisions of section 22 hereofo

Pertinent provisions of section 21 of the Act as far as this

discussion is concerned are:

In any claim, after the proceedings have been finally concluded,
the Commission shall promptly submit a report to Congresso The
Report to Congress shall contain (1) the f nal determination

of the Commission; (2) s * s, and (3) a statement of how each
Commissioner voted upon the final determination of the claim.

L08

8 Ind. C1. Com. 392

;) whether there are any just grounds for relief of the Claimant, and
if so, the amount thereof; (b) whether there are any allowable offsets,
counterclaims, or other deductions, and, if so the amount thereof, (3)
a statement of its reasons for its findings and conclusions."

These are pertinent provisions of the Act which in our opinion
govern the procedures with respect to the disposal of claims which
have been filed with the Commission whether they are to be litigated
to a conclusion or concluded by way of compromise settlement. No

matter how the final determination is arrived-at, whether by a contest

or by an approved compromise, it has to be reported promptly to the.
Congress after the proceedings have been finally concluded; and it is

provided in section 22 of the Act that:

Sec. 22. (a) when the_report of the Commission determining

‘ any claimant tote entitled to recover has been filed with
Congress, such report shall have the effect of a final
judgment of the Court of Claims, and there is hereby authorized

to be appropriated such sums as are necessary to pay the final
determination of the Commission.



But no specific procedures governing the presentation of_compromises
of claims to the Commission, or how it shall proceed to a determination
of compromises when they are presented are outlined in the Act or in
the General Rules of Procedure adopted by the Commission.

In view of the legislative history of the Act creating the Commission
it appears that we must give more than a perfunctory consideration to
proposed compromises; a mere rubber stamping of the agreements will not

do. Also, it is conceivable that there may be some compromises which

. the Commission would feel duty bound to disapprove.

L09

8 Ind, Cl. Com. 392

It is not our purpose in this opinion to review at length the legislative history of the Act; but to point out that the primary objective
of the Act was to provide a tribunal where and by which all of the claims
against the United States, based on grounds defined in the Act, on behalf

of any Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of American Indians

residing within the territorial limits of the United States or Alaksa,

would be fairly heard and determined finally and for all time.

The claims were to be those which occurred prior to and including
the date the Act became effective, and appeals from the decisions of
the tribunal could be taken to the Court of Claims and by'a writ of
Certiorari to the Supreme Court from any decision of the Court of
Claims. p

The adoption of an act of the kind finally enacted in l9h6 had been
advocated for many years principally by Indians and numerous Indian S .
rights associations to right the wrongs which the Indians claimed they
had suffered in their dealings with the United States, dating back to
the early days of this Republic. ‘These claimed wrongs run all the way
from securihg of treaties and contracts with Indians by'fraudulent,
or forceful means, failure to pay a fair price for lands taken from
Indians either by treaty or by force, failure to properly and fairly
adjudicate Indian claims by some of the Committees, Boards, or
Commissions which had been created over the years to help adjudicate
Indian claims, trespass on Indian lands by United States agents or
by its white citizens, failure to give an honest accounting for monies

or other property held in trust by the United States for Indians,

1410

failure on the part of the United States in its negotiations with
Indians to deal with proper representatives of the Indian tribes in
question, to general claims based on the alleged failure of the United
States to deal honorably, fairly, and equitably with Indians.

The Act of l9h6 permits the adjudication of substantially all
types of claims enumerated in the preceding paragraph, in addition
to some others not enumerated, even to the extent of allowing recovery on moral grounds.

Typical grounds for recovery under the act are asserted in the
original petition in Docket No. 225 in the instant case in paragraphs
lb, 15, and l6, (later the claims in Docket 225 were separately stated

by the order of the Commission, in Dockets 225-A, 2254B, 225-0, and

IEZS-D):

4 i lb. Upon information and beliefs plaintiffs allege that
defendant procured the execution of said treaties by misrepresentation and fraud:

(a) By failing to disclose and explain the true meaning of the language used in the treaties to those executing
the same on behalf of the Indians, those executing the same

on behalf of the Indians being unlettered and unfamiliar with
the use of the English language and not comprehending the full
meaning of the language used.

(b) By secret instructions given to the Commissioner
sent to negotiate treaties.

(C) By special inducements of lands and goods.

(d) By promise given to the Indians that they would
be permitted to remain in possession of the lands described

pin the treaty.

(e) By promises to permit them to continue to hunt and
fish in ceded territory.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

(f) By making consideration payable at the will and
pleasure of the President and Congress.

(g) The treaties were negotiated with and signed by

persons who were not duly chosen and recognized leaders of

the Plaintiff tribe but were persons designated by the defendant for the purpose of negotiating the treaties of cession for
the reason that the proper leaders had refused to treat with
defendant for a cession of said lands. The parties executing
said treaties were without authority of the tribe and acted

contrary to the wishes and intentions of the authorized leaders.
and members of the tribe.

15. Upon information and belief plaintiffs allege that
defendant procured the execution of said treaties through
dealings as aforesaid which were not fair and honorable.

16. The consideration promised to be paid to the Indians

for their cessions amounted to a small fraction of the value
of the lands ceded and constituted and was an unconscionable
consideration and represented a taking contrary to the Constitution and laws of the United States.

In this case, as in others before the Commission, some of the

charges of fraud on the part of agents of the United States in the
negotiations of treaties with Indians having to do with the cession
of Indian lands, have been found to be true, and recovery has been
allowed on that basis.

Situations of this kind raise problems in connection with the
approval of compromise settlements - settlements which in some respects
resemble treaties. These problems are among those with which we have
to deal in this kind of a proceeding.

There is also the question of whether-or not, in View of the long
and unfortunate history of Indian claims, there is any real substance
to the fear that no matter how nany times the claims are adjudicated

they never will be permanently settled.

LL12

u
3‘!

Jyon which recovery could be allowed by the Commission which was set up

5 Ind. C1. Com. 392

This thought was expressed by the late President Franklin D.
Roosevelt in a letter to the late Secretary of Interior, Harold Ickes,
in l9hl when the Indian Claims legislation was before Congress.

Said Mr. Roosevelt:

If Indian claims could be disposed of with finality through
"the establishment of an Indian Claims Commission, my attitude
might be somewhat different. The past history, however, of
these claims demonstrates the futility of any hope that this

purpose would be thus accomplished. Final action by the
Claims Commission would be no bar to the representation of

the claim to the Congress by the dissatisfied Indians or
their attorneys.

The contrary View was adopted by the Congress when it enacted the
Indian Claims Commission Act. In order to do everything possible to

satisfy the ends of justice and to bring to an end the long drawn out
Indian claims litigation, Congress enumerated a wide range of grounds
for the purpose of making investigations, holding hearings, and finally
adjudicating these claims.

CTo make sure there would be no legitimate Indian claim left without
its day in court, a new ground for recovery was added as a catchnallg that

ground encompassed all “claims based upon fair and honorable dealings that
are not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity."

And again, to make sure that the Commission would have ample powers

I

to fairly, justly, and finally render judgment on these claims, the
Commission'was authorized to investigate claims on its own initiative

through an investigation division which it was directed to establish.

OThe evidence gathered by this division was for the use, not only of the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

Commission, but it was to be made available to the Indians concerned

and to any interested federal agency. (Sec. l3(b) of the Act.)

The Commission claims no prophetic powers, but it does believe if

the claims are fairly and carefully tried when they are litigated, or
if they are settled by compromise, and all reasonable safeguards are‘
placed around the compromise negotiations and proceedings to see to it
that the agreements are fair, understood, and approved by a majority
of the Indian tribe members, that the Indians will accept the final
judgments in good faith.

But if the Commission has done its full duty and the right to
review on appeal the final determination has been exhausted, then if
the Indians should still be dissatisfied, there is little likelihood
that their claims will receive further consideration. As a matter of
law they should be estopped; and the conscience of the American people
will at last feel the Indians have been fairly treated and the matter
should be closed. These are our beliefs and cur hopes.

Compromise settlements of controversies hav- historically been
favored in this country as a matter of public policy.
we are in full agreement. In fact, compromises are the best hope for
the early settlement of hundreds of claims still pending before the
Commission after nearly thirteen years of activity.

Indian claims, many of which originated more than a century ago,

are difficult to prepare for presentation to the Commission, and it

with this policy

is almost as difficult to prepare a defense against them. Then there are

the matters of trial, preparation of briefs, consideration by the

211};

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

vCommission, rendering of judgments, possible appeals, perhaps retrial
if the Commission is reversed, or at least additional hearings, etc.
All these activities are time consuming and require large expenditures
of money. The most unfortunate part of all is the long delay in
bringing these claims to a conclusion. Many of the original petitioners
in claims filed, as well as some of the attorneys involved, have passed
on to their eternal rewards before their claims were finally adjudicated.
The legal maxim that, "justice delayed is often justice denied," seems
appropriate at this point.
with all this in mind we urge that more compromises be entered into

in situations where they are possible of accomplishment.

‘We now come to the application of our observations to the motion

~~§or approval of the “Compromise Stipulation” in Docket No. 225 Consolidated.

. J’

‘“§hen the "Compromise Stipulation“ was filed with the Commission counsel
for the petitioners and the defendant were advised of the views of the
Commission with respect to safeguards which should be used in connection

with compromises through their various stages from negotiations to final

approval by the Ccmmission. Counsel gave excellent cooperation in carrying

out our suggestions for which we commend them.

A hearing on the record of the joint motion praying for approval of

the compromise settlement was held by the Commission at which oral and

documentary evidence was received in support The

of the compromise.
Chairman, Vice Chairman and the Secretary of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska

were among the witnesses. -The Findings of Fact outline all the evidence

received.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

Having heard and considered the evidence submitted and the arguments
made by counsel in Docket No. 2254A, which was carried to a decision, the
Commission became informed with respect to the facts and the law involved
in Docket No. 225-A and to a limited extent with respect to Docket numbers
22558, 225-C and 22S—D.

In the instant case all requirements we have laid down elsewhere in
this Opinion with respect to compromises have been complied with by the
parties to this litigation.

Under these circumstances and in view of the Findings of Fact entered
herein, we are of the opinion that the compromise settlement is fair to all
the parties of this action now denominated No. 22§—A Consolidated.

‘With all the foregoing discussions, law, and background in mind, the
following steps and requirements in general should be followed, until such
time as the Commission has indicated otherwise, in the matter of the approval or com romise settlements:

No. 1.

On the Part of the Petitioners}, -The original compromise agreement should be signed by the Tribal
Council Chairman or other officials properly designated to do so, by“
individual petitioners who are acting in a representative capacity, by
all attorneys whose contracts of representation with petitioners have
been approved by the Secretary of Interior and who have a contingent
interest for attorney fees in the compromise settlement. Signed duplicates
of the original agreements by individual petitioners and attorneys, and

officials of organized tribes may be substituted as evidence of approval.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

when the petitioners are all individuals acting in a representative
capacity, and one or more of them become unable to act, either by death
or for other reasons, then upon proper application the Commission will
allow the substitution of new petitioners who have been properly nominated by the Indian tribe involved. In the event one individual is the
petitioner in a representative capacity, these procedures may be modified
to meet that situation.

Deceased attorneys of record should be represented by their duly
appointed legal representatives. (Surviving attorneys of record should
anticipate the necessity of meeting this requirement either before negotiations for settlement are begun or soon thereafter. This requirement
should not work a hardship because distributions of the attorney fees and

allowable expenses in any event are ordinarily paid only to the estate of

.3
fthe deceased attorney through the legal representative.)

-1- /On the Part of the Defendant:

Compromise agreement should be signed by the Attorney General or
someone acting in his behalf.
No. 2. ‘Filing with the Commission a joint motion of the parties together
with the original compromise settlement, praying for the approval of the
compromise and for the setting of a date for hearing the motion.‘
No. 3. On the date set an open hearing will be held by the Commission.
No. b. At the hearing both oral and documentary evidence will be received by the Commission.

The Petitioners should present as witnesses: If an organized tribe

is appearing as petitioner, the Tribal Chairman, the Secretary of the

hl?

8 Ind. c1. Com. 392 1,15

Tribe or Tribal Council, and in addition, any other Tribal members the
petitioners desire to have testify. If petitioners are individual Tribal
members who appear in behalf of the tribe, at least two should attend as
witnesses. L

The Commission will require evidence from these witnesses of what
has been done by them or the attorneys for petitioners to acquaint tribal
members with the provisions of the compromise agreement. Other appropriate
information may be required.

The attorneys for petitioners and the defendant will be required to
make appropriate statements with respect to the settlement.

Documentary evidence required will consist of resolutions from

th the Tribe and Tribal Council approving the proposed compromise settle\

ment; and authorizing their Chairman or other officials to Sign and execute
the compromise in their behalf. All proceedings connected with the calling
and holding of the meetings of the Tribe and the Tribal Council shall be
fully authenticated, as shall be the signatures of the necessary officials
signing the resolutions and the compromise agreement.

A letter of approval of the Compromise Agreement signed by the Secretary of the Interior or by someone duly authorized to act for him is

required.

The same procedures should be followed with respect to compromises
of offsets when sums involved are substantial.

The foregoing outlined steps and requirements seem to be basic and
necessary to carry out fully the purposes of the Act, but unusual and

unexpected circumstances may exist, not anticipated at this time, which

8 Ind. 01. Com. 392 _ 519

cjonceivably could cause undue hardships to the parties to a compromise
agreement, if these procedures were rigidlv enforced. If any such
situations should occur, the Commission will hear counsel for the parties
with respect to any modifications that may properly be allowed.

Based on the foregoing, a final order of determination will be

entered in conformity thereto.

"Arthur V . Watkins
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

 M. Holt a

Associate Commissioner

