BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAB-S COMMISSION

THE CI-IINOOK TRIBE AND B!-KN-138
OF INDIANS, ~
Petitioner,

vs . ‘Doc lcet No . 2334

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\.,.l\L..-d’\u.al‘\-...J\~...d'\.,.I\—..lN»...I\_./\_./

Defendant.
- Decided: April 16, 1958

FINDINGS _g§*_ mar

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

Historical

1. Probably the first known white=contact with the Indians in
the vicinity of the mouth of the Columbia river occurred in 1792
when Captain Robert.Gray crossed the bar of the Columbia and anchored
at the entrance to that stream. (01. Ex. 7, pp. 1;, 5). The best early
accounts of these Indians are to be foundgin the Lewis and -Clark
journals (1805). They state that "The Ellamucks, Clatsops, Chinnooks,
and Cathlamahs, the four neighbouring nations with whom we ham»...  ti:-'."‘-"ii.
most intercourse, preserve a general resemblance in person, .=ire:::.s:.s-3 a:=.:2c3..
manners. -3% %’c -1- The Clatsops and other nations at the mouth of 
Columbia have visited us with great freedom, -2- -31- -1'-. To   ‘L
quiries they answer with great intelligence, and the conversation rarely
slackens, since there is a constant-discussion of the events, and trade,

and politics, in the little but active circle of Killamucks, 

Cathlamahs, 1~Iah}c°Lacums, and Chinnooks. '=“«‘- -3% -:i- Thus, among   

6 17'?

and Chinooks, who live upon fish and roots, which the women are equally

expert with the ‘men in procuring, the former have a rank and influence

very rarely found among Indians." (Pet. Ex. 7, pp. 6-13; see also

Def. k. 511, p. 7). These journals locate the Clatsops as residing
on the south side of the Columbia and a few miles along the southeast
coast on both sides of Pointilidams. (Def. Ex. 13,, p. 33).

2. Lewis and Clark wrote of visiting a village of four houses
inhabited by a people calling themselves "War-ci-a-cum (War-ki-a-cuI:1) ,"
(Def. Ex. 142 - editorial note states these people were ”a. Chinookan
tribe, apparently now extinct“) and of being visited by Indians who
called themselves Calt har mar (Def. Ex. 1:2, p. 21?, editorial note
says this is "another extinct Chinookan tribe") . on arriving in what
is now Baker ‘s Bay, Lewis and Clark tell of being visited by Indians of
the "Wor}d.acum nation“ who came down to sell wappatoo and mention
thatithe Indians from the village below call themselves "Chinnooks."
They further wrote, "This Chinnook Nation is about 1:00 souls inhabid
the countrey on the small rivers which run into the bay below us and
on the Ponds to the NM. of us, live principally on fish and roots,
they are well armd with fusees and sometimes kill Elk Deer and fowl.
% -4- -31- The principal chief of the Chinnooks and his family came up to
see us this evening." (Def. Ex. L2, pp. 229-230). or the ,Clatsop,
Clark wrote ,, “This nation is the remains of a large nation destroyed by
the Smallpox or Some other [diseas_e.7 which those people were not
acquainted with, they Speak the Same language of the Chinooks and
resemble them in every respect except that of Stealing, -$9 -1- 61-."

(Id. at p. 2&5).

These explorers gave medals to two chiefs of the

Chinook, Com com mo ly and Chil-lar-la-wil. Apparently during the

I
'---J

period of the Lewis and Clark visit the Kathlamet lived in one village

of nine houses of the south side of the Columbia near what is now known
as Cathlamet Head while the hTahkiaku:m lived in two villages on the north
side of the Columbia. The explorers visited a Kathlamet village of
nine houses at this point and stated that “this Nation appeared to differ

very little either in language, Customs dress or appearance from the

Chinnooks 8.: War ci a. cum live principally on fish and pappato they

* have also other roots, and Some Elk meat." (Id. pp. 252 and 295:

see also Def. Ex. Ml, page 117 and Def. Ex. 99). The Clatsop, they
reported (Def. Ex. 111, p. 310 and Def. Ex. hl, p. 29h), lived in
several small villages on the sea coast to the southeast of the mouth
of the Columbia and on the southeast bank of the Columbia and were
not numerous having 11: houses and about 200 souls . The Chinook, they
stated, lived opposite the Clatsop on the "N33. Side 8: in small villages
& single houses made of split boards on a creek of Haleys [3§aker's

bay, and on small lakes or ponds, at no great distance from the river
or bay. Tolerably numerous - 15* if {’»’v." (Id- 13- 295; see Def. Ex. 1118).
Lewis and Clark estimated the Chinook nation at twenty-eight houses and
four hundred souls residing along the banks of a river to which 
gave the name Chinook, which they reported ran parallel to the sc:e:‘«:._
coast, watering a low country with many stagnant ponds and then 
into Bakers Bay. Their report continues "The wild fowl of the so ..
and the elk and deer of the neighborhood, furnish them with occasional
luxuries; but ther chief subsistence is derived from the salmon 

other fish, which are caught in the small streams, ~39 -31- -»’<~. To "‘

are added some roots ,'such as wild liquorice, which is the most  i i  6 180

the shanataque, and the wappatoo, brought down the river by the traders."
(Def. Ex. hl, p. 308).

3. Other historical references are contained in Petitioner's Exhibit
7', such as Washington Irving, who, writing in 1836, discusses these

Indians as follows:

A brief mention has already been made of the tribes or
hordes existing about the lower part of the Columbia at the
time of the settlement; a few more particulars concerning
them may be acceptable. The four tribes nearest to Astoria,
and with whom the traders had most intercourse were, as has
here to fore been observed, the Chinooks, the élatsops, the
Wahk/iacums, and the Cathlamets. The Chinooks resided chiefly
along the banks of a river of the same name, running parallel
to the sea coast, through a low country studded with stagnant
pools, and emptying itself into Baker's Bay, a few miles from
Cape Disappointment. This was the tribe over which Concomly,
the one-eyed chieftan, held sway; it boasted two hundred and
fourteen fighting men- Their chief subsistance was on fish,
with an occasional regale of the flesh of elk and deer, and
of will fowl from the neighboring ponds.

The Clatsops resided on both sides of Point Adams, they
were the mere reliques of a -tribe which had been nearly

swept off by the small pox, and did not number more than
one hundred and eighty fighting men.

The Wah1ci.acums, or Waak-i-cums , inhabited the north side
of the Columbia, and numbered sixty six warriors. They and
the Chinooks were originally the same; but a dispute arising
about two generations previous to the time of the settlement
between the ruling chief and his brother Wahklacum; the
latter seceded, and, with his adherents, formed the present
horde which continues to go by his name. In this way new

tribes or clans are formed, and lurhmg causes of hostility
engendered.

The Cathlerrets lived opposite to the lower village of the
Wah kiacums, and numbered ninety-four warriors.

David Douglas, a naturalist, who was in the area in the l820‘s
wrote -"On my return I visited Cockqua, the principal cheef of the
Chenooks and Chockalii  He was at war with the Cladsap tribe,

inhabitants of the opposite bands of the river, and that night expected

an attack which was not Irade . .. .. In the evening about 300 men danced

the war dance and sang several death songs.” Father de Smet (l8h?)
wrote that "The second visit we received, was from some Tchinouks, a
small tribe, inhabiting the immense forests of the northern shore. The
Clatsops, whose number amounts ‘to not more than one hundred and fifty
men, occupy the southern shore. The Tchinouks inhabit three villages
beyond the forest. -3% -1% -3’: They are of a peaceable temper, and, as their
wants are easily supplied, they lead an inactive and i.ndolent li_fe.
Fishing and the chase form their sole occupation. Game abounds in
their forests, and their rivers are teeming with salmon." The journals
of Dr. William Fraser Tolmie disclose that in 1833 Kathlamet village

consisted of-six huts. (Def. Ex. 15?, page 232).

And one Dunn, a Hudson Bay man who visited the area in 1832 or 1833

wrote (18kb):

The natives, who dwell about the lower parts of the Columbia,
may be divided into four tribes--the Clotsops, who reside around
Point Adams, on the south side, and are reputed by some the
most honest--the Chinool-cs; Waakiacums; and the Cathlamets;
who live on the north side of the river, and around Baker's
Bay and other inlets. From the great resemblance between them
in person, language, laws and manner, they all appear to have
emanated from one common stock. Though they occasionally can.
procure the flesh of elks, deer and waterfowls of the ponds
and rivers, their chief subsistence is fish, chiefly salmon,
which abounds in the river, and inlets; and roots, and berrrixmfaz
which women go a gipsying in groups at the proper season 
collect in the upper part of the country. This season is 
time of hilarity; and the women" bepaint their faces and  
with a sort of vermillion paint, partly to protect them :E‘ro.-.3,
the sun, and partly to present a gay and fantastic appearance 1.,
These roots and berries they make into cakes, which they dry
in the sun. These cakes, and preserved ‘fish, with an accompaniment of venison, form their winter store of which they
generally have no lack.

These tribes were formerly very ‘numerous and powerifdl. r  a.
they were greatly thinned by the scourge that spread its 

6 1531

far and ‘side among the northern and eastern Indians for many
years--the small pox. After having enjoyed a considerable
respite from this visitation, and recruited their force and
numbers to some extent, they were again, in 1829, and some
subsequent years, attacked by another malady, equally fatal-m
fever, attended with ague.

1:.

to the Northwest Coast of America" (Def. Ex. 172, in Docket 237, Upper

Gabriel Franchere, a fur trader, in his “Narrative of a Voyage

Chehalis, et al., '9'. United States), written in 1819‘ according to
Doctor Verne F. Ray (see Def. Ex..1.:5, page 55), nrote of the Columbia
river Indians that: "The men are not lazy, especially during the
fishing season. Not being hunters, and eating, consequently, little

flesh-meat (although they are fond of it), fish makes, as I have

' observed, their principal diet.'.‘ Of the politics of these Indians this

early observer noted as follows:

The politics of the natives of the Columbia are a simple
affair: each village has its chief, but that chief does
not seem to exercise a great authority over his fellowcitizens. * % ‘I:

As all the villages form so many independent sovereignties,
differences sometimes arise, whether between the chiefs or

the tribes. Ordinarily, these terminate by compensations
equivalent to the injury.

Horatio Hale, philologist of the United States Exploring Expedition,

A1838-l8h2 wrote in speaking of the Lower Chinook that “Twenty years ago

[E32237 there were below the Multnoma Island, some f ive or six thousand
people’, speaking the same, or nearly the same language. The principal
tribes or bands were the Trfakaikam (known as the Wahkyekum), the
Kathlamat (Cathlamet), the Tshinuk (Chinook), and the Tlatsap(Clatsop).
They are reduced to a tenth of their former numbers, and the remnant
In spealdng of the habits of the

will probably soon disappear."

Chinook, Hale said they “show a people accustomed to derive their

subsistence from the sea, and averse to 1-randering upon land. They

‘fer x-ridelyf, in this respect, from the Californians, who subsist
upon acorns and the seeds of plants, build temporary huts of brush:-rood
and straw, and are constantly on the move from place to place.” (Def.
Ex. 2?).

5. Lieutenant George H. Colvocoresses in his "Four Years In a
Government Evmloring Expedition“ £8527 wrote that there were marry
Indians "hanging around Astoria; most of them belong to the Clatsop
tribe, whose principal town is situated near Point Adams." (Def. Ex.
138, in Chehalis case, Docket No. 237). In l8h9, Joseph Lane, Superintendent of lndian Affairs for the ‘Territory of Oregon, in repwting
on the Indians under his jurisdiction stated the Clatsop Indim
clainaed a section of country on the south side of the Colunfoia river
at its mouth from Cape “Look-out" on the coast to Astoria. Lane
- .rther reported that the Clatsops subsisted principally on fish and
that there were “but few of this tribe lei‘ 3 about fifty is the extent
of their number. The whites occupy all their prairie lands.“ The
Cathlamet he reported claimed the country on the Columbia for about

thirty miles up the river from Astoria and nunbered S8 souls who

subsisted on fish. Lane said the Chinooks numbering about 100 lived

at Baker's Bay and fished and.hunted. (Def. Ex. lho).
6. Congress enacted a bill in 1850 authorizing the President to
appoint one or more commissioners to negotiate treaties with the several

Indian tribes in the Territory of Oregon for the ezctinguishment of

they claims to land lying west of the Cascade Mountains. (Def. Ex. 13?).

o 183

This act was superseded. by the Act of February 27, I-L851 (E? Stat. L. 586)
which provided that all treaties should thereafter be negotia' ed by
officers and agents of Indian Afi‘airs. (Def. Ex. 173, p. 3). On
Iiovember 7, 1851, Anson Dart, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for
Oregon Territory, forwarded thirteen treaties which he negotiated with
Indian tribes for the cession of lands upon both sides of the Columbia
river, upon the Willamette river and upon the Pacific Coast. “The
Treaties concluded at Tansey-Point (near the mouth of the Columbia)
cover a tract of over one hundred miles on the Pacific, running back
elongpthe Columbia about sixty miles: The country was owned by'ten
small tribes of Chinnook Indians:

numbering in all, about three hundred

and twenty souls ,“ Dart reported. The Superintendent also wrote in part

3::

as l0.L.LOWS ‘.1

The Clatsops, who were the first treated with; interposed
many objections to parting with their country upon any terms:
They made long and loud complaints, at the injustice done them
by the Government; who they said had taken possession of their
lands without paying them - had allowed the white people many years since - to occupy and buy and sell their country,
for which they had received no equivalent; pointing to instances where farms had been sold for from two to six

thousand dollars, upon which lands the whites were making
“much money."

Dart said their demands at first were unreasonable but that the Ciatseps
finally agreed to waive them if they could have two reservations each

af ten miles square. When this was turned down by the Governmnt the
llatsops after a consultation with neighboring tribes finally agreed
;o one reservation which would include their burying grounds and
-Odges at Point Adams - a tract three and a half miles in length and

1-70 miles wide at the north end, and one mile wide at the south end.

he treaty commissioner also stated that "that part of their lands

know-rn as ‘Clatsop Plains’ is an open level country with a very rich

wil, nearly or quite every acre of 1-iiich is claimed and occupied by
white people. The balance of the purchase is timbered land, chiefly of
the heaviest kind, (although it isucalled timbered land, there are

some Prairies of small extent on both sides of the Columbia;) -1": '3? '31-."

(Def. BX. 172) .

7. Anson Dart in his report accompanying the treaties reviewed

the habits and customs of these "fish eating" Indians. He reported

the "food used by these Indians (being almost entirely of fish) tends

much towards shortening their lives. I cannot but admit that there is

geat probability that only a very few years will pass ere they will

be side by side with their Fathers and Eaves - the tribe or tribes

e:..:=nct." His report air‘ so states he agreed to furnish clothing sufficient for every adult in all the tribes treated with. The report coninues 2

It may not be uninteresting to inform you, that during
each treaty concluded with the thirteen tribes, the entire
band was present, men, ‘women and children, and all were made
to fully understand the importance and the conditions of the
contract entered into. - In most cases they were extremely
anxious one and all to sign their names (make their mark)

upon the Treaty: In several cases every man living of the
band, did Sig} -:4 ~x- -:2-,

 

The lower band of Chinook Indians, which is the largest of
that tribe; have their head-quarters at viqat is called
Chinook point on the Columbia; and occupy at present, the
country on the north side of that river directly opposite
that of the Clatsops: As late as the year l820, this point
was the rendezvous of the most powerful Nation upon the
Pacific coast; nova wasted to a few over three hundred souls.

-ii-‘ii-it

The next treaty I would speak of in detail, is the one
considered with the remnant bands of 1»3heelappas' and

lluillequeognas. The only males living. of which tribes,
f13."(> the two signers to the treaty. ‘ihere are however
::ex=eral females - women and children yet living.

The tract of country purchased of them is situated on
.-rha.t is knot-:-rn as "Shoalx-rater Bay“ upon the Pacific, havi’-'13
3.bc'::.t twenty miles of coast and running back about forty
rziles - bounded on the north by the country owned by the
Zhehales Indians -» on the east by the lands of the

Io:-rlits band, and on the south by the lower band oi?“
3hinoo}cs.  % -31'

-3%-if--3’:

"I-€allowska" is the only male survivor of a tribe, once
>1‘ some note. The tract purchased of him, joining the
3latsops on the east is mainly valuable for its immense
"forests of and variety of choice timber, -31- ->9-*

The Kathlarret band of Chinooks, cede a valuable body
af land to the United States - extending from Ah-pin—pin
roint forty miles along the south side of the Columbia. =unning:_ back (south) about twenty miles. Astoria and
‘ort George are upon this tract. -% ‘Ir -'39

'-1--% asThe lands ceded by the Waukikam and Konniack bands of
hinooks is every;-zhere densely covered with timber and
:.as many very valuable mill-powers upon it ; that part
ying upon, and for two or three miles back from the
olumb ia, is very hilly xrith many bluffs and deep ravines ,
he balance is moderately rolling and susceptible of culti'ati.on. The Cowlitz river near the east side of the tract
.s suffic iently large for steamboats to the rapids -‘sir - -ti-.

The country ceded by the Konniaclds upon the South Side
1‘ the Columbia is composed of flat lands adjacent to this
iver, with deep rich soil, then gradually rolling, but
cod farming land extends to the bounds of the ICl.astka‘nia‘s

distance of about twenty miles. These lands were once
‘sued by the ICLatskania‘s above mentioned, and as an instance
o shot: the rapidity with which the Indian upon these shores
s passing? away I will relate that this tribe was, at the
irst settlerzent of the Hudson‘s Bay Company in Oregon,
o warlike and formidable that the Company‘s men dare not
 their possessions along the river, in less n'u..b»ers
nan sixty armed men. -X- -::-  The tribe is now reduced to
area .r_n._._e_n and five women. - The face and chara.cter of
339i?‘ <3011I'l”C1"3-' is very similar to that previously purchased
long the river (of the Konniac}c’s). (De? E. 172).

up.‘-.6

     

8. One of the thirteen treaties, none of which were ratified,
nregotiated by Anson Dart was entered into on August 7, 1851, with
 .- undersigned Wallooskee [spelled Wfallooska" in Dart's report see Finding 7 , only remaining chief of the Iiuc-que-clah«-1-re-nnzck

tribe oi‘ Indians, of the other part." According to Anson Dart this

Indian -:as the only male survivor of this tribe. (Finding 5) o The
pertinent articles of this treaty are as follows (Def. Ex. 6):

Article l. The said ‘v-Iallooskee hereby cedes to theUnited States the tract of land included within the
following boundaries, viz: beginning at thewestern
extremity of Ahwahpinpin Point, near Astoria, and running thence easterly parallel with the Columbia river
to a point directly south of Kathalamet Point; thence
south to a point directly east of Suallahlockas or Saddle
mountain; thence west to the said Saddle mountain; thence
northwesterly follovnng Lewis and Clark's river to its
mouth; thence northerly along the shore of Young's bay
and Columbia river to the place of beginning. The above
described land bemg all that is claimed by the said
chief or tribe.

Article 2. The said Walloskee reserves the privilege
of occupying his present residence during his natural life.

Art. 3. In consideration of the cession made in the
foregoing article of this treaty, the United States agree
to pay to the said Wallooskee, one thousand five hundred
dollars in annual payments of three hunted dollars in
money and merchandize, as follows, to wit: fifty dollars
in money, two wollen coats, two pairs wollen pants, two
vests, four shirts, ten blankets, twolinsey dresses, '
one blanket shawl, two calico dresses, two pairs boots,
two silk handkerchiefs, one silk sash, four bags flour,
ten gallons molasses, fifty pounds sugar, five pounds
tea, one keg powder, twenty pounds lead and shot, one
good rifle, one brass kettle, two ten-quarttin kettles,
four eight-quart tin pans, one axe, one cap, two tin
cups, two knives, two hoes. The above articles to be of
good quality and delivered at Tansey Point, aforesaid.

5; large portion of the western half of these lands which Wallooskee, as

’only remaining chief of the I\Euc-que-clah—1ce-muck tribe" agreed to cede

C.”

.-"Q?

to the Unit ed States are 1101-?’ claimed by petitioner to be within the lands
a"oorigir_-ally owned and occupied by the Clatsop Indians. (See Def. Ex. 5;
‘Ir. 287-295; Tr. 38h-389). The I\h1c-que-clah-vie-muck, accordhxg to

petitioner's expert witness, Dr. Taylor (Tr. 363) hail’? been dead for

one hundred years.

9. The unratified treaty entered into by Anson Bart and the

other treaty Commissioners with the Kathlamet band oi’ Chinook Indians

on August 9, 1853., provided in part as follows (Def. Ea. 7):

Article 1. The said Kathlamet band of Chinook Indians
hereby cede to the United States the tract of land included within the follox-ring boundaries, viz: beginning
at a point of land on Ioung‘s bay called Ah-pin-pin;
running thence northerly and easterly, :£'o]_'Lo1-sing the
southern shore of the Columbia river up to Hunt"s mill;
theme south on the west line of lands of the Eonnaack
band of Chinooks to the northern boundaries of lands

of the .n.aos‘na-~.;3_a band of uhinooicsg "thence wes'cer;z;y‘,

following said northern boundary and the northern boundary
of lands formrly claimed byrthe Nuc-que-clah-I-as-muck band
of Indians, also, all the islands in the Columbia river
opposite the above described land. The above description

is intended to include all the land owned or claimed by
said Kathlamet band of Indians.

Art. 2. The said Kathlamet band reserve iron the cession
aforesaid, two of the islands in the Columbia river, to wit:
one called Woody island, and one called by the Indians S1§y—-licla. The said band also reserve the privilege oi‘ residing at
what is called the old Kathlamet town, and of cutting timber

on the land above described for their own fuel and building
purposes.

Art. 3. In consideration of the cession in the first
article of this treaty, the United States agree to pay to the
aforesaid Kathlanet band of Indians an annuity of seven
hundred dollars for the term of ten years, as follows; to wit:
one hundred dollars in money, twenty blankets, ten wollen
coats, ten pairs pants, ten vests, twenty shirts, twenty
pairs shoes, fifty yards linsey plaid, one hundred yards
calico, one hundred yards shit-ting, eight blanket shawls,
one hundred pounds soap, one barrel salt, fifteen bags
flour, one hundred pounds tobacco, ten hoes, ten axes,
f£teen knives, twenty-five cotton handkerchiefs, one

L‘ ..LUL:

barrel molasses, one hundred pounds sugar , ten pounds tea,
three eight-Quart rass kettles, ten ten-quart tin pails,
twelve pint cups, ten six-quart pans, ten caps, one keg of
powder; all of the above articles to be of good quality and
delivered at Burnie ‘s landing, on the Columbia river.

10. The unratified treaty entered into by the treaty commissioners
ef the United States with the chiefs and headmen of the Ulatsop Tribe
 Indians on August 5, 1851, provided in part as follows (Def. Ex. 8):

Article 1. The said tribe of Indians cede to the United
States the tract of land included within the following
boundaries, viz: beginning at the westernextremity of
Point Adams, at the mouth of the Columbia river, and
running thence southerly along the coast of the Pacific
ocean to the mouth of a certain stream south of what is
called Tillamook head, which stream is called by the
Indians lock-les-pah-ta; thence easterly up and along said
stream to its source; thence east to the summit of the
coast range of mountains; thence northerly to the Swallaa
lockas or Saddle mountain; thence northwesterly to the

" 4‘ ‘O  A-54-. 4- Ana Tc-----I" 4'” 9‘ n“ .''I.. ...- ‘-- ' -1;
E1922‘. "El'.‘."....-C2.‘..» C... o.-.;-.-.; }I\..4i..}.tt'..}.'\§ nu." ...:i::'w'..t...‘.r emu 'v.:..c:..Lm.-, as .;..L.’vt:;_,

thence down and along said river to loung‘s bay; thence
westerly along said bay and the southern shore of the
Columbia river to the place of beginning; the above
described land being all that is claim-.ed by the said tribe.

Art. 2. From the cession aforesaid the following tract
shall be reserved, to wit: all that piece or parcel of land
described as follows, viz: beginning at a stake on the
southern shore of the Columbia river, between Tansey point
and Point Adams, 1-zhich stake is in the eastern boundary of
the old Indian burying ground, running thence southerly in
a direct line to the northeast ‘corner of William Hobson‘s
claim; thence westerly, bounding on said Hobson‘s claim to
the ocean; thence northerly slow the ocean to Point Adams;

thenceeasterly up and along the southern shore of the
Columbia river to the place of beginning.

Art. 3. It is agreed between the United States and the
said tribe, that the individuals of the said tribe shall be
at liberty to occupy, as fornerly, their fishing grounds at
the mouth of Neacoxsa creek, whenever they wish to do so
for the purpose of fishrxg; and it is further agreed that the
individuals of said tribe shall be allowed to pass freely
along the ‘beach from and to their reservation between their
said fishing grounds and Point Adams, and allowed to pick
up whales that may be cast away on the beach.

£';.r't-5 h. In consideration of the cession made  the foregoing articles of this treaty, the United States agree to pay
to the said Clatsop tribe of Indians the  of fifteen thousand dollars, in annual payments of fifteen hundred dollars
each, to be made as follows, viz: two hundred dollms in
money and the balance in the following articles, to 'si‘t:
forty blankts, twenty I-rollen coats, ti-zenty pairs pants,
twenty vests, forty shirts, forty pairs shoes, one hundred
yards linsey plaid, ix-so hundred yards calico prints, two
hundred yards shirting, fifteen blanht shawls, two hurzdred
pounds soap, two barrels salt, thirty bags flour, two
hundred pounds of tobacco, two hundred pounds sugw, tuenty
pounds tea, two barells molasses, two oxen or two‘ horses,
ten hoes, ten axes, six eighta-quart brass kettles, ‘twentyfive knives , fifty cotton handkerchiefs, ten ten-quart tin
pails, twenty si:-c-quart pans, twenty-five pint cups and
twenty caps; all of which are to be of good quality and to
be delivered each year at Tansey point aforesaid, and distributed to the heads of families belonging to said tribe.

ll. The unratified treaty made with the "Wau1<:i.ku.m band of the
inook tribe of Indians“ on August 8, 1851, by the treaty commissioners
:* the ‘”n'ted States provided in part as follows (Def. k. 135-c):

Article 1. The said Wau1c'Lka.In band of Chinook Imians,
hereby cede to the United States the tract of land 
cluded within the following boundaries, viz: beginning‘
at the mouth of a certain stream called the Labacluthl,
which empties into the north side of the Columbia rim at
the west end of G-ray"‘s bay; running thence up and along
the Columbia to the mouth of a certain stream called the
Neuc-tuc-hae, which empties into the Columbia on tln: north
side above Oak point; thence northerly along said Hem-tuchae to its head waters; thence north to the summit of the
high lands between the Columbia and Chehalees rivers; thence
following the su. “it of said highlands westerly to a point
opposite or directly north of the he ad waters of the said
Lahbacluthl; thence south to said head waters, and following said last named stream to the place of beginning. The
above description is intended to include all the land claimed
by the said band of Chinook Indians.

Art. 2. The said tr-.'au}=:i}o.m band reserve to themselves the
P3‘?-’5—1€.C3€ Of Occupying their present place of residence,
and also of fishing upon the Columbia river and the tuo
other strears mentioned in Article 3.; also the privilege
of cutting: timber for their own ‘building: purposes and for
fuel on the above described land, and of hunting on said
lands where they are not enclosed,

Art. 3. In consideration of the cession made in the foregoing articles of this treaty, the United States agree to pay
to the said Wau1=:iku.n band of the Chinook tribe of Indians
seven thousand dollars, in annu:iL'payr:.-ents of seven hundred
dollars for ten years, as follows, viz: one hundred dollars
in money, twenty blankets, ten wollen coats, ten pad is pants,
ten vests, twenty shirts, t1-zenty pairs shoes, fifty yards
linsey plaid, one hundred yards calico prints, one hundred
yards shirting, eight blanket shawls, one hundred pounds
soap, one barrel salt, fifteen bags flour, one hundred
pounds tobacco, ten hoes, ten axes, fifteen knives, twentyfive cotton handkerchiefs, one barrel molasses, one hundred
pounds of sugar, ten pounds tea, sm eight-quart brass
kettles, ten ten-quart tin pails, twelve pint cups, ten
six-quart pans, ten caps; all'to be of good quality and
delivered at Burnie ‘s landing, on the Columbia river.

12. The unratified treaty negotiated by the treaty comissiomrs
for the United Sta.tes with the "Wheelappa band of Chinook Indians" on
’august 9, 1851, provided in part as follows (Def. Ex. l3Sb):

Article 1. The said Wheelappa band of Indians hereby
cede to the United States all the land ovzned or claimed by
the said band. The land intended to be hereby ceded is
bounded on the north by lands owned by the Cheehales trim
of Indians, on the east by lands of the Cowlitz band of
Indians, on the south by lands of the Wauldkum and lower

bands of Chinooks, and on the west by the ocean and Shoalwater bay.

Art. 2. The above cession is made with the express understanding that the land shall be reserved for the exclusive
use of the Chinook tribes or bands, and the Cheehales tribe
of Indians, provided the majority of them shall consent to
give up their reserved rights to the lands they now occupy
and remove to the lands ceded in article first of this treaty.

Art. 1;. In consideration of the cession made in the first
article of this treaty, the United States agree to pay to
the said ‘rfheelappa Indians an annuity of five hundred dollars
for ten years, in the following manner, viz:' one hundred and
fifty dollars in money, twenty-five blankets, four woollen
coats, four pairs pants, four vests, four pairs men shoes and
ten pairs women‘s shoes, ten" shirts, sixty yards linsey plaid,
one hundred yards calico, one hundred yards brown muslin,
eight blanket shawls, fifty pounds soap, twenty pounds tea,
one hundred pounds sugar, eight sacks flour, five brass
kBt‘b1€S (eight--Q*1art,) five ten-quart tin pails, five sit»:quart tin pans. The above a.rticles are to be of good quality,

and delivered at Tansey Point aforesaid; one hundred dollars
of the money to be used for educational purposes, provided

he conditions of articles second and third of this tree.
are complied with.

'- Art. 6. The cession made in article first is intended
to embrace the land formerly owned by the Quilleqeeoqua
band of Indians, of whom only one man remains, Iicnaasrt,
who is a signer of this treaty.

.13. The unratified treaty entered into on August 9, 1851, by the
treaty commis sioners for the United States with the "lower band of
Chinook Indians“ provided in part as follows (Def. Ex. 135 g):

Article 1. The said lower band of the Chinook Indians
hereby ceded to the United States the tract of land in-»
cluded within the following boundaries, to wit: begnuing
at the mouth of a certain stream entering Gray‘s bay on
the north side of the Columbia river, which stream forms
the western boundary of lands ceded to the United States
by the I-Jaukikura band of Chinooks; running thence northerly
on said we.=:t£=2?"n homxndnry to lands of’ i'.h¢=>. Whe:=e'|_.appa.. b1’-Ind nf‘
Indians; thence westerly along said lands of the Eéheelappa
band to the Shoal-water bay; thence southerly and easterly
following the coast of the Pacific ocean and the northern
shore of the Columbia to the place of beginning. The above
description is intended to embrace all the land ma or
claimed by said lower band of Chinook Indians,

Art. 2. The said lower band of Chinook Indians reserve

the privilege of occupying the grounds they now occupy, for

the purpose of building, fishing and grazing their stock,

with the right to cut timber for their own building purposes
and for fuel. Also the right to pick cranberries on the marshes,
and the right to cultivate as much land as they wish for their
own purposes. No white man shall be allowed to interfere with
their rights, and it is hereby agreed that a white  named
Washington Hall shall be removed from the land above ceded.

The reservations in this article shall continue during the lives
of the Indians who sign this treaty.

.-’=.rt. 3. In consideration of the cession made in the first
article of this treaty, the United States agree to pay the
said lower band of Chinooks, an annuity of two thousand
dollars for ten years in the following manner, to wi :
four hundred dollars in monev 1° i +‘+y blankets, thirty woollen

.__.._._., _....  -,,, ...._..
coats, thirty pairs pants, thirty vests, I fifty shirts, fifty

.L,pairs shoes, one hundred and fifty yards linsey plaid, c.-.o

6192.":

hundred and fifty yards calico, two hundred and. fifty yards
shirting, twenty blanket shawls, three hundred pounds soap,
three barrels salt, fifty bags flour, three hundred pounds
tobacco, twenty hoes, ten axes, thirty knives, seventy
cotton handkerchief s, two barrels molasses, four hundred
pounds sugar, thirty pounds tea, ten eight--quart brass
kettles, fifteen ten-quart tin pails, thirty‘ pint cups.
thirty six-quart pans, thirty caps, one kep powder; all
the above to be of good quality and delivered at Tansey
point aforesaid.

13+. In the spring of 1851+ George Gibbs, who accompanied Governor
Isaac Stevens on his exploration tour, submitted a report to Captain
George B. I~icClelle.n, Commanding officer of the western division of the
Northern Pacific Railroad exploration party, In this report on the
Indian tribes of the Territory of Washington Territory, Gibbs Wrote:

On the Columbia river and at Shaolwater bay are a few
remants of the once numerous Chinooks. Of these there

'r.u::.-um -r-g~_~g-w-x4:s-r~'I 1? c--y-.¢.-:1;-3 am-r +1.?f\ rs-3+‘? Ant: .. +.}"\c.s YT-r-rr'u==>T‘ 2hr? ‘i'.h¢e
DIV-— -—, rub  ._£....*q.-sun:-gnu-4-ac.’-, q.-u.ou.- an-—°.' \o.....\_--a.. '-'-—~-' ‘ -&""' '°"“ "' "" "

Lower Chinooks; the former extending from the Dallas nearly
to the Cowlitz river; the latter from thence to the ocean.
* * * Of the Lower Chinooks there are six or seven settle...
ments, most of which consist of single families. The one
on Chinook beach is the largest, and amounts to 66. Almost

, all of these are, however, intermingled with the Chihalis.
One of their grounds is upon the south side of the Columbia,
opposite the mouth of the Cowlitz, and therefore in Oregon.
The total number of this tribe is reduced to about l20.
There are four persons who claim to be chiefs: Ske-ma-que-up
at Wahkiakum, To-tili-cum at Woody Island, E-la-I-rah at
Chinook, and Toke at Shalwater bay.

Gibbs in speaking of Shaolwater (’a«Ii_'l_lipa) bay reported that it was
really the P1‘in°i‘PPJ. seat of the Chinook proper who resorted to the
“Columbia mostly for their spring salmon while they dug their clams and
procured their winter supplies on the bay. His report further stated:

The southern half of the bay belonged to therzléhinook p'rope_;_'7;

the country on the Willopah river to the tribe of that name,
nd  L1-31-Der. end to  C‘ '1...-."}.°,,... # :6; 1'. .‘.+-v-xv-»-_~e:-rt:-r-5+ T-vs-F 'F’.cr.'.*r

l;;c,.:,J___;,_‘_')° :1‘; r./J.\.vs.J\..aJ..I.v |.t\.A.v ..I.w-um

Indians remain here, the small-pox having nearly finished

its =.-:'or‘.»:: during the past year. * * *3‘ Some lodges upon the
southern peninsula of "Shoalwater bay were left without a
survivor, and the dead were found by the whites lying
wrapped in their blankets as if asleep.  "‘ *

Sibbs also reported that the Willopahs might be considered extinct

as only a few women remained who were intermarried with the Chinooks

znd Chehalis. (Def. Ex. 171, in Docket 237).

15. George Gibbs‘ "Tribes of Western Washington and Nortfnvestem

regon, " written in 1856, was published in l877. The author wrote in
art as follows (Def . Ex, 12, page 186, 187):

Property.--As far as I can gather the views of the Sound
tribes, they recognize no individual right to land except
actual occupancy. This seems to be respected to this extent, that if a man has cleared a spot of land for cultivation, he can hold it on the return of the season for planting from year to year, as long as he sees fit. So in their villages, the site of a house pertains ‘tn -1-.he indivi deal as long
as he leaves any vestige or evidence of a building on it.
Among the Tsinuk and Lower Tsihalis, the right may have been
carried somewhat further, but unsettled lands away from their
usual haunts are but little regarded. Tribes are, however,
somewhat tenacious of territorial right, and well tmerstand
their respective limits; but this seems to be merely regards
their title, and they never, it is believed, exclude from

them other friendly tribes. t would appear also that these
lands are considered to survive to the last remnant of a
tribe, after its existence as such has in fact ceased. * "‘ *
As regards the fisheries, they are held in common, and no
tribe pretends to claim from another, or from individuals,
seigniorage for the right of taking. In fact, such a claim
would be inconvenient to all parties, as the Indians, mve
about, on the sound particularly, from one to another locality,
according to the season, Nor do they have disputes as to their
hunting grounds. Land and sea appear to be open to all with
whom they are not at war. Their local attachments are very
strong, as might be inferred with regard to a race having

f med abodes, and they part from their favorite grounds and
burial-places with the utmost reluctance.

With respect to sustenance for these Indians, Gibbs wrote (Id.

incipal food of the Indians on the west side of the
may be briefly set down as fish, roots, and berries.

. - - - . a e
Game furnishes to but few of them any considerable ltem. *

. - : -1Elk and deer are hunted to a certain extent, chiefly by the
bands nearest the mountains; * * *. .Lewis and Clarke Speak

0 -v 1. ’ "' 3-‘ 3"“
of game as having fu?RlSh-Q an article 01 luieny teen oi’
suoport to the Tsinuk, though abundant in their country.
7‘:=#36=

In writing of the accounts of early travelers among the Columbia River

Indians, Gibbs observed (Id. at page 235):

The next, and a far more valuable account * * *, is

that of Lewis and Clark, thirteen years later. * * * ?he
nomenclature assigned by them to many of the bands, with
which they met or of which they obtained information. 13

not recognizable at the present day. There are. in faC?!

no generic names used by the Indians among their own tribes,
but each band is distinguished by its appropriate eppella-.-_
tion, that of the ground which it occupies. Generic 0? tribal
names for others are sometimes used; bee» 35 before mentioned’
the cohesion among the bands_[id. at page 1537 e5 the Same
family is so small, that it is more usual" to heaI‘-them

' 

O .4.

¢'Q"!"H"'I'F"\"' (‘H1 Tr var-xv-\-3--s vs:-so-I 4-«vans-\ Tan-r _ ~ - - Uaawnaw
._ __'x__. __.n_ ,___ _ ____" .__,____-I _'‘__C‘.____,-,__~ ‘, , .,_,-_, 5;‘, \.pau-on-rain.-. 4.&‘\.n-t..t)¢-00:-uf\.I¢. but 0 ‘avg.’

appellations differ with the different tribes, and.moreover
die out with the abandonment of a particular lOCalitYs 1t
is next to impossible, after such a lapse of time, to
identify all of them, except by their locality or order of
succession.

16. In 1855 Governor Isaac Stevens or“wsshington-Territory'unsuccessfully'attempted to negotiate a treaty'with Chinook. Chehelie end
other Indians. Stevens reported the Chinooks to number 112 souls.

No further treaty negotiations'were ever held with the Chinook Indians.
In 1866 a reservation.was set apart by Executive Order (1 Kapp- 924)
consisting of 335 acres on Shoalwater'bay for the remnants of the
Chinook bands and the Lower Chehalis. (See 79 Co Cleo 558)- other
Chinook Indians eventually were placed upon the Chehalis, Quinault and
other coast reservations. The claims of the Chinook Indians have at

various times been considered by Congress. by the Court of Claims and

by the Department of the Interior. In l907, the 5€CTeteTY 05 the

Interior was required by the Indian Appropriation Act (34 Stat. 325, 369)
to investigate and report on the claims against the United. States of

the Waukikum, Rue que clah we muck, and Wheelappa bands of Chinook
Indians and of the Chehalis tribe of Indians. The acting Comissioller‘
of Indian Affairs prepared a report dated December ll, I907, for the

Secretary respecting these claims. This report reviewed the unratified

treaties made with the Indians concerned and briefly the history of
the Chinook Indians (Def. Ex. 69). The report stated in part as follows:

Since that date [T8927 bills have be en introduced in the
Congress by attorneys claiming to represent the Indians
who were parties to the unratified treaties, providing for
pament to said Indians of certain sums for the lands
al_'|.§'Bged to have been ceded. Attention is invited to H.R.
RQPOTJ9 2500.7 Fiftfsr-'-sixth Congress’, second sessi'on'on'H.R.
ll077, for the re'}:3ef—;-pf’. -l_-.h;=--K'g~i;.h1.f:_rn;_s-1;. 35.3, .55 enema»

"‘ bi:-b-& icc

Indians. In reporting, the committee said in part
¢**#*¢#

We find no reason for the present recognition of this old treaty, which did not at

the time of its execution command the approval of Congress. The treaty only gave the
Indians a small amount for their alleged rights,
md it is evident from its terms that the claims
upon which it was founded were not regarded as
valuable at the time of its execution in 1851.
This bill does not propose to accept the value of
the Indians‘ claims as stated in the treaty, but
only to regard that part of the treaty as binding
which assumes title in the Indians, and then proposes to allot-I the Indians all that the Government
has received from the sales of these lands. We do
not find any merit in the claim.

The report states that si.m:'Llar claims had been presented by the Nuc
';-19 Clah we muck, ‘slheelappa, and t.'au}:ikun bends which had been referred
.10 the Court of Claizrzs bv Corwress and were b==:{'...re said Court for

.1 -::>- "" "

ieterzaination. The acting Cornxrissioner concluded that:

There is no evidence on file in the office that any of
the Indians belonging to the four bands specified in the act
of June 21, l906,‘[;aukikum, Rue que clah we muck, Wheelapa
and Chehali§7 are now living, except the Chehalis, for whom
a reservation has been set aside, If it be true that some
of their descendants are alive, they have married and intermarried.with other bands until it would.be impossible to
determine with what tribe they affiliated in l85l.

I am of the opinion that none of these bands has any

foundation for a claim against the Government, and that

no further recognition should be given to these pretended
claims.

17- BY.Act of Congress of August 24, 1912 (37 Stat. 518. 535) ?h8
following payments were authorized: to the Clatsop tribe - $15,000; to
the Nuc-quee-clah-we—muck tribe - $1,500; to the Kathlamet Band of Chinook
Indians - $7,000; to the Waukikum Band of Chinook Indians - $7,000; to the
Wheelappa Band of Chinook Indians - $5,000; and to the Lower*Band of Chinook
Indians - $20,000. These sums, the act directed, were “to be apportioned
Ag those now living and the lineal descendants of those who may be dead,
by the Secretary'of the Interior, as their respective rights may'appear“
of said tribes and bands. The act further provided that the Indians "shall
accept said sung or their respective portions thereof, in full satisfaction
of all demands or claims against the United States for the lands described
in the agreements or unratified treaties between the United States and
said Indians dated, * * *." In Duwamish Indians, et al- v. United States,
79 C. 318. 535, 559, the Court of Claims found that out of the appropriation
above mentioned the Lower Chinook received $l¢,837.36;'the‘Wheelappa Band,
$3,833.33; and the'waukikum Band, $5,600. Other sources disclose payment
05 $5,500 to the Kathlamet and $77 4,0,5? to the Clatso

-ul--I-In-3

P?i3tiOn. Rolls 0; the tribes or bands prepared in l905 showed 87 latsop,

I2? Lower Chmook and 5 Kathlamet Indians on the rolls. Payment rolls
u.nder the l9l2 fact show 5 Indians shared the L-4'au_kikum Band Payment and
16 Indians shared in the payment to the Willipa Band. (See Commission‘s
E>’§"1ibi‘CS A. B, C.) In the Duwamish case, supra, the Court oi‘ Clairas
considered the claims of "The Chinook Tribe and Bands of Indians.”

The findings of said Court reviewed the history of these Indians, the
unratified treaties made with them, and the payments made by the Act of
1912 to them. (see Finding XXIX therein). In its opinion the Court
(79 C. Cls. 535, 608-610) set out the claim of these Indians to compensation for some 822,000 acres of land. "A review of the Government's

dealings with this tribe,“ said the Court, "conclusively shows the claim
to be without merit." The Court, however, concluded it did not have

jurisdiction of the claim set forth by ‘petitioner (id. at p. 610).

Ethnoloaical

 

18. Frederick W. Hodge's (Bureau of American Ethnology, Bulletin

30) , “Handbook of american Indians" contains considerable Iraterial on

the Indians of the Columbia River. Of the Kathlamet, Hodge wrote. that

they were a Chinookan tribe which adjoined the Clatsop and claimed the
territory from the Tongue Point-to the neighborhood of Puget Island.
Hodge reported that they seemed to have but one village, known as

Cathlamet and in 1849 numbered 58 people. Hodge wrote that "they are

I10’-<’ €35?-inCt.“ (B...-LE. 30, Part I, page 23.6).

The Clatsop, accordi_n.§3:
to the author, were a Chinookan tribe formerly living about Cape Adams

on the south side of the Columbia river and extending up the river as

far as Tongue Point and south along the coast to Tillamook Head,

0

*1

6323013. Hodge states that the "language is now practicallgr extinct,

and the remnant of the tribe has been almost who-sly absorbed by

n.._ghboring groups." (Bolt:-9E0 30, Part I, page 305). Of the Wahkia.1<u.*r1,
Hodge reports that they were a Chinookan tribe formerly livi ig on the
north bank of the Colurribia. near its mouth and that their territory
adjoined that of the Chinook and extended upstream toward Oak Pout.
Hodge wrote: “According to Stuart (l8l2) they were an offshoot of the
Chinook who had separated from the main body about two generations
before under chief Wahkiacum and were afterward known by that name.
They have been lost sight of as a tribe since about l850, when Gibbs
referred to their chief as almost the last survivor of the tribe.
Their principal village seems to have been near Pillar rock, a short
distance above Grays bay. According to Boas they had two villages
near Pillar rock .. as -r *9‘ (B.A.E. 30, Part :_t1,p. 890). or the

"' ‘ lopah,” Hodge states that they were a Chinookan tribe on the

lo:-zer course of Willopah river in Washington and that these Indians
have so frequently been “confounded with the Kwalhioqua, an Athapascan '
tribe living on the upper course of that stream, that the latter have
usually been called Willopah. * * * Along with the Kwalhioqua they

ceded their lands to the United States in 18694. In 1910 there was said

too be a single survivor who understood the language." (B.A.E. 30, Part
II. P. 955.)

19. The Chinook tribe, according to Hodge in his "Handbook of
.:.mericaz1 Indians" (B.A.E. 30, Part I, p. 272) is the best known tribe
of the Chinookan family and "they claimed the territory on the n.;‘='i“side

of the Columbia river, wash., from the mouth to Grays bay, a distance

05 3b0Ut 15 m., and n. along the seacoast as far as the n. part of
Shoalwater bay, where they were met by the Chehalis, * * *. Swan
placed their number at 112 in 1855, at which time they were much

mixed with the Chehalis, with whom they have since completely fused,
their language being now extinct. * * * The portion of the tribe living
around Shoalwater bay was called Atsmital. * * *" Hodge in speaking

of the Chinookan family states that the village was the chief social
unit and that there was always a headman or chief in.the villages who
might, by reason of personal qualities, extend his influence over

several neighboring villages, xbut in general each settlement was

independent.“

20- Joel V. Berreman in writing his “Tribal Distribution in
Oregon" for the American Anthropological Association publication
(Numb€r'47. 1937) (Def. Ex, 138) discusses the Chinookan tribes of
the Columbia. ‘With respect to these Indians he wrote as follows:

From.the evidence ayailable a division of the Chonookan
peoples into tribes is very difficult to make with accuracy;
The political organization of the area is very imperfectly
known, and'perhaps'was not designed to fit such.a classificatory'scheme. The groups seem to shift about considerably
between fishing camps and permanent homes, and frequently
navigate the river to some distance to carry on trade with
other bands. This makes it well nigh impossible to delineate
tribal boundaries with accuraci. Ihoreover, the early literature does not alwaysziistinguish'betwen a permanent village,
a fishing camp, a band of traders, and a tribe. Many "tribes"
are mentioned as consisting of only a few houses. * * *

The Chinook depended for their permanent food supply on
the salmon runs in the Columbia river and its tributaries,
and their settelements were concentrated along the rivers.
The exact extent of their claims to hunting grounds back
from the river is not known with any degree of accuracy;
For this reason the southern line of their boundary has
been drawn in most cases rather arbitrarily.

21, Doctor Verne F. Bay in his “Lo:-rer Chinook Ethnographic
Eiotes" (l938) reported that the Chmook had no designation for a

larger political unit than the village. Ray included as a single

ethnic unit for which he selected the term Lower Chinook the Clatsop,

Chinook, Shoalwater Chinook, and Kathlamet. In selecting th9 term

Lower Chinook the author stated he neant thereby the Chinookan-speak»
ing peoples of the lower Columbia and I-Jillapa Bay and added "It is
terminologically unfortunate that the Kathlamet SPOKQ 3 dialect
associated with the upriver peoples." Of the political organization
of the Chinook, Dr. Ray wrote as follows:

"All of the villages form so many independent soverign-.
ties .... Each village has its chief, but that chief does
not seem to exercise a great authority over his fellow

‘In % A * A A ~."  -‘M-___”_:‘__ ‘_:5  -an-uilul-: an-In-5 ¢:IuIu

I C
('5 ‘I ‘I’ "I I'D l'\'v'|\ run  _ . - - .. can-au.}\_v 9-... up i.a.'sA-..r i'I\i¢L \-4'»? KJJ. 4 ; L-.n.£\a4.a\...-¢ 5.; ‘IA. .1... H II‘:-i-b& -I.-Ml

\nv--. i-I-u-u—n\-r¢-¢..p Q

1819 with reference to the social organization of the

Lower Chinook. Thus these peoples are established as

in basic political accord with other known groups of the
region. My own informants affirmed the existence of
village autonomy’, but pointed out that able and wellliked or greatly feared chiefs often exerted a much wider.-.influence than might formally be indicated, though this
extended power was stricly unofficial. * * "‘ Such POWBT

of course must not be confused with political control,
since it was of no significance in village internal affairsan
The author further reported that "Travel from /Chinook village to

any other one was possible by water alone." (Def. Ex, 1&5, pages 35,

38, 55, 101). Ray prepared a map of the territory of the lower Chinook

"about l800" which is similar in area to the territory assigned to these
Indians as of l8OO by Doctor Tajflor, petitioner's expert witness.

(Def. Ex. LL5, page 37). Of their political organization Doctor Ray

1- ‘T

also wrote (The Pistorical Position of the lower Chinook in the na'ti'v“e

Culture of the I\3.orthwest) (Def. Ex. 150):

_ The Lower Chinoo'i< fitted comfortably into this pattern
[village autonor::g_7 and thus the term Lower Chinook Isust be
taken as referring to an etmic unit rather than a political
one. Even the linguistic differences between the Chinook
and the Kathlamet did not seem to lead to a. feeling of
greater unity between two villages of the former than between one of the former and one of the latter. Further,

temporary cooperation between two or more villages for
purposes of common defense occurred only rarely and did
not lead to political alliances. Indeed, wars seen most
frequently to have been waged between one village and
another not far distant. It was inconceivable that two
or more village chiefs might have met together in council;
the life of one would have been in grave danger of forfeiture. * * *

22. The Commission finds based upon all of the evidence of record

that aboriginally there were certain identifiable groups living in the
‘~’lCl1’1i’F«3’ of the mouth of the Columbia river and for a mmber of miles up

the river on both shores of‘ that. .=:+..r-enm- These groups have been identified in historical sources  by ethnologists as the Chinook (proper),
the Clatsop, the Kathlamet, the Wahkiakum, and the Nucqueclahwemuck. While these groups have been referred to respectively in the documents
in evidence as “tribes" or "hands" there is substantial evidence that
Village autonomy prevailed in each group of these Indians. The Cornml5Sl0nl\1I"C-her finds that all of these Indians depended almost entirely for their sustenance on marine and riverine products supplemented by roots and berries that were obtainanle close to their settlements or received in trade. Hunting was not important to them and game

was a luxury and also an item received in trade.

23. The Commission finds that aboriginally the region now claimed

by petitioner to have been evn was-'mn:>'l1r

-é-V 2-Ind

used and occupied by these various
groups supported an Indian population of an estimated 13,500 people
.-s.L.ls.a...L..c..a..a..a.Z3

of a.bun_dance; that in t4&G late l700's these

62

Jug

‘e the victimes of a small pox epidemic that reduced their ranks
ntateriall ; that the r made a mild recovery numerically after that
epidemic until the so-called intermittent fever attack of l829-l832.
This epidemic wiped out between seven-eighths and nine-tenths of these
lndians. After l832 all that remained of these groups were “a few
hangers-on“ at trading posts and claiming spots. By’ 1850, the date
of the alleged taking of the lands claimed by petitioner, most of
these depleted groups of Indians were on the verge of extinction
or becoming fused with other groups of Indians, such as the Chehalis.

21+. Petitioner has failed to prove at the date of the alleged

taking exclusive use and occupancy in the Willipa-Chinook as a separate

entity or as an alleged subordinate band of the Chi nook 'Pri_‘m=: prgper)
to any of the lands described in the unratified treaty of August 9-; 1851.,
.1 the Wheelappa Band of Chinook Indians. Doctor Taylor, petitioner‘s
expert witness testified that a map using the base year l850 would show
the area around Shoalwater (i-Jil'.Lipa) Bay as Chehalis and the Willipa
area occupied in the north by Chehalis and in the east by Cowlitz .Indians.
The willipa area, according to this witness, is not, and never was,
Chinook territory. The term "Wil_"Lipa—Chinoo1<,“ Taylor e:~'.plained, referred to Chinook living in the Shoalwater Bay area who came to be known
as Shoalwater Bay Chinook and later as Willipa Chinook when the name of

‘the B337 was changed to Wilxlipa Bay (Tr. 70).

25. Petitioner has failed to prove what lands the E-iaukikurn Tribe

GI‘ Band of Indians ercli‘-s've “V used and occ“ ied at the date of.‘ the

in! d II |lII- I10 . 1‘, Jlhlf W 5%

Petitioner‘s e}:pert 1-fitness  not designate

TO
C)
\1)

any boundaries for the ‘\~Iau_kikum even in 1800 (see Pet. 33):‘ ll)‘. Most
of the lands described in the unratified Treaty of August 8, 1851,
(Finding ll) with the "i«!aukiku1n Band oflithe Chinook tribe of In&ms“
are depicted on Taylor's map for 1800 as within the boundaries of
Kathlamet territory as found by the witness. Doctor Taylor testified
it would be ezxztremely difficult to put a boundary around the Waukikum
(Tr. 354). All the evidence of record shows the Waukzikum to have been
a separate tribe at all times pertinent to the issuesuherein and not a
part of the Chinook Tribe (proper) as “subsumed” by Doctor Taylor.

26. There is no substantial evidence that the "Nuc-que-clah-wemuck tribe," who have been dead for over a 100 years according to Doctor
Taylor, with whom the unratified Treaty of August 7. 1851. (Finding 8)
was negotiated, exclusively used and occupied the area therein described.
There is no substantial evidence that said Nuc-que-clah.-we-muck Tribe
was a subordinate band of the Clatsop Tribe or that said Clatsop Tribe at
the date of the alleged taking in 1850 exclusively used and occupied 

significant part of the lands described in the unratified treaty with

the Nuc-que—clah-we-muck Tribe.
27. There is no substantial evidence of the lands exclusively used
and occupied by the Kathlamet Tribe of Indians as of the date or the
alleged taking in 1850. In early aboriginal times the Kathlamet :-LI1<IZfii.:‘.’—.‘:_.‘.=.“”.T=...‘-'4'
lived on the south side of the Columbia River within the area descri.beo:
in the unratified Treaty of August 9, 1851, (Finding 9) but, according

to the evidence, the remnant of this tribe moved to the north side of

the Columbia in about 1810, and resided near what is now Cathlamet,

C)

l''!’’

hington._. withm the lands described in the unratified treaty with
the ‘=‘3aUl'»:iku»*u. Doctor Taylor, petit-ioner‘s e:-zpert, testified he has
less certain with respe£1.t to the boundaries he assigned the Kathlamet
in l8OO than he was concerning those for the Chinook proper and the
Clatsop. Taylor further stated he shared “some of Dr. Fried's and If .

Suphan‘ s Etmologists for defendantj doubts concerning just who the

Eiathlamet were. They were an identifiable group, but it was not easy

(Tr. 355)

to decide on the territory that they occupied."

28. There is no substantial evidence to support petitionerts con-r

tention that there existed aboriginally or historically a Chinook Nation; .

..he Commission further finds that at no time was there a merger of the

identifiable groups or tribes known as the Chinook (proper), Kathlamet,

Clatsop, Waukikum, and I~Eue-que-clah-we—muck, and that these identifiable
E. r «P5 maintained their separate identities for many years. There is
no substantial evidence that petitioner is the successor in interest tothe claims of the Kathlamet or Nucqueolahwemuck tribes of Indians. C
29» The Commission finds that as of the date of the making of

the unratified Treaty of August 5, l85l, with the Clatsop lndians the
population of this group did not exceed 80 people who were apparently
living in 3 Village or villages at or near the mouth of the Columbia
river on its south shore near Point Adams. The Commission further
finds that the Clatsop still used and occupied at the date of the treaty
the lands in the vicinity of their fishing grounds at the mouth of

1‘-Eeacoxsa Creek ( see Article 3 of the unratified treaty) and that the

Tillamook Indians were using the area around Seaside, Oregon, just

t'\)
C)

U1

south of this location (Tr. 67). The Commission finds that petitioner,
Clatsop Indians, has proven aboriginal or Indian title to those lands
beginning at the western extremity of Point Adams, thence east along

the south shore of the Columbia River to where the Lewis and Clark

River enters Youngs Bay, thence up the said Lewis and Clark River to

a point on said river due east of the northern limits of Seaside, Oregon,

thence from said point due west to the Pacific Ocean and thence north

along the coast to the place of beginning. (See Def. Ex. 155).

30. The Commission finds that as of the date of the unratified
Treaty 05 August 9, l85l, with the "Lower Band of Chinook Indians,“
or'what have been referred to in previous findings as the “Chinook
proper," that the population of said group (including the fewldillipa.
Chinooks who were treated with separately) did not exceed 60 people.
The Commission further finds that much of the area now claimed by

said group in the vicinity of Willipa (Shoalwater) Bay was not ex»
clusively used and occupied by said group as of the date of the alleged
taking and for many years prior thereto. Chehalis speaking peoples

had been moving into said area in the early 1830's and were also

using its resources. The Commission finds that petitioner, Chinook
Tribe (proper), was living inia limited number of settlements along

the Columbia River near what is now Chinook,‘Washington. The Commission
finds that the Chinook (proper) Tribe has proven aboriginal or Indian
title to those lands on the mainland in the State of'Washington on the

north side of the Columbia River now embraced within Township l0 North,

:......;'»'es lo and ll west and the’ fractional townships 9 North in Ranges 10

and ll West, including Sand Island in Baker B33’: (See Def. BX. 155)»
-351-o The Commission finds that .‘i‘ol1o*«Ii_I1g the making of the unratified

'l‘reatysof August 5, 1851, with the Clatsop Tribe of Indians (Fdg. 10),

and the making of the unratified Treaty of August 9. 1851: With the

I.-ne'er Band of Chinook In&ans, or the Chinook Tribe proper (Fdg. 13),

the defendant assumed definite control over the areas of land exclusively used and occupied by said Clatsop Tribe and Lower Band of Chinook

Indians, as described in Findings 29 and 30, disregarding the aboriginal

rightsof said Indians. It was in this way, and as of the respective

dates of August 5, 1851 and August 9, 1851, that the lands aboriginally

st OWINFQ army}
*0? 

o’""*'"'~"' ed ’*‘.*' the Cla*:.s...'o Tribe and t-‘he Tower Band of‘ Chinook

%"-Inc-oxu-I-in-run-an In-U.

ndians were taken from them Without their consent.

Edgar E. Witt .
Chief Corarnissioner

Louis J. 0'1~Earr
Associate Commissioner

 I-E. Holt
Associate Commissioner

6 20?

