6 LL61;
BEFORE:  INDIAN cmnzs con:-:ISSIoN

rm: IOWA Tame or THE Io.-o. RESER- )
IATION IN KANSAS AND r:E:S3_a.SKA, THE )
[on TRIBE or THE Io.-IA RESERVATION )
[N OKLAHOMA, et al.3 THE SAC AND )
§'ox TRIBE or INDIANS or OKLAHCE-‘LA, )
 SAOAND FOX trams OF MISSDURI, Ar)
 AND; K TRIBE or MISSISSIPPI )
ms IOI.-EA, et halo, )
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

P etitioners ,

v. Docket No. 135

“I-IE UNITED STATES OF AMFIRICA,

Defendant.
Decided: July 2, 1958

FINDINGS OF FACT
The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
Petitioners

1. The Iowa Nation of Indians is comprised of petitioners (1) the
ma Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in Kansas and Nebraska and (2) the
ma Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in Oklahoma. Both of the petitioner
'ibes are residing within the territorial limits of the United States
ad are the sole successors in interest to the Iowa Nation of Indians _,
.d, pursuant to the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60
at. 959) and on behalf of said nation and all its members, are entitled
present these claims 3 relative to the title and ownership of lands set
rth in Finding LL herein. (Iowa petitioners proposed finding 1; Decadant‘ s finding 1).

2. The Sac and Fox Nation, referred to in the petition as the "Con-federated Sac and Fox" is comprised of three bands, petitioners herein,
and, residing within the territorial limits of the United States, are the
successors in interest to the rights of the Sac and Fox Nation. These
bands are: The Sac and Fox Tribe oflndians of Oklahoma, represented by
individual member petitioners Edward Hack, Pauline Lewis and Williazn
Newashe; The Sac and Fox Tribe of Missouri, represented by individual
petitioners Charles W. Robidoux, John Conneu, Dorothy Gilfillian,

Thomas Green, and Thomas Herrick; and the Sac and Fox Tribe of the Mississippi in Iowa, represented by individual member petitioners, Kenneth

Youngbear, Charles Davenport, Percy Bear, and Columbus Keahna. The petitioner tribes as well as the individual member petitioners, on behalf of
"‘ Sac and For Nation and all its members are entitled under the pro«=visions of the Indian Claims Commission Act to present these claims

relative to the title-and ownership of those lands as described and set

out in Finding h (Tr. 3-7).

Sub Q‘ ect Mat ter

3. The lands involved in this proceeding are situated in north central and northeastern Missouri and southeastern Iowa and were a part of
that vast territory, which was acquired by the United States from France by
virtue of the “Louisiana Purchase" in the treaty concluded on April 30, 1803
(8 Stat. 200), such acquisition being subject to a right of occupancy in
favor of the Indian tribes due to their original and previous possession.

1:. Petitioners ceded all their right, title, and interests in the

lands involved in this proceeding by virtue of separate treaties, each

6 1:65

6 1:66

concluded on August 1;, 1821;. Each cession included all of those lands
officially designated as Royce 69 and l20, and the total area ceded as
set out in "Article lst" of each treaty reads as follows:
The ("Sock and Fox tribes . . . . ." "Ioway_ . . . J‘) . . .
do hereby agree, in consideration of certain sums of money,
etc.__to be paidto . . . . . bythe Government of the United
States, as hereinafter stipulated, to cede and forever quit

claim, and do, in behalf of their said tribes or nations,
hereby cede, relinquish, and forever quit claim, unto the

United States, all right, title, interest, and claim, to the

lands . . . within the limits of the state of Missouri, which

are situated, lying, and being, between the Mississippi and

Missouri rivers, and a line running from the Missouri, at the

entrance of Kansas river north one hundred miles to the northwest corner of the state of Missouri and from thence east to

the Mississippi . . . . ." (7 Stat. 229; 7 stat. 231)

(a) Excepted from thomlands ceded under the separate treaties of
August 1;, 18214 is that portion officially designated as Royce 50, which
was ceded under the provisions of the purported treaty of November 3,
l80’.L between certain members of the petitioner Sac and Fox Nation and the
United States, and described generally in so far as pertinent to these
proceedings as lying between the Mississippi River on the East, and the
Missouri River on the South, and bounded on the west ani north by -a line
running north from a point on the Missouri River at the mouth of the
Gasconnade River to a point on the Jeffreon River thirty miles from the
mouth, thence down the Jeffreon River to the Mississippi. (Iowa Pet.
Finding 53 Sec and Fox Finding 5; 7 Stats 834)..

6 (b) Cession 69 lies wholly within the State of Missouri; while Cession
l2O is located in the extreme southeastern portion of the State of Iowa and

is described in Article 1st of the Treaty of August 1;, 18231iC0nCl1lded with

the petitioners Sac and Fox Nation as that land lying between the Des Hoines

and Mississippi Rivers and south of that line running from the northwest
corner of the State of Missouri east to the Mississippi River. (7 Stat.
229; Eighteenth.Annual Report of the Bureau of.American Ethnology 18961897, Part II "Indian Land Cessions in the United.States," Charles C.
Royce - My Missouri I, My Iowa I.)

S. The petitioner, Iowa Nation of Indians, seeks to establish a
compensable interest in those lands, or a portion thereof, ceded under
the Treaty of.August h, 182k (7 Stat. 231) by showing that said nation
held (1) aboriginal Indian title at the time of cession, or (2) a "recognized title" to the area so ceded.

p. 2, 199)

(Iowa proposed findings of fact,

6. The Commission finds and concludes as a.matter of'law that the
andant did not recognize or intend to recognize either under the
Prairie dn,Chien Treaty of 1825 (7 Stat. 272), or any other treaty,
statute, or agreeent, any compensable interest, title, or legal right
to the lands, or any portion thereof, in Royce cessions 69 and 120 as
described in Finding h.

7. The petitioner Iowa Nation of Indians limits it present claim
based on aboriginal use and occupancy at the time of the treaty of 182k
(7 Stat. 231) to those lands within that portion of Cession 69 lying west
of the watershed between the Grand.and Chariton Rivers.

(a) Iowas Ex. 183 - a.map introduced by the petitioners Iowa Nation
to "show the situation with respect to exclusive use and ownership of
Cesssion 69 and 120 as of the year l82h” (Iowa proposed Finding 22; see

Sac and Fox proposed Finding 17).

6 ho?

(b) Dr. Wallace, petitioners‘ expert witness, testified that he

prepared Iowa Exhibit l83 and that this map represents: ". . . . the territory described in the Treaties of 1821:, involving the cession of the sac
and Fox and the Iowa, however, excluding the territory covered by the
Missouri section of Cession $0. The area to thevest is colored pink and

represents the region predominantly used by the Iowa. The area to the

east is colored green and represents the area predominantly used by the

Sec and Fox . . ." (Tr. 20 and 21).

8. The Iowa Nation of Indians are classified as of the Siouan linguistic stem of the Chiwere subdivision, which includes the Otoe and

Missouri Indians. See:

(a) Indian Tribes of North America - Swanton, p. 267.
"Tradition assigns to this tribe a single origin with
the Winnebago, Oto and Hissouri, and it is borne out
by the close linguistic relationship between then."

(b) Iowa Introductory Exhibit I.

"Traditional and linguistic evidence proves that the
Iowa sprang from the Winnebago stem, which appears to
have been the mother stock of some other of the southwestern Siouan tribes; but the closest affinity of the
Iowa is with the Oto and Missouri, the difference in
language being merely dialectic."

.9. Sometime toward the middle of the eighteenth century the Iowa Tribe

or Nation moved southwardly from about the Okoboji Lake region inwthe inorar

western part of Iowa along the Missouri River where they finally settled

just south of the present city of Council Bluffs, Iowa.

Until about 1765. This location is northwest of the boundaries of Ce.;::».&;.;.  y

69.

(a) Lewis and Clark reported in l8O1.L the location of the old Iowa

village on the Missouri River as being 30 miles above the entrance to  a

The re they ran; 

6 1:68

liver Platte (Iowa Ex. 21; Def. Ex. 9).
(b) Auguste Chouteau referring to this period in notes he had
written on the Iowa in 1816 states "The Iowas formerly had their village

on the right bank of the Missouri about eighteen miles above the river

Platte on the lands of the Mahas.",

(c) In the “Iowa Journal of History and Politics 19353" Mildred

Mott Wedel stated: "To sum up, then, the Ioway Village was on the

east side of the Missouri River about seventeen miles above the mouth
of the Mosquito River, and three miles below the present day Indian

Creek, just south of a high bluff. This would be just south of the City

of Council Bluffs below a bluff that stood out noticeably." (Def. Ex. 5)

(d) Dr. Wallace, petitioners‘ expert witness, testified as follows:
"They (Iowa) apparently were under pressure from the Sioux

people in this region who surrounded them to the north, to the

east and also to the west, and drifted southward along the

Hissouri River, apparently stopping for a time somewhere in the

neighborhood or somewhat north of the Little Sioux River; they
moved down to a site, village on the east bank of the Missouri

River, a mile or two south of Council Bluffs." (Tr. 21 and 22)

Questioned on the date of the movement to the Council Bluffs area and
its relative location to Cessions 69 and 120, Dr. Wallace stated:_ "Council
Bluffs is northwest of Cession 69 and 120. The precise date at which they
arrived at Council Bluffs I do not kn w. It was probably about 1725; somewhere in the early part of the Eighteenth Century.“ (Tr. 22) He further
stated that? “xhey remained in the Council Bluffs area until about 1765,
so they remained in the Council Bluffs area from 1730 to I765." (Tr. 21:14)

(e) Dr. Zachamr Gussow, who was called as an expert witness by the

defendant substantially corroborated Dr. E-..’allace's testimony on this point

6 I469

when he stated that the Iowa Tribe started to move slowly out of the
Spirit Lake and Lake Okeboji region and started to hunt further south
from the northwestern corner of Iowa, around 1700, and by 1721 had moved
down to a location near Mosquito Creek, near the Missouri, in approximately the vicinity of Council Bluffs, where they remained until about
1757. (Tr. 296)
10. During a period from about 1755 to l76S the Iowa Tribe abandoned
their village site at Council Bluffs and moved slowly eastward in a body
and established their principal village on the Des Hoines River approximately hO leagues up this river near the present site of Selma, Iowa.
There they remained until approximately l8l2. A second Iowa village was
established during this period on the Iowa River and there are reports
of two lesser Iowa townsites across the Mississippi River in Illinois,
which were abandoned around 1803 or 18014. All of these village locations
are outside of Cession 69 and northeast of the area claimed by the Iowa
Tribe or Nation in this proceeding.

(a) "An Account of Louisiana" - 1803. An abstract of documents in
the offices of the Secretaries of State and of the Treasury:

“Returning to the Mississippi and ascending it from the Missouri,

about 75 leagues from the mouth of the latter, the River I~1oingow

or Riviera de Moine enters the Mississippi on the west side and 

it are situated the Ayoas, a nation originally from the I=Iisso'o.:;

speaking a language of the Otachatas; it consisted of 200 warrio 

_ before the smallpox lately raged among them." (Iowa Ex. 19)

Earlier accounts from Spanish sources take notice of this Iowa

Des Moine River location as witness the report of rancis C-ouget to

de Galvez in 1777. In describing the various Indian sites ffOm the trade

ing post at St. Louis Couget wrote:

Lewis

the I-{uen River. "

"The? (Iowa) are located eighty leagues from this village

(St. Louis) by water by the Misisipi river on the shores of
{Iowa Ex. 13)

and Clark wrote in 1805:

"Their village is ‘£20 leagues up the River du Iéoin, their

country join the Siouslands and extends to the Missouri

River 0 0 In (Defo EX. 

Thomas Anderson, a British trader, reported in 1801-1802:

tribe of Indians . .. . ."

"I ascended the Des I-Eoines about fifty miles, to the Ioway
(Iowa Ex. 18)

(b) Colonel Auguste Chouteau, who spent many years during the latter

part of the 18th and early part of the 19th centuries among the Missouri

Indians, and according to Eafilliam Clark he was partly responsible for the

Iowa migration from Comil Bluffs to their village sites on the Des Moine

in the 1869‘ s,

According to Chouteau:

"The Iowas formerly had their village on the right bank of the

Missouri about eighteen miles above the river Platt on the lands

of the Hahas."

6 1471

he then sets out the extent of country while they were living at the Missouri

site:

"They (Iowa)however pretended to claim that small tract of land
upon which necessity had compelled them to settle; but their
country was bounded on the north by the dividing ridge that separated tlm waters of the Grand & Des Moins rivers, east by the Otos,
south by the Missouri river which separated them from the Mahas &
west by the Sioux their most inveterate enemies. . . ."

 

and then Chouteau speaks of their leaving the Council Bluffs area:

“Afraid to hunt on their own lands lest they might be attacked by
the Sioux, and constantly threatened by (illegible) Mahas & Otos
who wishes to drive them from (illegible) mall tract of countm'
on which they had established (illegible) they determined on a
removal to the country of the river dyes Moins which had long before
been abandoned by the Moingonas a band of Sioux who formerly inhabited it. And for that purpose, in 1765 they sent a deputation
to Mr. de Leclede of t., Louis who then had the exclusive trade

of the Missouri requesting to know whether in case of their removal

he would send braves among them in the new situation which
they proposed to occupy, his answer beig favorable about
one-half of the Tribe moved in the same year to the country

they had designated being about a hundred and fifty mil...s
up the river des 1»-ioins, . . . . the balance of the tribe

all removed to the same place in the course of two or three
years." (Def. Ex. 12)

Stephen Long in Thxaites "Early Western Travels," Vol. 15, 1819-20,
recounts the Iowa leaving the Missouri site as a complete detachment from

this area. He states:

"The Ioways, after having resided in a village on the lower part
of the Missouri a considerable space of time, were rejoined by
the band above mentioned; when they abandoned their position,

and returned to the waters of the His sissippi and erected a
village on the Hoyene, where it still remains." (Iowa EL. 62)

Governor William Clark, who participated in the treaties oi‘ cessions involved in this proceeding, relying upon Chouteau‘s notes, stated in a

letter to the Secretary of War, dated February 20, 18213

". . . . This Tribe (Io:-rays) had been induced by Col. Chouteau
to abandon their country near the Council Bluffs on the Missouri
and settle on the River de Moin to be more convenient to trade

with them . "

(c) Dr. Wallace testified to two other Iowa towns, both being in

Illinois, one located opposite the mouth of the Iowa River and the other

opposite the mouth of the Des Moins. (Tr. 22)

He states further that they were abandoned in the early l800’s and

that:

"The main Iowa village during this period, lets say roughly
1800 was probably on the Des Moines." (Tr. 22)

Morse’s "The American Gazetter“ for 1798 lists a "Lower Iowa Town” on the
east side of the Mississippi River some 61 miles below the mouth of the

Iowa River, and an "upper Iowa Town" on the east side of the I-Zississippi

River. (Def. &. 16).

Pike‘s report of 1807 indicates the Iowa lived
in two villages , one on the ”De I-Ioyen" and the other on the "Iowa."
(Iowa Ex. 30)

1.1.. Governor Clark sought to remove the Iowa Nation from under the
influence of the British during the War of 1812 by directing them to move
south and west from their Des Moines River village across to the Hissouri
River. Some of the tribe made the effort and moved intothe CharitonGrand River area where about 1816 the first Iowa village was reported to
be located somewhere on the Grand River. Later in 1823 a permanent Iowa
Village was built somewhere on the Grand River in which eventually the
whole Iowa Nation lived for a period. From about 1812 to 1827, because of
the hostilities between Great Britain and the United States and a certain

riction among themselves and with the Sac and Fox Indians, the Iowa Nation
as a tribal unit became greatly divided, some returned to their old village
on the Des Moines River, some moved over to the Missouri River west of
93551011 59 and joined up with the Otoes and others scattered themselves
about the Chariton-Grand River area in undetermined numbers and at unknown
locations both within and without the area embracing the western portion of
Cession 69.

(a) By letter, dated September 12, 1813 , Clark outlined his proposal
to the Secretm of War to move the Iowas and Sac and Fox tribes from the
Mississippi across to the I-‘iissouri River in order to prevent them from
joining the English. He states therein:

“I have therefore thought it a correct measure to draw off these

tribes from the Mississippi and place them on the Missouri and
send the United States factory which formerly supplied them at

6 1:73

Fort Madison, up the Missouri to supply than on that River at
a point I shall assign for those Indians to remain during the
present Indian war."

and further:

"I have sent also to the Ioways directing them to pass across
to the Hissouri and a trader will be there to trade with them."
(Iowa EEC.  '

(b) The first reference to an Iowa village on the Grand River is
contained in an official report from Governor Clark in 1816. (Def. Ex.

5)site with reference to Clark‘s letter:

Dr. Gussow, defendant's expert witness, commented on this village

"Some of the Iowa were divided on the question of alliances between the two countries at war, Britain and America . . . . the
first documentation I have is about 1816, when the Iowa became
divided at this period, and some of the Iowa leave the Des Hoines
River village. .. .... It is _at this time when they establish a site on the Grand River,
but where on the Grand River I don't know.

The first reference I have in a letter from Clark, . . . . I
this is dated Nove-:3oer 1:, 1816, . . . .

The Grand River village is mentioned in a number of documents
post dating 1815 or 1816. In none of these documents can I
identify the location of that village." (Tr. 316)

Dr. Wallace, on cross examination refers to the same Iowa village on

the Grand River in the following manner:

The village of the Iowa on the Grand River which is being tallied
about there, was established during the War of 1812 to draw the
Sac and Fox and lose away from British influence and frm contact
with pro British Imrlians in the upper Missouri.

As a consequence, the Iowa left their village on the Des Maine
and the Sac and Fox left their village at Rock River and presumably other villages further up came down." (Tr. 170)

Earlier Dr. Wallace in a similar vein stated on direct examination that:

6 MIL

"During the ‘War of 1812 the Iowa were brought down from their
village on the Des.Moines and located temporarily in settlements on the Grand River, on the Osage River and on the La I-iine
River in order to prevent contact with British agents." (Tr.

31)

Dr. Wallace indicated that after the war the bulk of the Iowa went back
to their old village on the River des I-‘ioines. (Tr. 32)

(c) During the war of l8l2, Stephen Long reported that one of the
principal Iowa chiefs by the name of "Hard Heart," left the main body
of the Iowa Nation at the Des Moine River and moved westward and joined
the Otoes across the Missouri. Hard Heart did not approve of the proBritish sentiments of his nation. His defection according to Long
resulted in a subsequent westward movement of the rest oi‘ his nation
" . . . so that the Otoes, Missouries, and Ioways were then united."

(Def. Ex. 26) Apparently these followers of Hard Heart returned to

air village on the Des Moines River about l820. (Def-» Exo 5: 253
Sac and Fox Ex. 185). George Sill by writing from Fort Osage on October 1,
l82O confirms the divided and meandering aspects of the Iowas. He States:

"This tribe (Iowa) is about as numerous as the Kansas. They

are latterly much divided, so that I am unable to state precisely how many villages they occupy, or where they are located.

About half the tribe I understand joined the Ottoes, near the

Council Bluffs, last year, with the intention of raaaining there.

I am not sure whether they still remain there or not. The other

part of the tribe remains in two villages _,I believe, on the
Des Hoines and Grand Rivers."

Dr. Wallace attributes the Iowa migration to join the Otoes in 1819
as stemming from a dispute with the sac and Fox. (Tr. l9h) This fact
seems to be confirmed by a letter written to Secretary of War from

ienjamin O‘Fallon, Indian Agent, dated September 25, 1819, which reads,

on part :

6 1:75

‘IA misunderstanding havina latel t_aken place between the Sockees and the Ioways has induced the latter to abandon their

original residence (on the Dcmoin and Mississippi) and locate
themselves on this river; they are now living with the ttres
and Hissouris who were all once one nation." (Iowas Ex. 61)

Thomas Forsyth, reporting on the Indians within his agency, stated on
Hay 12, 1822:

"The Ihowais have heretofore been a lost sheep, living in two

or three different villages, and the principal chiefs with some
few followers living with the Ottos whose language is similar

to that of the Ihowais. I sent last fall a talk to the Ihowais
advising the whole of that nation to live together in one village
up the River de Moine." (Iowa Ex. 78)

(d) According to For-syth the Iowa established a new village somewhere on the Grand River in 1823, in which the whole Nation was locatedo
He states in his letter of July '3, 1823:

"I have been informed that the Ihowai Indians formerly residing during the summer months on River de Heine have all removed
and built_a new village on the Grand River which falls into the
Missouri River some distance above Chariton." (Iowa 21:. 814)

Dr. Wallace spotlights the existence of the Iowa Grand River village
on his map introduced as Exhibit 1833

"Well, as we have said many times, this village which is smbolized
by that red dot was built in 1823, and at that time according to
Forsythe, it held all or almost all of the Iowa tribe, which would
be at the top limit a thousand or probably I would say of Iowa who
did not live there. But it would be the main village at that time.“

Thomas Forsyth confirmed the fact of the Iowa withdrawal from the
Des Moines River site to the Grand River village since they were now outside of his agency in 1821;. (Iowa Ex. 91)
According to Dr.

village for four years until 182? ad then moved over to Little Platte

River west of Cession 69 in 3.827. (Tr. S7)

‘fallace the Iowa Nation remained at their Grand River

6 1:76

U12. As the frequency of white contact with the Indians increased in

this area, the activity of the Indian trader assumed a more important role

in the red man‘s economy. Hunting for the fur bearing animal, while satisfying the immediate wants, nevertheless provided the necessary means of

exchange for Indians to trade for the white man‘s goods.

(a) Dr. Wallace summed up the importance of hunting to the Indian

of this day in the following manner:

"Hunting would be extremely important to an Indian tribe, not
merely for the sake of the value of the meat which a hunter
could get for himself and his family or for the skins and furs,
and bone, which they coulduse for making articles of clothing
and other valuables, but particularly because it gave them furs
and pelts which could be traded to Europeans for hardware and dry
goods which were regarded by the Indians as essential elements

of their standard of living at this stage. So that the Indian

currency system if we can put in this phrase was made up of skins
and furs."% (Tr. 1:2, 1:11)

Wallace also testified that with the increase of Indian trading activity the production or agricultural products declined. (Tr. 151;-156)

According to Dr. Wallace, Indian agricultural activity centered about growing‘''’. . . large quantities of corn, beans, squashes, those things in

several varieties."

(b) Dr. Gussow, in his report (Def. Etc. llh) confirmed the importance

of hunting to the Iowa Indians after the coming of the whites. He states

6 1:77

the following in his opening paragraph under sub-title "Iowa Hunting Grounds":

‘The Iowa lived a semi-nomadic life, hunting for subsistence,
for reasons of economic exchange with European traders, and
augmenting their diet by planting small quantities of corn,
beans, squash, and other crops. It is no exaggeration to state
that with the coming of the Europeans, hunting for exchange became the dominant economic activity of the Iowa, as with other
Indians. The Iowa not only spent more time in hunting for exchange than in any other economic activity, but their way of life
was to become dependent upon European articles of manufacture to

l".'"R 0'
'. I

the point where a failure to obtain trade goods could mean
starvation.‘

l3.

terms.

Documentation is practically nil. Such questions, _as intensity

and frequency of use of a given area and the relative size of an Iowa
hunting party are strictly matters of inference or even mere comecture.
At the time the Iowa Nation was located at its village site near the
present town of Council Bluffs up until approximately 1765, the IOWaS
hunted close the Missouri River area, ranging eastward to the Des Moines
and southwardly to the Nisnabotna River, but the area primarily lies
within what is now southwestern Iowa, being generally north and west of
Cession 69. After the Iowa Nation moved eastward (circa 1765) to their
Des Moines River village site they continued to hunt westward then to the
southwestern part of Iowa to the Missouri River in the general region

of the headwaters of the Grand and Chariton Rivers, and dipping into the

northwestern portion of Cession 69.

(a) Dr. 1rIallace‘s testimony in reference to the Iowa hunting area,

circa 1765, reflects the difficulty in delimiting the area. He states:
"By the time they reached Council Bluffs, still under pressure
from the Sioux, their hunting probably . . . and this again is

inference . . . was southward along the Missouri and eastward
towards the Des Ivloines.

"I would think that by . . . well, from l76S they probably were
making use of the territory south of Council Bluffs and in the
general region south of the Des Iioines and between these two
points ('2) of the Missouri river, which would include the pink
area, Cession 69 and 120, although this as their hunting ground,
isn‘t specifically delineated." (Tr. 214)

Delimitation of Iowa hunting grounds can be made only in general

6 1178

Dr. Gussow in his report on the Iowa hunting grounds during this period

states:

"The Iowa must have hunted in what is now western Iowa,

east to the Des I-Eoines, south to the Iiishnabotna, and

northward at least to the Boyer and perhaps to the little

Sioux River." (Def. Ex. llllv, p. l9)

Dr. Gussow cites Chouteau‘s notes as outlining the Iowa territory in
1760, and he concludes that the entire area lies outside of Cession
69.

(b) In his notes written in l8l6, Auguste Chouteau, referring
to the period, circa 1760, attempted to delineate the hunting areas
or territory claimed by the various tribes in this region. Besides
the Iowas, he noted the Otos, Missouri, Sioux and Kansas, among others.
His outline of the Iowa's claim to the lands in this area has previously been set out in Finding lO(b).

(c) After moving to their Des Moines River site in about I765,
the Iowas continued to hunt westward to the Missouri River. Thomas

Anderson, an Indian trader, who spent the years 1801-1802 with this

tribe, stated in his report:

"I ascended the Des Hoines about fifty miles, to the

Ioway tribe of Indians . . . These Indians hunted

near the Missouri, about ninety miles across the country

where we were located.“ (Iowa Ex. l8)
In his report in 180?, Pike reported "The Iowas reside on the river
De Moyen, and westward to the Missouri." (Iowa Ex. 30) Stephen Long
noted in recalling his early travels "The Saul-cs, Foxes, and Ioways,
hunt in the plains toward the sources of Grand River, where elk and
deer are still nurnerous, and the latter dispose of their ‘pelfries'
to traders on the Missouri." (Iowa Ex. 63) Lewis and Clark reporting on their expedition in l805 place the Iowa country next to the

Sioux:

ta

"Their (Iowa) village is 11-0 leagues up the River Deemoen,
their country join the Soues Lands and extend to the
Missouri Ever . . . . They a.re descendants of the ancient
Missouris, and claim the country west of them to the _
Missouri; but as to its precise limits, or bourdaries, "
between themselves and the Saul-cees and Foxes, I could
never learn."

(C1) After the War of 1812, when the Iowas for the most part,
had moved generally from their Des Irloine River site to locations on
the Grand River and across to the Platte River, Agent Sibley, who was
stationed at Fort Osage, reported in l83.9 to Governor Cl:-.r1«: that he
believed the Iowas had as just a claim to the lands northwest of the
Missouri as did the Osage who had ceded all their interests to the
lands north of’ the Missouri River in the 1808 treaty with the United
States. His report states, in part:

"I confess myself an advocate for the Ioways in this

matter . . . The claims of our Indian Tribes to lands

are so extremely vague and undefined, so conflicting and
intermixed, that I cannot conceive a much more difficult
task, than to assign to each tribe its proper limits . . .
Therefore I think it would much better comport with the
liberal views and benevolent policy of our Government toward those poor creatures, to satisfy them all by annuities,
in proportion to their numters, for such lands we desire to.
add to our domain, used as the hunting grounds of any Tribe
or Tribes.“

and further, indicating use of the same area by neighboring tribes,

“Perhaps, it would be just to say, that the forests and
wilds of Missouri belong in common to those Nations of
Indians who lived contiguous to them, and hunt thru them.
And that when our Government thinks proper to reclaim
those vdlds for the use of one People, renumeration ought
to be made in common to those tribes whose natural pursuits
are thus interfered with.“ (Iowa Ex. 57)

In a subsequent report dated October 1, l820, Sibley stated in reference

to the Iowa hunting grounds:

6 L180

"The Ioways hunt principally between the I-Eissouri north of
it, and the Mississippi river, from the heads of the two
Chacatons (Chariton) , up to the Nodoway and sometimes i‘ urther up. "

(e) Dr. Wallace, petitioners‘ expert, is of the opinion that
the Iowa traditional hunting grounds to which the Iowas claimed
“exclusive” control from 1800 to 1824 were bounded by a line

“running up from the Missouri River along the watershed
between . . . the Grand and Chariton Rivers, to a point

on the Des Moines and possibly across the Des I-ioines for
some small distance, then turning up- the Des Ivloines and
westward to meet a line which I believe I referred to in
earlier testimony between the Iéottoway and Iiishnebottonna
Rivers which flow southward into Missouri through the Platte
Purchase." (Tr, 153)

In reference to the permanency and location of the Iowa hunting vi1-lages or camps, Dr. Wallace confessed lack of knowledge and conse-Q
quently he was unable to determine how frequently the Iowas returned
to their hunting spots. (Tr. 131+, 158)

(f) DI‘. Gussow states in his report that after the Iowa had
located themselves at the Des Moines River site,

" . . . the Iowa hunted in the Des Moines valley, probably

ranging as :E‘ ar as Farebault's trading post two hundred

miles up river, southwest into cession 69 towards the headwaters of the Grand and Chariton rivers, and beyond, west

to the Nishnabotna.” (Def. Ex. 1111», p. 20)
He states further that after 1810 and presumably until the treaty of

cession in 1821+,

"The Iowa continued to hunt in the plains toward the
sources of the Grand river and in the western part of
Cession 69, but largely for secondary animals, elk and
deer."

lllr . From about 1700 to 1821+, the population of the entire Iowa

Nation averaged approximately 1,000 persons. (Iowa Proposed Finding 30)

6481'

15. The Commission finds from all the evidence that the petitioner Iowa Nation of Indians and the petitioner members thereof, are
the successors in interest to the Iowa Tribe or Nation which ceded
under the Treaty of August 4, l821+ (7 Stat. 231) all its interest to
those lands described in Finding 14»; and the Commission finds further

that at the time the defendant acquired title to the aforesaid lands

a by purchase from France in 1803 ‘until the Treaty of 1824, the Iowa

Tribe or Nation held original Indian title to those lands described

within the following boundaries:

“Commencing on the present Missour-Iowa line at a point
which under the call in the Treaty of 1824 formed the

‘northwest corner of the state of Missouri‘ due east

along said line to the northwest corner of Putnam county,
Missouri; thence due south following the western line of
Putnam county and the western line of adjoining Sullivan
county, I'Iissouri to the southwest corner of Sullivan county;
thence on a line due west to the southwest corner of Gentry
county , Missouri; thence due north along the western line
of Gentry county to the place of beginning."

Sac and Fox Claim
16. The petitioner, Sac and Fox Nation seeks to establish a compensable interest in those lands or a portion thereof ceded under the
Treaty of August 1+, 18214 (7 Stat. 229) by showing that said Nation
held (1) aboriginal Indian title at the time of cession, or (2) a
“recognized title" to the area so ceded. A (Sac and Fox Proposed
Finding of Fact, p. 2)
17. The Commission finds and concludes as a matter of law that
the defendant did not recognize or intend to recognize either under

the Treaty of 1801+ (7 Stat. 81+), or any other treaty, statute or agreement, any compensable interest, title or legal right to the lands, or

61482

any portion thereof, in Royce Cessions 69 and 120, as described in
Finding N0. 1+.

18. The petitioner, Sac and Fox Nation limits its present

claim founded upon aboriginal use and occupancy at the time of

the Treaty of l82l+ (7 Stat. 2395 to those lands within Cession 120
and that portion of Cession 69 which lies east of the watershed between the Grand and Chariton Rivers. (Sac and Fox proposed Finding
17; see Commission's Finding 5).

19. Around the middle of the eighteenth century, the individual

Sac and Fox tribes of Indians became closely allied due to their mutual

difficulties with the French. They subsequently began to move as

a body southwestward from the State of Wisconsin toward the Mississippi
River where they finally settled in individual village sites along and
on both sides of the I-hssissippi. These separate Sac md Fox villages

remain fairly consistent during the years that followed up to the Treaty

Of 1821? (7 Stat. 239). These villages range along the Mississippi River

area as far north as the Turkey River and Prairie du Chien region, and
as far south as the mouth of the Des Moines River. Generally the Fox
Tribe occupied the upper villages and the Sac Tribes the lower v:LLlage
sites. The small Sac village at the mouth of the Des Moines River was _

the only village of consequence that lay within the ceded area, it

being located in Cession 120.

(3) Dr. Gussow, defendant's expert witness, states in his report

that the Sac and Fox established alvillage some place on the Rock River

about 1760. (Def . Ex. ll1+, p. 28) Auguste Chouteau in his notes

6483

written in 1816 refers to a similar occurrence when he states that

the Allied Sac and Fox.Tribes, ". . . left their village on the Ouisconsin,

gradually descended the Mississippi and in 1764 settled on Rock River.“;

and he states further:

“The Foxes, or rather a band of them, also removed, in
the same time, to a place called Spanish Hines (Dubuque's)
and no other tribe having opposed them they have for a long

time continued in uninterrupted possession of that tract
of country; . . ." (Def. Ex. 12)

Francisco Cruzat reported in 1780 that the Sac Ration was on the
Mississippi, "forty leagues“ from St. Louis (Sac and Fox Ex. 5). .A
later report made in 1797 by Howard states that the Sac and Fox ". . .
have three villages in the vicinity of River Ana Indes ( the Deslhgines)
. . . .“ (Sac and Fox Ex. 1%) I

(b) :15 l80#.amos Stoddard wrote to Governor Dearborn concerning
the Sac Tribes;

”I'believe an opinion has generally prevailed that the
Sacks mostly resided on the East side of the Hississippi
whereas the contrary appears to be the fact. A trader who
has resided among them for upward of 20 years lately informed me that he now resides among them on the west side
of that river . . . ." (Sac and Fox.Ex. l9)

In a subsequent letter to Dearborn also written in 180%, Stoddard had

this to say:

"How far the whites have encroached on them I cannot learn
— nor am I informed how far the claim of the Saucks and

Reynards extend down the Mississippi. One thing is certain
their claim extends back to the Missouri where some of the

‘whites have settled. ‘They conquered the lands on the Missouri
from.the little Osages. . . .

I believe an opinion has generally prevailed that the Sauks and
Reynards mostly live on the East side of the Hississippi. This
indeed was fornerly'the case . . . . but they now mostly inhabit
a large island formed by a lake on the west side of that river
just above the mouth of the Be Hoine, only 258 miles above this
(St. Iouis)" (Sac and Fox Ex. 20),

In 180-’-Iv the Sac and Fox Nation ceded all its right, title and

interest to those lands described in Royce Cession 50 by the purported
Treaty of November 3, 1801;.
No. 4(a).

(7 Stat. 81;) See Commission's Finding

The ceded area apparently includes the territory referred

to bf Stoddard.

(C) On August 9, 1805 Zebulon Pike depmed from St. Louis to

begin his expedition up the Mississippi River. On August 20, 1805

he arrived at the foot of the rapids de Moyen which extend some eleven

ntiles to the Sac village. Pike encarapted opposite this village and on

the following day addressed the chief men of the village. (Sac and Fox

EX» 29) This village at the confluence of the Des Moines and Mississipppi

Rivers is in Cession 120. In 1810 the report was published as an"Ethno‘§1"3PhY of the Mississippi“ in which Pike set out in detail the locations

of the various Sac and Fox villages he had encountered. It reads in

part:

"The first nations of Indians whom we met with in ascending
the I'1:'z.ssissippi from St. Louis were the Sauks who principally
reside in four vi'_Llages . . . . The first at the head of the
De Hoyen on the ‘:1’. shore consisting of 13 log lodges (at
Montresse, Lee County, Iowa); the second on a prairie on the
E. shore about 60 miles above; the third on the Pdviere de
Roche, about three miles from the entrance (Iiilan, Rock Island
County, Illinois); and the fourth on the river Iowa.

CCOCCQOOCCCCUCICOCDOOOOCIIOIIIIDIIOOCOI-O-I-IOIICICOOOOIOIICCC-CI

The Rejmards reside in three villages -- The first is on the 3'1.
side of the 1‘-Essissippi, six miles above the rapids of River de
Roche (Rock River - Le Claire, Scott County, Iowa); the second

is about l2 miles in the rear of the lead mines (Dubuque, Iowa);

and the third is on Turkey riverhalf a league from its entrance.
(Sac and Fox E:-:3. l35, I36)

 

6485

(<1) On February 19, l806, President Jefferson sent to Congress
a statistical report prepared by Captain Merrivzether Lewis relative
to the Indian tribes of the Louisiana Territory. Lewis places the
Sac Indians at 2,000 souls, living "on the west side of the Mississippi,
140 3-99-Sues above St. Louis“; he remrks that the Sac and Fox Indians

"are so perfectly consolidated, that they may in fact be
considered as one nation only; they speak the same language;
they formerly resided on the east side of the I-hssissippi. ";

Lewis numbers the Fox Tribe at 1200 souls located in one village near
the 38108. (Sac and Fox Ex. 30) Other references to the Des I-Eoine River
village are: Dearborrz, April lO, l806, "(Sac villages) at the Rapids

of the Mississippi above the mouth’ of the River De I~1’oin." (Sac and

FOX EX. 31); Governor Let-Iis, July l, l808,

". . . . . iimediately after the delivery of these horses they
(Sacs) returned from their village at the rapid demoin, situated
on the S. west ‘om of the Mississippi l5 miles above the entrance of the river De I-‘ioin . . . if . . . the Saucs return to
their old village . . . that it will be best to establish a f actory at the rapid demoin on the S, west side of the Mississippi
near their village . . . " (Sac and Fox Ex. 36)

and Indian 3-agent Johnson's report to Governor Clark, July 25, 1813;
". . . The Sac Nation has seven hundred men, six hundred of
them live at the mouth of the river De Moin friendly disposed
. . . Fox nation four hundred men, two hundred fifty live at
the mouth of Demcin River, one hundred near Prairie du Chien,
fifty at their lead mines on the Mississippi." (Sac and Fox

EX. 38)
Ce) Dr. Gussow in his report in reference to the Sac Des Moine
River village comments as follows:
“Of these settlements the Des Hoines river site was

the only one within cession 120. The Des Ivioines site
was also one of the smallest of all the Sac villages.

6486

Pike mentions l3 lodges. Fors$h in letters written in
l8l9 and 1820 refers to the Des Moines site as a ‘small’
Village, . . . The Des E-Eoines site was abandoned in l82l
when the inhabitants moved to the mouth of the Iowa river,

but was resettled a year later b* a few families (who are
related to a half blood _[trader7Jna..*-ted Blondeau). These

latter families were still there, according to Forsyth,
in 1821b. The main body of the Sac numbering 800-1000 warriors, continued to live, during this period, at the large
Rock River settlement." (Def. Ex. Ill!-, pp. 31. 32)

According to Gussow there were never any Fox villages in Cession 69,

but nevertheless, "The general history of the Fox Indians, their
migrations, hunting grounds, wars and alliances d‘ter 1733 were closely
linked with those of the Sac." (ibid p. 32)

20. During the ‘iafar of l8l2, portions of the Sac and Fox Nation
who claimed some allegiance to the United States moved down from their
Mississippi River sites and were found at various locations on the
Salt, Missouri, Osage and Chariton Rivers on lands within Cession 69.

(a) John Campbell reported to Governor Clark on March 10,
l8l2:

”. . . I have an interview with some of the Sac Indians

who claim protection from the Americans. I told them I
had no instructions to protect them.

The chief informed me that there were a number of his

nation on the Mississippi above the Salt River and that

they were all friendly toward the whites.“ (Tr. 370. 371)
According to Dr. Gussow these Indians came down to the Fort Mason
area to escape those persons who were pro British, (Tr. 371)

(b) As reported in the journal of Jules de Mun, members of the

Sac Tribe were on the Osage River committing depredations against the

Osage Indians and the white settlement at. the mouth of the Osage

River :

"There were Sacs belonging to the village which has been
established in the last three years, by permission of the
government, on the Osage River, and who under the appearance of peace, commit 93. sorts of depredations which they
pretend are attffnutable to the Sacs of Mississippi.“

(Tr. 373; Def. Ex. 36)

(C) Thomas Forsyth reported to Governor Clark on March 21+, l820:
"It would appear that Sac and Fox Indians had a camp near

a white settlement located on the hfissouri River below the

mouth of Grand River - This or the Boone's lick Settlement."
(Sac and Fox Ex. 65)

21. Having established their village sites along the Mississippi

River in 1760, the Sac and Fox proceeded to hunt the area on both sides

d of the river from as high up as Prairie du Chien and the Wisconsin River

to as far south as the mouth of the Illinois River. The Sac hunting
grounds east of the Mississippi River below the Des Moines River to
the Missouri lay principally in Cession 50 and the northeastern part of
Cession 69. After l81D, since the quantity of game and fur-bearing
animals had greatly diminished in eastern Iowa and Missouri, the Sac and
Fox were compelled to extend their hunting trips toward the headwaters
of the Imra and Des 3.-foines River, and toward the headwaters of the Grand
and Charlton Rivers across to the Missouri River. As a result many of
the Sac and Fox gave up extended hunting trips because of the distance
involved and concentrated upon the lead mining activity in Dubuque ,
Iowa region. After 1812 Sac and Fox excursions southward to the
Piissouri for the most part consisted of raiding parties bent on commiting depreciations upon both the white and Indian settlements in the area.
(a) As early as 3.795 the Sacs were reported to be hunting in as

far down the Mississippi as the Missouri River. Trudeau reported in

6

1795 that: "The Sacs, who are very numerous, hunting on the Missouri,

killed ten or twelve Osages . . .“ (Sac and Fox Ex. l0)

(b) Dr. Gussow states that during the latter part of the eighteenth
Century‘ the Spanish ‘trading policy was to encourage the neighboring
Indian Tribes to come to St. Louis to trade with the Spanish. Such
tribes as the Osage, Iowa, Kickapoo, Mascoutins, Potawatomi, Ottawa,
Sac and Fox regularly made trips to St. Louis (Def. Ex. 111;, p. 39)
According to Thomas Eutchins in 1776, the Spanish traders,

". . . . have drawn all the Indian trade of the Missouri,

part of that of the Mississippi (northwards) and of the

tribes of the Indians residing near the Quisconsing and

Illinois rivers 'to~this village (St. Louis). . . ."
(Def. Ex. 82)

(C) The Sac and Fox and Osage Indians during this period and
into the early l800‘s were intermittently engaged in tribal warfare
with each other throughout the entire area embraced in the southeastern
portion of Cession 69 and in Cession 50 at the confluence of the Hissouri and Mississippi Rivers. (Def. Ex. ll?-I-; see "Black Hawk's"
biosrazohcsr. Def. Exs. 63. 71. 105)

After the United States acquired this area in 1803, Lewis and Clark

explored the Louisiam Territory beginning in 1801». As to the Sac and

Fox hunting grounds Lexis reported:

”. . . . they sometimes hunt in the country west of them
towards the Missouri, but their principal hunting is on
both sides of the Mississippi, from the mouth of the
Ouisconsin to the mouth of the Illinois River.” (Sac
and Fox Ex. 30)

Amos Stoddard reported to Governor Dearborn on June 22, l80«’-E—:

". . . . How far the whites have encroached on them I cannot

learn - nor am I informed how far the claims of the Sauks
and Reynards extend down the Mississippi. One thing is cer-tain their clair: extends back to the Missouri where some of
the whites have settled. They have conquered the lands on
the Missouri frm the Little Osages." (Sac and Fox Ex. 20)

Zebulon Pike report‘ n-'='

-~*-::

on his expedition to the headwaters of the
Mississippi in 1805-1807 had this to say about the Sac hunting
grounds: . I

"They hunt on the Mississippi and its confluent streams,
from the Illinois to the river des Iowa and on the plains
west of them, which border the Missouri. They have for
many years past made war on the Santeaux, Osages and
Missouris. . . .";

and as to the Fox hunting grounds he states:

I‘!

. . . They hunt on both sides of the Mississippi from
the river Iowa below Prairie due Chiens to a river of that
name (Upper Iowa river), above said village." (Def. Ex. l8)

(d) In his biography written about l833, Black Hawk, the legendary warrior chief of the Sac speaks of the "Two River" country as their

deer hunting country which area was on the north boundary of Cession

50 in Cession 69. He states that the Sac Rock River village

"had stood for more than a hundred years, during all of

which time we were the undisputed possessors of the valley

of the Mississippi, from the Ouisconsin to the Portage des

Sioux near the mouth of the Missouri, being about seven

hundred miles in length. . . ." (Def. Ex.,63)
When the construction of Fort Mason was being considered by the United
States during the War of 1812, Black Hawk felt that “. . . . I did
not want a fort in our country, as we wished to go down to the Two River

country in the fall and hunt, it being our choice hunting ground, and

we concluded that if this fort was built it would prevent us from going

6 M90 

there. . . ." (Def. Ex, 63) Dr. Gussow seems to agree with Black
Hawk in reference to Sac hunting grounds: "More particularly, it

was the lower Mississippi Sac villages who hunted toward the Missouri
in the eastern part of Cession 69 up until this time." (Def. Ex.
114. p. 56)

(e) As the Sac and Fox hunting grounds became depleted along
the Mississippi about 1810, they turned their attention to working
the lead.mines at Dubuque, Iowa. John Bradbury‘wrote circa 1810:

“These lead mines are of great value to the Saukee and

Fox.nations. As the game on the lands which they claim

is nearly destroyed, they have therefore been compelled

to commence the business of mining or rather digging,

but the operation of smelting is done by the squams.“
(Def. Ex. 71)

And Nicholas Boilvin, an Indian agent, wrote on February 2, 1811:
“The Sacs, Foxes, and Iowas can be as well supplied at
the latter place as the former particularly as they
have mostly abandoned the chase, except to furnish themselves with meat, and turned their attention to the manufacture of lead, which they procure from a mine about sixty
miles below Prairie des Chiens. During the last season
they manufactured 400,000 pounds of that article, which
they exchanged for goods." (Def. P . 20) '
Thomas Forsyth, in 1821, confirmed the scarcity of game along the
.Mississippi River and necessity of the Sac and Fox:Indians to work
the lead mines, "for means to feed their families during the summer
months," and further "indeed I cannot see how the major part of the Foxes
and some of the Sauks could exist without those mines. . . .”
(f) Coupled with the depletion in game and the encroachment

of the whites from.the east after the'war of 1812, the Sac and Fox

moved further west and northwest across Missouri for new hunting grounds

6 491

while at the same time committing depredations against the white
settlements along the Missouri River. August Chouteau, in his notes
of 1816 refers to Indian hunting activity within Cession 69 and
states:

“The Sacks, Foxes, Iowas and some other Mississippi Tribes

have of late years been in the habit of hunting there but

that alone cannot give them as right. . . .“ (Def. EX. 12.)
By letter dated June 23, 1850, Clark noted that the Sac and Fox
were commencing a war against the other Missouri tribes which were
located for the most part either on the south or west sides of the

Missouri River. (Def. Ex. 75, 111+) Stephen Long reported in 1820:

“The Sauks, Foxes, and Ioways, hunt on the plains toward the sources

_of Grand River. . . ." (Iowa Ex. 63; Def. Ex. 26) Long also reported

that war parties of the Sac and Fox were west of the Missouri River
raiding the villages of the Ornahas. (Def. EX. 25) In 1323 Forsyth
reported that Sac Indians were hunting on the Kansas River. All of
these reports place the Sac and Fox west and north of Cession 69.
As to depredations committed by Sac and Fox in white settlements during the ‘t.-Jar of 1812, J. L. Thomas, a historian, states:

“Black Hawk and his faction of the Sac and Foxes . . .

began hostilities against Boone's Lick Settlement before

the war between the United States and England was declared.
June 18, 1812 Congress declared a state of war e:cLsted between the two countries and from then to March 21!», 1815, a
predator; Indian war upon the settlements north of the Missouri
was kept up . . . ." (Def. Eix. 55)

22. The population of ‘the combined Sac and Fox Tribes from
earliest times is diffictdt to estimate but at the time of the Treaty

of August 21:», 1821!» approximated 14-,LLOO to 6,500 souls.

6 492 ” 

(a) In 1806 Herriweather Lewis estimates the Sacs at 2,000
souls and the Foxes 1,200.(Sac and Fox Ex. 30)

(5) Forsyth on.May 2, 1821 puts the combined Sac and Fox at
5.500 Souls. (Sac and Fox Ex. 71)

(c) Dr. WeJ_'Lace testified: “From information supplied by
Forsyth in 1824, the population of the Sac and Fox is given as 6,400
persons . . . ." (Tr. 62)

23. The Commission finds from all the evidence that the petitioner Sac and Fox_Nation, and the petitioner members thereof, are
the successors in interest to the Sac and Fox Indians who ceded by
the Treaty'of.August 20, 1824 (7 Stat. 239) all their right, title
and interest to those lands as described in Finding 4; and the Com.
mission further finds that at the time the defendant acquired title
to the aforesaid lands by purchase from.France in 1803 and until the
Treaty of 1824, the Sac and Fox;Nation held aboriginal Indian title

to those lands described within the following boundaries:

"Commencing at a point corresponding to the northwest corner
of that cession known as Royce 50 and proceeding north on
that line which would form an.extension of the'western.bound3!? line of Royce 50 to that point where such extension intersects the Missouri-Iowa line; thence east along said line to
its intersection with the Des Moines River; thence following
along the south.bank of the Des Moines River to its confluence
with the Mississippi river; thence down the west bank of the
Mississippi to a point corresponding to the northeast corner
of said Royce 50; thence'west along the northern boundary
line of Royce 50 to the place of beginning.

The “Half-Breed" Tract
2h. The Commission finds that by the Treaty of August 2%, 1824

(7 Stat. 239), Congress intended and did so recognize and confer upon

6 493

6 494

the Sac and Fox for the benefit of their half breeds a reservation
title to those lands lying within and officially described as Royce
Cession l20. By the Act of Congress of June 30, l834 (4-Stat. 740),

the United States relinquished its reversionary interest in the reservation to the Sac and Fox half'breeds.
(a) In the second paragraph of "Article lst” of the Treaty of
August 24, 1824 (7 Stat. 239), the United States from the lands ceded

thereunder, reserved a tract of land to the Sac and Fox.for the benefit of their half breeds. Said paragraph reads as follows:

"It being understood, that the small tract of land lying
‘between the rivers Desmoin and the Mississippi, and the
section of the above line between the Mississippi and the
Desmoin, is intended for the use of the half breeds belonging to the Sack and Fox nations; thex holding it, however,

‘by the same title, and in the same manner, that other Indian
titles are held."

(b) That Congress intended to create a reservation is amply
demonstrated by its subsequent act of relinquishing its reversionany
interest in said reservation back to the Sac and.Fox.half breeds, by

the.Act of June 30, 1834 (4 Stat. 740):

I!

An Act to relinouish the reversionagg interest of the United

States in a certain Indian reservation Igina between the rivers Mississippi and Desmoins.

IBe it enacted.bv the Senate and House of Renresentatives of the
‘United.States of America, in Congress assembled, That all the
right, title, and interest which might accrue or revert to the
United States to the reservation of land, lying between the rivers
IDesmoins and Mississippi, which was reserved for the use of the
half-breeds belonging to the Sacs and Fox nations, now used by
‘them, or some of them, under a treatytmade and concluded between
the United States and the Sacs and Fox tribes or nations of Indians,
at'Washington, on the fourth.day of August, in the year one thousand eight hundred and twenty-four, be, and the same are hereby
relinquished and vested in the said half-breeds of the Sacs and

 

Fox tribes or nations of Indians, who, at the passage of'this act
are, under the reservation in the said treaty, entitled, by the
Indian title, to the same; with full power and authority to transfer their portions thereof, by sale, devise or descent, according
to the laws of the state of Rdssouri.

Approved June 30, 1834."

s/ Edaar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

s/ Louis J. 0‘I~*Earr
Associate Commissioner

5/ wm. M. H91’:
Associate Commissioner

