and

OT"§UA AED CEIPPEHA INDI§§S OF

1 Docket Ho. 58
-NICHIGAK, et al.,

Plaintiffs,
vs.

TI-E U3-3l_':'.§D STATES OF Al-ERICA,

\../N../\.../\_./\.../\u—/\../Nu#Ns./\./Nc./\../*\._/N../

Defendant.

Decided: May 20, 1959
Appearances:

James R. Fitzharris, hcGinn and
Fitzharris; Hoag, Gruber and
Edwards: .0.R. EbGuire, and
Clarence G. Iindquist,
Attorneys for the Plaintiffs.

 

Sim. T. Carman, with whom was
Er. Assistant Attorney General
Perry'W. Horton,

Attorneys for the Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COEHISSION

 

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Docket 58 presents two causes of action. One is based upon the
cession on July 6, 1820, (7 Stat. 207), by the Ottawa and Chippew'
Nations of Indians of the St. Martin Islands in lake Huron and the
other arises out of the cession on.Earch 28, 1836, (7 Stat. &9l),
by the sane parties of the northern.Michigan peninsula and that part
of the southern.Eichigan penins17a'wrich is roughly described as lylng north of the Grand and Thunder Bay rivers. Identical causes of

605

action, based upon these same cessions, are plead in Docket 18-3 ggd the
same relief is sought. The two dockets are consolidated for trial with

the understanding that all evidence introduced in either action would ap—

-ply with equal effect in the other.

The plaintiffs in Docket 58 are the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians in
the State of Kichigan, also known as the Ottcwa and Chippewa Indians of
Michigan, and individual members thereof. They sue on behalf of all the
Ottawa and Chippewa Indians interested in the claims herein presented.
The defendant admits that the ancestors of these Indians on March 28,_
1836, held original Indian title to approximately l2,0hh,93h acres of
land within Area 205 as outlined upon Royce's Map l of Michigan, Vol. l8,
B.A-E., exclusive of prior cessions, reservations, andtwo tracts therein
which are hereinafter referred to as Suh—areas "U3 and “S”.

The plaintiffs in Docket 1893 are the Keweenan Bay Indian Communityand.former Chippewa Bands whosevmembership new comprise that Community;
and Charles.Picard and Edward honguse, who are members of the Community;
the Bay Mills Indian.Community and individual Chippewagwho are members
of it, and the Sault Ste. Eerie Band which comprisesa part of the Bay
Mills Indian Community. It is now conceded that the former Chippewa
bands whose members comprise the Keweenaw Bay Indian Community resided
west of the tracts here involved and had no interest in these lands.
3°°°Tdin81Y the petition in Docket l8~E will be dismissed as to the
Ke“°e“3” 38? Ihdian Community, the Lfanse, lac Vieus Desert and Ontonagon
Bands of Chippewa Indians, Charles Picard and Edward Eongnse, plaintiffs
therein. Defendant challenges the richt of the remaining plaintiffs i
Docket l8-E to present either of the claims asserted, alleging that,they'

Sue “in a representative capacity in the name of the Bay Eills Indian

_,.au9.—.,_.

 

7 Ind. Cl. Cor -575 507

Coz?£:J.1.uity” and "not in behalf of the Ottawa and Chippewa Indians“ who executed the two treaties.involved.

The issues presently for deteraination are whether the plaintiffs in
Docket l3—E have any standing before the Commission, and whether original
title has been established by any of the parties plaintiff to Area ll3,
being the St. Martin Islands in Lake Huron, on the cession date of July 6,
1820, and as to Sub-areas “U” and “S” on their cession date of March 28,
1836. The second issue involves the further question of whether ownership,
if found, existed.solely by reason of use and occupancy or had been recognized, which recognition.defendant denies. we shall first discuss the capacity and right of the plaintiffs in Docket 184E to.naintain this action.

O llt appears that in the l8th century a number of separate, autonomous
bands or groups of Chippewa and Ottawa Indians resided'within Area 205. Of
ithe Algonquin linguistic stock, they spoke different but mutually intelligible languages. The two were intermarried, and some bands included both
Ottawa and Ohippewa Indians. By 1836 all of these Indians were recognized

by the United States and by'thenselves as forming a tribal unit known as

lithe Ottawa and Chippewa Indian Nations in the State of Michiaan.(&2w}L Cls.

i‘ 24o). The merger date is indefinite, but this tribe appears as plaintiff

in Docket 58. It relies upon the Durant Roll of l9l9 for identification
of its:membership and that roll, according to its title, is limited to
'tawa and Chippewa Indians, or their descendants, who were “on the roll
of the Ottawa and Chippewa Tribe of Eichigan in l870, and living on.Earch~
h, l907“. The record does not disclose whether this 1870 roll included
all of the Indians who may have had an interest in thefwo tracts of land

here involved upon.the dates of their cession- or all the successors of

7 Ind. Cl. Com. -576 . 608

such Indians. However, the plaintiffs appear in a representative capacity on behalf of all suds persons.

While the allegations of representation may have been more adroitly
set forth, yet there can be no doubt but that the plaintiffs in Docket
l8-B include deseendants of and sue in behalf of all the Chippewa Indians
whose ancestors held an interest in the tracts of land here involved upon
the dates of their respective cessions. At least one of these plaintiffs
is a member of the organization appearing as plaintiff in Docket 58.
Neither of these parties contest the right of representation.or the capacity of the other to sue. They join in one proposed Findings of Fact, present joint Briefs, and seek but one joint recovery. we are not concerned
nith the identification of each individual who may be entitled to participate in any recovery the Commissionznay allow in either of the causes of

_action here presented, since that is, of course, an administrative function,

s but we are interested in<ieternining that all such parties are properly re,presented.p

“we are of the opinion thatthe parties plaintiff in both these dockets
possess the representative capacity to sue andrepresentparties entitled
to participate in any eventual recovery herein. Since they do not contest
the right of representation as between themselves,and since the degree of
defendant's liability, if any, is not to be measured by the number of parties plaintiff, and can not be increased through this joint representation,
and since defendant is not required to meet any new or more extensive claim
by reason.thereof, the Commissiontelieves that defendant's objection.to the
participation of the plaintiffs in Docket-18-E has no justiciable merit. A
Ihe joint efforts of the plaintiffs in both dockets, will, therefore. be

recognized.

 

7 Ind. c1. Com. -576 509

0 -\

aains for deterzination the question.of whether the plaintiffs

1

have estaolished original Indian title or a recognized title to Areas ll3
and Sub~areas “U” and “S”. it does not appear to be disputed that Indian
title had been extinguished before March 28, I836, to those four tracts of
‘land within'Area 205 which are identified as-Areas 2l, 22, 23 and ll2;
Areas 2l and 22 being the land on either side of the traits of Kackinac
and the.Mackinac Island which.were in possession of.Ervland and passed to
the United States under the declaration of sovereignty of July.h, I776, as
recognized by the Treaty of Paris on August 3, l783, (8 Stat. 2l), Area 23
being the Bois Blanc Island.which was ceded by the Treaty of August 3, I 95,
(7 Stat. L9), and Area ll2 being a tract about the Sault Ste. Marie which
was ceded on June I6, 1820, (7 Stat. 206). The defendant admits that on
March 28, 1836, plaintiffs‘ predecessors in interest held original Indian
title to the remainder of Area 205 with the exception of Area ll3 and Subareas "U" and “S5. .
Plaintiffs say'that their title to the three tracts under dispute was
recognized by the defendant in the Greenville treaty of August 3, l795,
(7 Stat. 49). The record establishes that Chippewa Indians then in posé
session of the Bois Blanc Island executed the 1795 treaty and that those
Indians later merged into a tribal organization of Ottawa and Chippewa
Nations of Indians which the Court of Claims found existed in 1836, (A2
33- C18. 2&0). It does not appear that this tribal organization existed
in 1795 or that the ttawa Indians who formed a part of this amalgamated
tribe and whose descendants are plaintiffs herein were parties to the
Greenville Treaty. (Dominic. et al.. V. United States, 2 Ind. Cl. Coma

455: COD. Dkt. LO-B) Accordingly, the only land to which recognized title

:-o-.'.u..

7 Ind. Cl. Con. -576 610
may have applied under that treaty is that land which the Chippewa then
held under identifiable possession. Since the part of Area 205 in possession of the Chippewa was not described in either the 1795 treaty or the
March 28, l836, treaty, neither of these treaties can be relied upon for
that identification which is necessary in order to support a finding of

recognized title. (Kiami Tribe vs. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Com. l80,

189, 215, Con on-.. 253). It follows, then, that plaintiffs’ right to

_ recover for land claimed by reason of either Chippewa or Ottawa ancestry

depends upon proof of original Indian title, or in other words, proof of
exclusive use, occupancy and control. The extent of original Indian
title land can be no greater than that which each ancestral group held
under original lndian title when.the United States sovereignty attached
in 1775, and which.they continned.to use, occupy, possess and control on
March 28, 1836.
we do not think the record convincingly established that plaintiffs’

predecessors held original title to Area ll3, the St. Nbrtin Islands in

lake Huron, at the time of their cession on 3uly'9, 1820, nor do we beglieve there is support for plaintiffs‘ clain.or.recogniaed title to theseii

islands. There are onlydno:recorded visits to them by white nen, one by
Alexander Henry'in.company'gith his adoptive Ottawa family in 1763, and
one in 1820 by Henry Schoolcraft and a Captain Douglas. Neither 05 these
parties subsequently mentioned seeing any evidence of Indian occupancy,
although Schoolcraft's visit was exploratory and he described the soil,
mineral, timer and general topography of the larger island. Chippewa
Indians were reported living on then,in 1824 and l8hO and there are two
other references to Indians on them after 1824, but official enumerations

of the Indians within the Michilinackinac superintendency in l8l7, 1819 and

...._..._..—.... g... . ....-— .- :7 ind. Cl. Com. 5'76   613.

.9

a—Q.4n.

I835 do not locate any Indians on the islands. The record also suggests

.. . - - (

that those reported there in l82l; may have been cutting wood on what was
then the public domain for use in the construction of new agency buildings.

..A . -_ __. - q--- . r - 1' ’ \ ' ..

‘Inany event‘ the presence of I)tta1::a Indians on the islands in 1763 can not

on

help he establish a recognized chiepeee title, for uhile it is not evident
upon what date the amalgamated tribe oi‘ I836 did come into existence, it

. ‘I1. .
‘ \ ‘H’. t.

is evident that  C hippex-Ia and Ottawa -in the Michilimackinac superintendency were separate groups until after the 18th century.

-q. 0 C

There are included in the evidence presented herein numerous reports

_.__-.__= _. ._ -_.) - _ . _" _ -. - ft _ ‘ . z . ‘ - ' ‘ so r.

from officials andothers who were in contact with the Indians in this

5:. (5 I

region both before and after the United States eatended its sovereignty

".h .1 ' - " ' u
I!’ . ‘ “ ‘ 4 s .

s over the area, andmre suggests an occupancy or use of the islands by

. ‘U ‘D

 

Indians prior to their cession. The extraordinary circumstances surround‘_‘ .. — _ _ ; . v
-o 8 - ' o p .‘ 4 b ' r

ingHHenry's visit indicate it was an unusual occurrence. We are also ‘im“pressed with the iiact that Agent Boydwprocured the cession,  from the

Indians on the island ‘or on the northern peninsula within five miles of

. . \' "'. -. . _ . _ "' " ' '-yv

them, or from th s o 1-’ 1:1 I 1 nd s ten miles away, or even “'rom
oen.-ac'nacsa ome ‘oi 

- those residing «south of the Straits, but from Ottawa_ and Chippewa at L‘A:-‘ore
‘. ' .. . . _: 1 -. .‘ , - ‘ “r a‘ . _ _ m T ‘-‘,_-__,'  E ._ _..  
Creche‘, which lies by direct measurement some 45 miles gaway, and was considerably farther by canoe. Furthermore, these Indians are said merely to

. ‘H.’ on an 0 4

"claim" the islands, rather than to own them. We are of the opinion that

plaintiffs have failed to establish an ancestral use and occupancy of the

St. Hartin Islands.

o _ o
" d

Now as to ownership by petitioners of Sub-areas “U" and "S":

-It
'\- I

 The record establishes that for some years prior to I836 the Chippewa

_ ‘ n.
‘ - . I ' 5 ' -' . I. f
-.

held possession of the Gheboygan River, with one village about 54.0 miles

7.Inc.'c1. Com. - 575   an '- ‘ 512'

above its mouth. The Cheboygan watershed in the northern part of the
southerln peni sula is some ‘distance away and ‘separated fron these Sub-ares
by the headwaters. of the an Sable River, and Chippwa. Indians are not in
shown to havefpenetrated this far‘ up the An Sable by 1836, sowe  not

say a recognized Chippewa title to ‘either Sub--area "U" or “S” is shown to

 have been created by the treaty of 1795.

As to the use and occupancy of Sub-area “U”: houghton and I-iiggins
lakes. are  the northern part of Snb-area.“H". James Shasfandona ‘hold of
hunting there but gave no dates, and since the Ottawa and Chippewa remained in II-Iichigan  continued their established way of life after
 this hunting may have occurred even subsequent to the cession.date
Oi‘ 1336. a ‘Bee ‘same situation. prevails with respect to burial grounds reported near the lakes and concerning Hinsda_'Le's report of an Indian trail from
Saginaw which skirted ‘the eastern shores oi‘ the two ‘lakes and then branched
to Fejckinacii and the Grand Traverse. Certainly the trail was unlcnown among the i saginawu  and their traders in 1831;. when the Government sent an

eitploratory  party to mark ‘out a route from Saginaw to I~£ackinac.‘*V 3-1 the Ottawa  a tradition of, once living at Houghton Lake 3 it was

considered a secluded region and was not part of their living or hunting

grounds in 1.819.‘ It appears to have been an’:6'5cupied area as late as the

18503 ,'for when Bla clcbird nadeia trip across the peninsula to Saginaw short‘ 15' before 1855, he traveled two and a halt dayaeoutheast of the lakes before

finding Indian hebitiatione, nor does he mention any Indian: living or hunting about the lakes. I i

A5 gene became scarce and competition for rare became more keen, it
3PP8e.rs the Indians went farther inland for hunting. Traders.‘ posts were

located about 1-.0 «nil es upstream on many of the western rivers, and the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 576 613

o I .
h 0 Q

Indians’ hunting camps were 70 to 80 miles inland along the strean., so
it is quite probable thatet least the southwestern portion of Sub-area “U”

was being hunted over by Ottawa Indians by the l820s, but it is not estab‘lished that this situation prevailed during the previous century.

The evidence supporting plaintiffs‘ claim of use and occupancy of
Sub-area "S" is not convincing. There is no proof that plaintiffs‘ ancestors were ever actually within its boundaries. It lies within the watershed of the Saginaw, with the Chippewa, Pine, Tobacco and Cedar rivers all
rising within it. It is an accepted fact that Indians used natural calls

in bounding their countries, and'when some more outstanding geographical

feature was not visible for physical identification, that watersheds and

4'!‘

drainage divisions were used. The Saginaw Chippewa were said by their
traders to have been upon all effluents of the Saginaw River. They traded with Detroit, and, while friendly with plaintiffs‘ ancestors, they were
a separate and distinct unit of the Chippewa Indians. It is known.that
they hunted on Pine River and had a village beside it a short distance
southeast of Sub—area "S"; thct a trail led from.that village northeast
through the Sub-area; that a second village stood near Clare, on Tobacco
River, slightly northeast of the Sub-area. It is evident that the
Saginaw Chippewa used.this Sub~area, and may in fact have exclusively done
so.

From a consideration of the entire record‘we conclude that the plaintiffs have failed to establish such use and occupancy of these Sub-areas
“U” and “S”, as is necessary to establish original Indian title, and that

theF'have failed to identify either Area ll3 or Sub-areas “LU” and “S” as

land to which recognized Chippewa Indian title was extended by the Treaty

7 Ind. 01. Com. — 5'76 _ 61,,

Eugust 3,. 1795.

The record establishes that Royce areas 21, 22, 23, 112 and 113 contain
a total of 50,452 acres; that Sub-areas “U” and "8" contain approximately
956,160 and 253,AAO acres, respectively; that exclusive of said areas there
are l2,hL6,905 acres within Area 205, of which acreage the Ottawa and
Chippewa Nations of Indians retained 401,971 acres for reservation purposes from the cession of March 28, 1836, (7 Stat. A91). These acreages will be
accepted as controlling in the absence of a future stipulation by the parties hereto or the presentation of further evidence respecting acreages when

evidence touching the value of the ceded lands is submitted by the Commission.
EdgariE.‘%itt
Chief Commissioner

I concur:

Associate Commissioner

