1 Ind. c1. Comm. 530 p 530

em"-ens: sum INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION A

on ASSIRIBOIHE I'1mLA.N TRIBE,
elaintirs,
v. Docket no. 62

TE UNITE SEATES,

Nu-/K-fVuu'\-.I\-/K./N-J\q.?\unI

Defendant.

Appearances: C

Louis A. Gravelle, Douglas Whitloclzz,
Edward F. Howrey, and Davies, Bichberg,
Beebe, Busick & Richardson,

Attorneys for Plaintiff.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
Assistant Attorney General

A. Devitt Vanech,
Attorneys for Defendant.

APR 2 7 3333
ommon _o__n_ mm COMMISSION

Oiiéarr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

This case comes to us on a motion of the defendant for s'o.mmaI'y
Judgment based upon the proposition that the claim asserted‘ in the
petition is the same claim that was submitted to the Court of Claims
in case Ho. J‘-31 (77 o. Cls. 31:7) and by that Court determined upon.
its merits and, therefore, the judgment of the Court of Claims is
res judicata.

In this case the plaintiff, according to the petition, sues for

the value of 6,?-’J—L7,91%0 acres of land located in the States of Montana

1 Ind. c1. Com. 530 L , A ~ 8 531

-.2and.North Dahota; which had been set over to it by the_treaty of’
September 17, 1851 (11 Stat. 7&9). known as the Fort Laramie Treaty.
This tract will hereafter be referred to as the Fort Laramie lands.
By Executive Order of.kugust 18, 1868, 169.57%-acres of the land.was
set apart for a military reserve; by Executive Orders of.April 13,
1875 and July 13, 1880, 5,8M2,M96 acres of the area were set apart
for other Indians or restored to the public domain, and by said order.
of July 13, 1880, 365,870 acres of the area were taken to satisfy
railroad.grants and for public entry or sale as public lands. The
petition further alleges that the lands were taken by defendant withp

out the consent of the Indians and without compensation, and that they

1.1-A-an n-P -I-In -n-u-U1.
v v

A ‘
I¢\.I-b 4- H40  uf 6°” 7:: -L6

J-11 __
?**t “*9 JJO

The prayer of the petition is for the value of said lands at
the time tahen.“plus an amount sufficient to produce the full equiva~
lent of that value paid contemporaneously with the taking measured by
a reasonable rate of interest from the time of taking to the date of
payment, less legal offsets * * *.' p

The defendant does not question the alleged facts or the sufficiency of the petition to state a cause of action under the Indian
Claims Commission.Aet, but by its motion for summary judgment asserts,

in effect, that the cause of action.here presented was determined on

«its merits by the Court of Claims in Case No. J«3l (77 C. Cls. 347)

on December M, 1933, and, therefore, the judgment of the Court of

Claims is a bar to this claim. It is therefore necessary to review

I

1 Ind. Cl; Comm. 530 _,3 _ o-532

the record in the former case.

9

uaccording to the opinion in the former case, the plaintiff there_in sought the recovery of damages because of the appropriation.hy defendant of the Fort Laramie lands belonging to plaintiff, being the
same land involved in the pending claim, to which.plaintiff claims
title under the provisions of the Fort lramie treaty referred to

above. The petition in the former case included a claim for other

lands and for destruction of game. The respective claims were treated

--separately by the Court of Claims, so this discussion will be confined

to the claim arising out of the appropriation of the Eort Laramie lands.

The Court of Claims made special findings of fact which appear
in the case as reported in 77 C. Cls. 3&7 and are numbered I to XlI,t
however, the last sentence of No. XII does not appear in the official
findings, it being the reporter's statement of the determination of
the Court.

. The Court found that the Fort Laramie lands had been ceded or
granted the plaintiff by the Fort Laramie treaty, that they had been
appropriated by the defendant, and that the value of the same at the
time of the appropriation “did not exceed 50 cents an acre or

$3,238,970," (Findings IV to VIII, inclusive, and pages 370ml, 373

def opinion). Thus; we see, the Court made every finding necessary

for an.adjudication of the claim; it found the Indians were entitled

to the land, that it had been expropriated by defendant and that it

had a maximum.value of $3,238,970.

1 Ind. C1. Comm, 530 s - . ' 535
' - h.. T '

The Court also determined that the offsets amounted to at least
$”.227;h7h.56 (Finding xii) and.because of the fact that the offsets
exceeded the value of the land, thecourt (we find from an enmination of the Court of Claims records in the case) made a final order‘
on December 1}, 1933, which reads as follows:

"Upon the special findings of fact, which are made a
part of the judgment herein, the Court decides asa conclusion of law, that the plaintiff is not entitled to
recover, and its petition is therefore dismissed."

It is plain from the findings of fact that the Court determined
that the lands there in question, which, as before stated, are the
same as those involved in the case before us, were taken from the
Indians by defendant under the Executive orders mentioned "above and,
at the time taken, had a value of $3,238,970. The Court also found
that the defendant was entitled to offsets against plaintiff which
exceeded the value of the land taken, hence, the dismissal. I

The Court made no allowance for interest, and its failure to
do so was the real question presented to  argued ‘before us at the
hearing of the motion to dismiss. The defendant takingjthe position
that even if the plaintiff was entitled to interest as of a "taking"

of the Indian lands, the failure of the plaintiff to appeal made the

s adjudication final and barred a renewal of the contest on that question.

The plaintiff, on the other hand, insists that the question of the
allowance of interest was never presented. to or considered by the

Court of Claims and furthermore that under the jurisdictional Act of

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 530 5 -   . 53”‘

March 2, 1927 (151! Stat. 1263), which governed the Court of Claims,
it could not allow interest on the value of the property appropriaated, for, by express terms of the Act it was "confined to the value

- of the '3 '3' '3' property at the time of such appropriation or disposal

" * "',”  therefore the plaintiff is not barred by the former
judgment of the Court of Claims from asserting the same claim before
us. The parties agree that the jurisdictional Act of 1927 did not
provide for interest, in fact, the legislative history of the Act '
set forth in plaintiff's brief (pp.  to 6) shows that interest was
not intended to be allowed.

The amended petition in the former case and the petition before
us are substantially the same as to the taking of the Fort Ia:-ami,e
lands. In both cases the claim is based upon the appropriation of
6,1m7,9ho acres--the Fort Laramie landi--«-by virtue of and under the
authority of the three Executive orders referred to abovee

As we view the judgment of the Court of Claims, and the findings
upon which it was based, that Court made a definite and final adjudication en the question or value of the land.‘ taken, namely, the sum of
$3,238,970. While the finding is that the value "did not exceed”
that amount, the only proper construction to be placed upon the phrase
is that the land had a value at the time it was taken of $3,238,970‘.
Counsel for plaintiff direct our attention to this statement appearing at page 373 of the opinion-——"Ue conclude that the value of this land at the time

1 Ind. c1. cos. 530 6 _ 535

it was taken did not exceed 50 cents an acre and may
have been less, and that its total value did not ex:

ceed $3,23§,9ro." '(Underscoring supplied.)

as indicatingta failure of the Court to determine the "exact value“
of plaintiff's land. We do not so construe the statement. In any
event the findings control such differences. 3 Am. Jur. 669, Appeal
and Error, Sec. 1158.

Passing for the present the qeestiee of offsets, the plaintiff
contends that since the Court of Claims decision there have been
intervening decisions creating*an altered situation, and that the
passage of the Indian Claims Commission not changed the law, thus
removing res judicata as a bar to the present suit.

The fundamental question before us is whether the altered situw
ations relied upon by plaintiff applies to the claim asserted before
and determined by the Court of Claims in the former case. We shall,
therefore, consider the cases re1ied.upon by plaintiff.

’.£'he case, Yankton Sioux he-its v. United States, 272 ms. 351,
71 L. ed. 29M, decided in 1926, involved the value of 6M8 acres of
land taken from the Sioux Indians for an Indian school in the State
of Minnesota. The Indians owned the land in fee. The.Act of Eebruw
3?? 16, 1891 (26 Stat. 76%) authorized the Secretary of the Interior
to acquire a site for the school “by purchase, condemnation or otherwise." iActing'under this authority, the Secretary appropriated the
land known as the "red pipestone quarries” for the school.

The Supreme Court decided:

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 530‘ 536

-7“That the United States has taken and holds possession of the entire quarry tract of 6M8 acres is not
in dispute; and since the Indians are the owners of it
in fee, they are entitled to just compensation as for
a taking under the power of eminent domains“

Later the Court of Claims awarded the Indians the value of the land
plus interest, although interest was not provided for in the jurisdiotional acts. 65 c. Cls. M279 decided.April 16, 1928.

Klamth.v.'United states, 3oh'U.s. 119, 82 L. ed. 1219, decided
in l938, was a case in which the Indians sued the'United States for
the value of 87,000 acres of their land taknn.by'the‘United States
under the.Act of June 21, 1906, (jh Stat. 325), which authorized the
Secretary of the Interior to exchane the 87,000 acres of tribal lands
of the Indians for other lands which had been taken from them.by mistake and restored by the exchange. The lands were taken from the
Indians without their knowledge or consent. The Court, in holding
lthat the Indians were entitled to the value plus interest, said:

“Unquestionably Congress had power to direct the

exchange and for that purpose to authorize expropriation of plaintiffs’ lands. The validity of its enactments is not questioned. The taking was to enable

the government to discharge its obligation, whether

legal or merely moral is immaterial, to make restiu p.;

tution of the allotted lands. The taking was in invitnm,

specifically authorized by law, a valid exertion of the

sovereign power of eminent domain. It therefore implied

a promise on the part of the Government to pay plaintiffs

just compensation.”

The case United States v. Creek Hation, 295 U.S. 103, 79 L. Ed.
1331, decided in 193%, arose out of the treaty of June lh, 1866

(in Stat. 785). At the time of this treaty the Greeks had a fee

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 530 '   _ 537
1 8 1

simple title (see treaty of February 111, 1833, 7 stat. #17) and
ceded the west half of their holdings to the United States, retaining the east half. In 1867 the United States coded the lands

lying immediately west of the lands retained by the Greeks to the

lsac and Fox Indians. .A line dividing the two areas was run by

defendant in 1871, and in 18721a second line was surveyed which.ran
somewhat east of the original line and thereby took from the Greeks
some 5,000 acres of the land.retained by them in the 1866 treaty.

By the Act of February 13, 1391 (26 stat. 7119), part of the 5,000

lacres‘were allotted to Sac and.Foz Indians and the balance sold to

settlers. The Supreme Court held the Greeks were entitled as "Just
compensation” the va_ie of'the land, plus five per cont"", from the
date of patents issued settlers. The 189l.Act did not in terms inw
clude the 5,000 acres of Greek land but the defendant's agents
erroneously thought it did, and so disposed of the 5,000 acres. lhe
jurisdictional.Act did not provide for interest. In referring to the
disposals under the 1891 Act, the Court said:
“True, they rested on an erroneous application of‘
the act of 1891 to the Creekzlands in the strip; but, as
that application was confirmed by the United States, the

matter stands as if the act had distinctly directed the
disposals."

The ease. United States v. Shoshone Tribe, 299 U.S. 1176, 81 L.
ed. 360, decided in 1936, was for the value of half the Shoshone
reservation taken.hy the Government by placing.Arapahoe Indians

thereon in violation of the terms of a treaty with.the Shoshone,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 530 i d 538
.. 9 an
and against their will. The Cmt concluded that while the original
taking was tortious it was made lawful ‘by various acts of Congress
which amounted to a ratification of the tortiorus acts which constituted an appropriation by the exercise of the power of eminent domain
and under the Fifth Amendment. In addition to the value of the land
taken, the Court allowed interestfrom the date of the appropriation.
The case of'United States v. Goltra, 3l2‘U.S. 203, 85 L. ed. 776,
decided es 19u1, involved an unauthorized taking of river vessels by’

the Government, the retention of which was judicially. approved. The

s taking of the vessels was predicated upon an alleged violation of the

terms of a contract, and in the suit for damages for the unlawful tak.:.... .....:.-13.1.: .....
3 .54.; aaLLI..L..Lv.I..U.l..I.

ing the Court of Claims (91 Ge C-ls 119}

1 1 (11.1-4:53 -iv-n¥ Hanson‘. nu... nhohlllt-lhb uh‘.-V QU

&
Cu-IN-I-as ‘hit?

to the damages. In disallowing the interest, the Supreme Court

_ clearly stated the difference ‘between cases in which interest may be

allowed as part of just compensation and those in which no interest
may ‘be allowed (unless, of course, it is permitted by the Jurisdictional act or allowed by the statute governing interest on claims

against the Government). This is what the Court said;

“The distinction between property taken under authorization of Congress and property taken without such authority has long ‘been recognized." Citing United States
v. North American, 253 U.S. 330, 61$ L. ed. 935; Seaboard

Air Line V, United States, 261 U.S. 299, 67 Lo ed. 661.1;
and Phelps V; United States, 27h U.s. 3&1, 71 Lo Ed. 1083.
The opinion continues, making special reference to the Creel: and

Shoshone cases, supra, as follows:

1 Ind. c1. Comm; 530- ‘539

_ - 10 —

"Acts of government officials in taking property without authorization of Congress-confer no right of recovery
upon the injured citizen. There are two instances of Congressional ratification of ta.k:1ngs which turned tortious
sets into the exercise of the power of eminent domain and
placed upon the Government the duty to make ‘just compensation,‘ including sums in the nature of interest. These
are United States v. creek Nation and Shoshone Tribe v_.
United States. In both cases there was a special jurisdictional act. In neither case was interest expressly
allowed. In both this Court found Congressional confirmation of the previously unauthorized acts; in the Creek
Nation case, by disposition of the 2-:rong:E‘ully acquired
lands and failure to seek:cancellation of the disposals
after ‘full lcnowledge of the facts‘ and in the Shoshone
Tribe Case by ‘the statutes already summarized, recognizing the Arapahoes equally with the Shoshones as occupants
of the land, accepting their deeds of cession, assigning
to the tribes equally the privilege of new allotments, and
devoting to the two equally the award of future benefits.‘

“In the case now before us, however, there is neither
the reqiisite Congressional authority before the taking nor
any ratification or confirmation of the tort after the taking, which would justify a conclusion that the fleet was
acquired by eminent domain."

The conclusion to be reached from the Goltra case is that unless
an appropriation of Indian land is taken under authority of Congress
(and this includes Congressional ratification of unauthorized takings)
no interest is allowable; in other words, it is only where such lands
are appropriated in the exercise of the power of eminent domain does
just compensation require the increment measured by interest or some
other standard to be added to the value from the time of talning. The
same rule appliesto the appropriation of non-Indian property. Seaboard Air Line R. Co. v. United States, 261 U.S. 299, 67 L. ed.‘ 661;,

and cases therein cited. Nor are condemnation proceedings necessary,

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 530 . 54°
.. 11 ..

for, if the appropriation is made in the exercise of the power of
eminent domain, the right to the’increment of interest under the
Fifth Amendment attaches whether the takingwas as a result of such.
proceedings or by act of the Government without instituting condemnation proceedings; although it seaems, that when property is taken
without condemnation proceedings there arises an implied promise,
imposed by the Amendment, to pay the value of the property, which
includes the increment from the time of the taking. Jacobs v.
United States, -290 ms. 13, -,§ L. ed. 1142; United States v. Creek
Nation, 295 U.S. 103, 7§ L, ed. 1331.

yThe reason underlying the rule is plain and logical. In ordinary claims against the Government for the value of property talcen,
that is, property not taken under Congessional authority, no interest
can be recovered unless there is an express statute or a contract
allowing it. United_States'v. Alcea, decided by the Supreme Court

on April 9, 1951, 95 L, ed. . In such cases the Fifth Amendment

does not apply. However, when property is taken by authority of anact of Congress it is in such cases that the‘ Fifth Amendment applies,
and requires that the property holder be paid “just compensation, "
which the Supreme Court has construed to reciuire not only payment for
the value of the property at the ‘time taken by the Government but
"such additional amount beyond the value of the property rights when
taken by the Government as may be necessary to the award of just

compensation, the increment to be measured either by interest on the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 530 '     541

...12....

value or by such other standard as may be suitable in the light of
all the circumstances.” Shoshone case, supra. The word "interest"
as here used is a convenient measure of increment to value and is
not meant in the sense the term is ordinarily'used. United States v.
Klamath, 30hWU.S. 119, 123, 82 L. ed. 1219. Moreover, since this
increment to value is a part of just compensation, it attaches automatically to the award and.does not depend.upon Congressional authority. Shoshone case, supra, and cases cited therein; United
States'v. Klamath, supra,

The case, United States v..Alcea Band of Tillamooks, 95 L. ed.

_J, decided by the Supreme Court on April 9, 1951, confirms the

 

conclusions reached above, In that case a treaty had been made by

which the Indians ceded to the Government a large area of land they ’

held by original Indian title. In.anticipation of the ratification

of the treaty the Government took over lands of the Indians, ceded
by the treaty, and.although the treaty was never ratified, retained
them without paying the Indians any compensation therefor. The Court
of Claims in its conclusions of law on the question of the amount of
recovery (115 C. Cls. M90) determined that the Indians were entitled
to the value of the land on November 9, 1855, the date taken, andi
“an additional amount in each.case as a part of just compensation

measured“ by interest at stated rates. In its opinion (p. #91)

that Court said:

1 Ind. clpcomm. 530 5 - 542

-13“A. further hearing has been held and the case is now
before us for determination of the amount of compensation
to which the four plaintiff tribes are entitled under the
Fifth Amendment, measured by the value of the lands taken

on November 9, 1855, plus an additional amount measured by
a reasonable rate of interest to make just compensation.“

In reversing the Court of Claims as to the allowance of interest, the

r Supreme Court said this:

"It,is the ‘traditional rule’ that interest on claims
againstthe United States cannot be recovered in the absence
of an express provision to the contrary in the relevant

statute or contract. 28 U.rS.C. (Supp. III), Sec. 25l6(a).
UNITED STATES Yo THAYER-WEST POINT HOTEL C09, 329 U95. 585,

588 (l91L7), and cases cited therein. This rule precludes
an award of interest even though a statute should direct
an award of ‘just compensation‘ for a particular taking.

UNITED STATES V. G-OLTRA, 312 U.S. 203 (l91ll). The only

exception arises when the taking entitles the claimant to

just compensation under the Fifth Amendment. ally in such

cases does the award of compensation include interest.

snssomn .a.1nu1m B. 009 V. UNITED snares, 261 ms. 299

(1923); Unmm swans V. Tmrm-wmsr POINT co... SUPRA.“

In none of the cases cited above was interest provided for in
the Jurisdictional acts. And, it might be mentioned, it seems that
it is unimportant that a jurisdictional act is silent on the question

of interest if the appropriation of property is within the meaning
of the Fifth Amendment. Shoshone v. United States, 299 ms. LL76,
1493-1}, 81 L. ed. 360, 367. And in every case where interest was
allowed as a part of just compensation under the Fifth Amendment,

the appropriation of Indian property was made under authority of

Congress.

Now let us consider the Assiniboine case, as determined by the

Court of Claims, in the light of the above cases, That Court, as we

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 530 . 543

C.-11;have stated above, definitely found and decided that the Fort Laramie
lands were taken or appropriated by virtue of three Executive orders.
At no place in the findings or the opinion of the Court is it shown p
or even intimated that Congress authorized the several appropriations

of the Fort Laramie lands, or that it in any manner approved the Ibeecutive acts which resulted in depriving the Indians of the entire
reserve. So the Court of Claims was correct in not allowing interest
because, (1) no interest was provided for in the jurisdictional act,
and (2) the taking was not under authority of Congress.

This brings us to the proposition advanced by plaintiff, that
there has been a (1) change in the law since the decision by the
Court of Claims, and (2) there have been intervening decisions creat- ' ‘
ing an altered situation.

As to the first, plaintiff said in its brief and argued before
us that under the Indian Claims Commission Act we may allow interest

as a part of just compensation. This may be true, although we find

_it unnecessary to decide the question here,. in a case where the appropriation of lands is in the exercise of the power of eminent domain,
that is under Congressional authority, but, as we have shown above,
there was no such appropriation, and since the Indian Claims Commission
.Act does not provide for interest we may not allow it in cases like
that of the plaintiff here. So whatever change in the law there may I
have been, does not help plaintiff.

As to the altered situation brought about by intervening decisions,

pl Ind. C1. Comm. 530  * 544

it is of course true that the Creek, Shoshone and Klamath cases, supra,
were decided after the decision in the Assiniboine case, and by them
interest was allowed as part of just compensation; however, the Yankton
Sioux Tribe case, supra, was decided by the Supreme Court in 1926 and
allowed “just compensation as for a taking under the power of eminent
domain," and in 1928, the Court of Claims, pursuant to the mandate of

the Supreme Court, allowed the Indians the value of the property plus

_ interest as for a taking under the power of eminent domain. These

cases, as we have shown above, do not support the plaintiff's position,
since they were based upon an appropriation of lands under Congressional authority. Moreover,’ the decisions in the Yanlrton Sioux case, supra,

disprove the assumption-of plaintiff that the Court of Claims would not

' have allowed interest had it been urged to do in the Assiniboine case.

In view of the decisions in- the Yankton Sioux case, which were decided
long before the Assiniboine case, it must be presumed that the Court
of Claims was of the opinion that because of the nature of the claim
the Assiniboine were not entitled to interest.

There remains the question of offsets. The plaintiff contends
that the question of offsets was not ”finally'determined“ by the Cdurt
of Claims because it did not designate the precise expenditures of
the Government allowed by the Court as offsets against the liability.
As we understand the findings, the Court considered a number of items
of expenditures, aggregating $5,137,66st71. or this total, plaintiff

disputed items aggregating $91o,19h,15, and the Ccurt deducted this

1 Ind. c1. Com. 530   545

- 15 amount from the total expenditures claimed by the Government, leaving
a balance of en,227,u7u.56. uhich.was allowed by the Court and which
more than offset the value of the land appropriated, and resulted in
the dismissal of the petition. he think there was a sufficient determination of the offsets in that case, and the plaintiff is not
entitled to retry that issue. H

Plaintiffs rely upon the cases, Seminole Nation v. United States,

316 U.S. 286, 310, 86 L. ed. 11180, l1l97, as authority for their contention, but those cases are not authority for their position here.

The Supreme Court, in remanding the cases, did direct the Court of
Claims to “designate the particular gratuitous expenditures to ‘be
offset against the Government's total 1ia‘bi1ity,'! but the failure of
the Courtto do so originally was not made a ground for reversal.

From the foregoing, it is our conclusion that the prosecution
of the claim is barred by the judgment of the Court of Claims in

J—3l (77 o. Cls. 3M7) and.that the petition must be dismissed.
Chief Commissioner Witt and Associatacommissioner Holt concur.

Dated this 27th.day of April, 1951.

