BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

wmmmmmmmnmmmor
INDIANS, ETC., ET AL.

Petitioners,

vs. Docket No. 329
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Defendant.

THE CI-IEYENNE AND ARAPAHOE TRIBES
or INDIANS, ETC.,

vs. Docket No. 3h8

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
3
)
)
)
)
3
THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA, 3
Defendant. )

Filed: November 1, 1955

FINDINGS OF FACT
Certain documentary exhibits were received in support of petitioners‘ motion for summary judgment respecting the proper construction and effect of the
Treaty of Fort Laramie, September 17, 1851 (10 Stat. 7&9). There is no substantial dispute as to the facts contained in these documents, the same haying

been stipulated to by the defendant in the case of the Crow Tribe of Indians

 

v. The United States, Docket No. Sb, 3 Ind. Cls. Comm. 11.7, and the defendant
having opposed the consideration of the same in this case. The only question:is
as to the ultimate interpretation of the undisputed facts as respects the proper
construction and effect of the Treaty of Fort Laramie. Accordingly, the Commission makes the following findings of fact in support of'its order granting

petitioners‘ motion for partial summary judgment.

h-30b

1. On September 17, 1851, defendant and several Indian Tribes or nations,
including the Cheyennes and Arapahoes, concluded a treaty by which a certain

tract of land was therein designated as the "territory of the Cheyennes and Ar  rapahoes”. The said treaty, insofar as applicable here, reads:

TREATY or FORT LARAMIE WITH sroux, rrc., 1851

"Articles of a treaty made and concluded at Fort Larame, in the
Indian Territory, between D. D. Mitchell, superintendent of Indian
affairs, and Thomas Fitzpatrick, Indian agent, comissioners
specially appointed and authorized by the President of the United
States, of the first part, and the chiefs, headmen, and braves of
the following Indian nations, residing south of the Missouri River,
east of the Rocky'Mountains, and north of the lines of Texas and
New Mexico, viz, the Sioux or Dahcotahs, Cheyennes, Arrapahoes,
Crows, Assinaboines, Gros—Ventre Mandans, and Arrickaras, parties
of the second part, on the seventeenth day of September, A.D. one
thousand eight hundred and fifty-one.

"ARTICLE 1. The aforesaid nations, parties to this treaty,
having assebled for the purpose of establishing and confirming
peaceful relations amongst themselves, do hereby covenant and agree to
abstain in future from all hostilities whatever against each other, to
maintain good faith and friendship in all their mutual intercourse,
and to make an effective and lasting peace.

"ARTICLE 2. lThe‘aforesaid nations do hereby recognize the
right of the United States Government to establish roads, military
and other posts, within their respective territories.

“ARTICLE 3. In consideration of the rights and privileges '
acknowledged in the preceding article, the United States bind themselves to protect the aforesaid Indian nations against the comission of all depredations by the people of the said United States after
the ratification of this treaty.

"ARTICLE h. The aforesaid Indian nations do hereby agree and
bind themselves to make restitution or satisfaction for any wrongs
committed, after the ratification of the treaty, by any band or
individual of their people, on the people of the United States,

whilst lawfully residing in or passing through their respective tern
ritories.

"ARTICLE 5. The aforesaid Indian nations do hereby recognize and acknowledge the following tracts of country, included within metes and boundaries hereinafter designated, as their respective
territories, viz:

h-30¢

-11- -If it ‘I"The territory of the Cheyennes and Arrapahoes, comencing

at the Red Bute, or the place where the road leaves the north fork  
of the Platte River; thence up the north fork of the Platte River

to its source; thence along the main range of the Rocky Mountains

to the headwaters of the Arkansas River 3 thmce down the Arkansas
River to the crossing of the Santa Fe road; thence in a northwesterly
direction to the forks of the Platte River, and thence up the Platte

River to the place of begimiing.

"It is, however, understood that, in making this recognition
and acknowledgement, the aforesaid Indian nations donot hereby
abandon or prejudice any rights or claims they may';=?.,have fto other
lands; and further, that they do not surrender the privilege of
hunting, fishing, or passing over any of the tracts of country
heretofore described.

"ARTICLE 6. The parties to the second part of this treaty
having selected principals or head- chiefs for their respective
nations, through whom all national business will hereafter be conducted, do hereby bind thanselves to sustain said chiefs and their
successors during good behavior. f

"ARTICLE 7. In consideration of the treaty stipulations,

and for the damages which have or may occur by reason thereof to

the Indian nations, parties hereto, and for their maintenance and
the improvement of their moral and social customs, the United

States bind themselves to deliver to the said Indian nations the
sum of fifty thousand dollars per annum for the tem of ten years,
with the right to continue the same at the discretion of the President of the United States‘ for a period not exceeding five years the reafter, in provisions, merchandise, domestic animals, and agricultural
implanents, in such proportions as may be deemed best adapted to
their condition by the President of the United States, to be distributed in proportion to the population of the aforesaid Indian
nations. ,

"ARTICLE 8. It is understood and agreed that should any

of the Indian nations, parties to this treaty, violate any of the
provisions thereof, the United States may withhold the whole or

a portion of the annuities mentioned in the preceding article from
the nation so offending, until, in the opinion of the President of
the United States, proper satisfaction shall have been made.

"In testimony whereof the said D. D. Mitchell and Thomas
Fitzpatrick commissioners as aforesaid, and the chiefs, headmen, and
braves, parties hereto, have set their hands and affixed their marks,
on the day and at the place first above written."

h~30d

2. At the time that the Treaty of 1851 was negotiated and entered into all
of the lands involved in and described in the Treaty were by the United States
recogiized generally to be lands held and occupied by Indians from time immemoriel,

held by them by aboriginal Indian title.
3. Immediately and for some years preceding the Treaty of Fort Laramie, because of the discovery of gold on the Pacific Coast, gold-seekers, emigrants
and troops found it necessary to pass through this Indian country, the Indians
bitterly resented their invasion and intrusion because the ihites destroyed
and depleted buffalo and game, the native grasses and forests, and threatened
the livelihood and traditional means of subsistence of the Indians, bringng
disease among than and causing starvation, suffering and great loss of life among
the Indians. The hostility thus aroused manifested itself in the killing and
massacre of the whites passing through the country, serving as a constant
threat and hazard to any white people passing into or through said country.
The Indian tribes or nations involved also fought mnong themselves, mostly on
account of boundary disputes, the more warlike particularly preying upon and
invading the territories of other tribes; thwe said internecine wars imperiling the whites who entered the country. (Ex. 3-A and 30).

11. The Indian nations and tribes, parties to said treaty considered themselves entitled to compensation for the right- of-way of white travelers through
their country and for the resulting destruction of game, grass and timber committed by troops and emigrants . (Ex. 39).

5. The purpose and intent of the United States Governmmt is seeking a
treaty with the Indian nations and tribes here involved was to bring about "
peaceful relations among the Indian tribes themselves and stop internecine wars

and to have the tribes agree among themselves, with respect to the vast territory

b~30e
recognized as generally held by all of them by Indian title, to an exact definition of the national domain of each tribe and the establishment of fixed
boundaries to that end, and to obtain from each tribe affected a right-of-way
through their country for the peaceful passage of emigrants and troops; and
otherwise to placate the Indians, satisfy their complaints and obtain agreement to avoid future depredations. (Ex. 3A, 30, ho).

6. The Government agents who negotiated the treaty with the Indians and
who signed it for the United States as Commissioners understood the purpose and
intent of the Government, as outlined in the previous finding, and in their
extended negotiations with the Indian tribes at Fort Laramie, leading up to the
execution of the treaty, so represented to the Indians, and the Indians so
understood. (Exs. 25a, b, c, d and 1‘).

7. By the treaty of Fort Laramie, the United States Government accomp
plished the purpose for which the appropriation of Congress was made and to
which it desired the assent of the Indian tribes affected, whereby, for the
consideration named, the United States obtained the right of passage through
the territory and the promise from the Indians that they would keep the peace.
The recognition that these lands were the lands of the Indian tribes affected,
theretofore held in exclusive occupancy (except as invaded by whites) by these
Indian tribes, was implicit throughout treaty and was understood by all of the
negotiating parties. (Exs. 6, bl).

8. The Treaty of Fort Laramie is not merely a treaty of amity and an agreement between the Indian tribes themselves, but by said treaty and the manner of
its negotiation and the acts and conduct of the defendant, the United States of
America, immediately before and after the execution and ratification of said

treaty, defendant accepted, acknowledged, ratified and confirmed petitioners’

h~3o£

aborignal Indian title and right of occupancy, possession and use of the territory described in Finding 1. "

9. 'I'hat by order made and entered on May 5 , 1952, the above cases were
consolidated £or trial, so the foregoing findings of fact are intended to apply to each insofar as either involves an interpretation or the Fort Laramie
Treaty of September, 1851.

/s/ EDGAR E.‘WITT
CEIe? Cisaoner '

/s/ LOUIS J. O'MARR
Assoaate Cissioner

/s/ WM. M. HOLT
Kssociate CEfs§{oner

