BEFORE THE INDIAH GLAD-ES CO3:-MISSION

THE 1~TUcKLEsiiooT TRIBLE.‘ or INDIANS )
on relation of Napoleon Ross, )
Chairman of the General Council, )
)
Claimant, ;
V. ; Docket No. 98
THE UNITED STATES or Azirmci, )
)
Defendant. )
Decided: July 17, 1958
Appearances:

Frederick W. Post, with whom
was Malcolm S. McLeod,
Attorneys for Claimant.
Donald R. Marshall, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION _q§ E CO1-IMISSI ON

Holt, Associate Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Comission.

This case is now before the Comnission for determination for the
acreage and value thereof in 1859 of the tractof lam described in Finding No. 22. In our original decision filed ‘August 25, 1955 (3 Ind. Cl.
Comm. 658) we held that the claimant Muckleshoot Tribe held original
Indian title through exclusive occupancy and use in 1859, and long prior
thereto, to the tract of land described in Finding 22 3 that said land

was taken by defendant on March 8, 1859, without payment of compensation;

6621:‘

and, that claimant was entitled to recover compensation measured by the

value of its interest in the land at the time of taking. The Commission

ordered that the case proceed for the purpose of determining the acreage
of said tract of land and the value thereof on March 8, l8S9, less such
part thereof as may have been acquired by Muckleshoot Indians subsequent
to 1859, if any.

Further hearings were held before the Commission on these issues
on May 9, l9S6, and September 23, 1957. However, no further evidence
was offered with respect to any land within the described tract having
been acquired by Huckleshoot Indians, so the entire acreage of the tract

is now to be valued as of 1859 for the purpose of determining the amount

of compensation claimant tribe is entitled to recover. Determinations

with respect to offsets will be made following further proceedings on

that issue.

The parties are now in agreement that the Muckleshoot tract contained l0l,620 acres of land.’

Claimant contends that since there was “no practical market" for
the lands in 1859, the amount it is entitled to recover should be based
upon the subsistence value of the lands to claimant in 1859, fixed by
Claimant at $292,500.00. Claimant also contends this amount should be

increased 2.7 times to $789,750.00 because of the decrease in the value

of the dollar between 1859 and the present.

Defendant contends that Huckleshoot land had a fair market value
in 1859 of $10,000.00, or approximately ten cents per acre.

The evidence, as outlined in our findings of fact, discloses that

the I-Iuckleshoot tract is located in the southwestern part of King County

6625‘,

in the present State of 1:.-‘ashington. The northwest corner of the tract

'.s approximately lh miles southeast of Seattle, Washington, and the
western boundary of the tract is slightly over Lt miles east of the

waters of Puget Sound. Most of the land in the area is level to undulating, with about ll.§;'5 classified as rough, precipitous land. The
tract is watered by the Green River, which flows throughout the middle
of the area, and by the White River, which forms the south boundary of
the tract. The climate is moderate, and there is an abundance of rainfall.

In 1859 the tract lay within the County of King, in the Territory
of Washington. There was virtually no white population in the area,
the 1860 census showing a population of 302 people in King County. The
first established settlement within the I-Iuckleshoot ‘tract was in 1871:.

In 1859 there were no railroads in the area and the few overland roads
_ere of little use for transportation.

The Muckleshoot tract was located within a band of heavy timber
which covered virtually the entire area west of the Cascade Mountains.
The valuable Douglas fir formed about 7/8th of the forests‘ growth, while
the remaining trees included the red cedar ani hemlock. There was some
fertile land, mostly along the river valleys, but the productive soil
accounted for only about 14,93 of the land. The cost of clearing the
heavy timber made the land practically valueless for any agricultural
purposes other than to provide subsistence to individual settlers. There
were no minerals in the tract.

Since there is no dispute as to the acreage involved, the question

now before us is the determination of the value of the I-Iuckleshoot tract

6 626 2'»,

011 H9-I'0h 8, 1859- The test for valuation of land is the fair “market

value" of the land. As the Suprene Court stated in New York v. Sage,

 

239 U. S. 57, 60 L. Ed. 1143, ". . . what the owner is entitled to is

the value of the property taken, and that means what it fairly may be
believed that a purchaser in fair market conditions would have given for
it . . ."

Both parties in this proceeding agree that there was no "actual
market" for the Muckleshoot area in 1859. The evidence indicates that
there were no sales of large tracts of lani in the general area involved at a date on or prior to the valuation date herein involved.

In the absence of evidence of actual market value,‘in the sense of willing
buyers and willing sellers, resort must be had to other data which would
have been considered by a hypothetical buyer and seller in dealing with
the‘ land in question in 1859. The principles and factors which are to

be taken into consideration in such cases were summarized by the Court

of Claims in Otoe and Missouria Tribe of Indiars v. The United States of

 

America, 131 0. C15. 593. The Uourt stated at page 633 that the factors

 

to be considered in the absence of evidence of "market value" included
"the natural resources of the land ceded, including its climate, vegetati-°n: including timber, game and wildlife, mineral resources and whether

they are of economic value at the time of cession or merely of potential

5 627 3:

Value: Water power, its then or potential use, markets and transportation --—

Considering the ready markets at that time and the potential market."
With this brief statement of the methods of evaluating land, let

us examine the appraisals of the expert witnesses of the parties. The

claimant's expert, Mr. James A. Crutchfield, valued the tract by two

methods, arriving at two figures.
His first method involved a computation of the value of the timber
on the Huckleshoot land based on an assumed 1859 average stand of lb,,300

ft. BM per acre valued at an assumed valuation figure of $1.00 per 1,000

BM in 1902 discounted to 1859 at 8%. To this figure was added an additional lS cents per acre representing his opinion that a small portion
of the land would have been usable for agriculture. This resulted in
an average of $2.211 per acre valuation.
The Commission cannot give much weight to this appraisal. The
record does not contain sufficient evidence upon which to base any
specific estimate of the average stand of timber in the Muckleshoot
tract -on March 8, 1859. Accordingly, Mr. Crutchfield‘s estimate of
111,300 ft. per acre is pure:-conjecture. Further, his figure of $1.00
per thousand feet BM for an average stumpage value of timber in Washington in 1902 is disuputed by many of the authorities and cannot, in any
event, have any mathematically computable relationship to a stumpage
value for the Muckleshoot tract timber in 1859. The Commission does
not believe the evidence supports Mr. Crutchfield's opinion that the
agricultural value of the Muckleshoot land would have averaged 15 cents
an acre.

The opinion of Mr. Crutchfield cannot be given much weight by the
Commission for the further reason that his method of evaluation is not
in accordance with legally approved standards but rather involves methods

based on conjecture and speculation, which methods have been specifically

rejected by the courts and this Commission. Mr. CI'utch.field‘s method was

6628'

rejected in U. S. v. 13.140 Acres of Land, etc., 56 F. Supp. 535, in Which

   

the Court stated that, "The separate valuation of timber or rock attached
to land, or valuations arrived at by a process of multiplying the number
of cubic feet or yards by a given price per unit, are not approved bases
for evaluation." Mr. Crutchfield‘s valuation also involved the adding
of computed timber values to a computed agricultural value. This method
of proving separately the values of various uses to which the land is
adapted and then adding these separate items of value to find the value

of the land was rejected in Horton Butler Timber Co. et al., v. U. 8.,

91 Fed. 2d, 881;.

The second method of evaluation used by Mr. Crutchfield, which is
the method urged by counsel for claimant, involves a computation‘ of the
income which the Muckleshoot Indians could have earned had they been employed by the white settlers rather than obbtaining their own subsistence
from the land which they occupied. Mr. Crutchfield has assumed that the
Muckleshoot Indians could have each earned an average of $150 a year or
a total tribal income of $19,500. Capitalizing this figure at 6% he has
computed a value of $325,000, which he says, must have represented the

value of the tract to the Nooksack Indians since they preferred to make

their own subsistence from the land rather than work for the white man.

From this figure he has deducted 10%, representing the value of the fj.£*§?,=}."'_=-._"-_.'_-'=.‘.-:g__

rights retained by the Indians. Under this method of computation Mr.

6 629

Crutchfield found that the value of the tract in 1859 was $292,500, or 5-*4 

$2.88 per acre.

While this ‘method appears to be based upon assumptions which the Com-mission believes are completely unjustified, it is not necessary to burden

this opinion with them since the method is entirely theoretical and is
.ot based upon any judicially accepted method of evaluating land. The
r-iduculous results which may be achieved by this method are apparent
from the fact that Mr. Crutchfield valued the ‘land of the Nooksack Tribe
of Indians, in the matter of Docket No. I46, at $12.58 per acre while he
valued the land in the Muckleshoot tract at $2.88 per acre, whereas it
is apparent that the Huckleshoot tract_.was, in fact, more valuable land
than that of the Nooksack Indians. The Commission cannot give weight
to an opinion on land valuation which is based on such a method.

Mr. Crutchfield has also multiplied both of his appraisal figures
by a 2.? factor, which, he claims, represents the amount by which the
dollar has depreciated since 1859 on the basis of the index of wholesale

prices of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The law is well settled that,

e in the absence of provisions .i‘or.the payment of interest in the‘jurisdictional act, u:n.'Less the taking of land was under Congressional authority in the exercise of the United States sovereign power of eminent
domain, the payment of just compensation does not require an increment
measured by interest or any other standard to be added to the value at

the time of taking. The Assiniboine Indian Tribe v. The United States,

 

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 530 and cases thereincited. The Indian Claims CommisS5-°1’1 Act (60 Stat. 101:9) contains no provision for the payment of interest.
The taking in this case was not in the exercise of the power of eminent
domain. The claimant is entitled to recover the fair market value of the
lands as of March 8, 1859, but is not entitled to any increment to be

added to the fair market value, whether such increment be computed as

interest, or by multiplying the fair market value by a .__dollar depreciation

6 630. 

h.

factor, or by any other means.

The defendant's appraiser, Mr. Vern A. Englehorn, has Submitted 8
detailed appraisal report containing much material which has been helpful to the Commission  arriving at an evaluation of the Hucklershoot
area. Mr. Englehorn has attempted to appraise the land on the basis of
its fair market value in 1859 assuming a hypothetical seller and hypothetical buyer and taking into consideration the area‘s size, topography,
accessibj.lity,l surrounding sales, population, and factors which would be
involved in its utili zation for resale as timber land. However, the
Commission cannot agree with Mr. Englehorn's conclusion that the Huckleshoot land had only a nominal value not exceeding $l0,000,00, or a little
over 9 cents an acre, as of March 8, 1859.

-Both parties are in agreement that the highest and best use for the
Huckleshoot tract would have been as timber land. A-prospective purchaser of the tract would have considered many factors affecting the
price which he would be willing to pay for the timber land. Among the
factors to have been considered would have been the quality of the‘
timber, its density, its accessibility to both sawmills and markets for
lumber, and the topography of the area. .

The record clearly indicates that the Muckleshoot tract lay within
the heavily forested section between the Cascade Mountains ‘and Puget Sound.
It appears that a majority of the trees in the area were the valuable
Douglas fir and that the remai.ning trees included hemlock arxi cedar which
were also valuable for lumbering operations. In 1859 the Douglas fir was
being exported all over the world for use as spars on sailing ships. Much

lumber was also exported to supply the expanding area around San Francisco.

6 631

There is no evidence upon which to base any accurate estimate of
16 average density of the forests within the Muckleshoot tract in terms
of thousands of board feet per acre, Mr, Gannett reported that King
County was originally heavily forested but that fire or the ax had destroyed large areas. While there is evidence that fires had destroyed
some forest land in the Puget Sound area prior to l8S9, it appears that
the most damaging fires occurred subsequent to the evaluation date.
The Commission believes that on the evaluation date the forests within
the Muckleshoot tract were comparable in their stand to ‘the average of
the surrounding Puget Sound area.

Most of the Huckleshoot tract was not immediately accessible to the
many sawmills which had been constructed in the Puget Sound area prior to
March 8, 1359. There was, in 1860, only one mill in King County. That
mill, located in Seattle, could have used some of the timber in the
western section of the Euckleshoot tract along the white River, which
was driveable below the mouth of the Green River. Most of the sawmills
were located in the counties of Kitsap, Jefferson, Pierce and Thurston.
111 1359, timber on the Huckleshoot tract, with the exception of that which
was in the extreme western part of the area along the White River, would
have been considered inaccessible for extensive lumbering operations with
the crude means then being employed by timbemen.i The evidence discloses
that the only timber which was cut commercially was that which stood within a mile to two miles inland from salt water or a driveable stream.
Ebrcept for that portion of the white River below the mouth of the Green

River, there were no driweable streams within the Huckleshoot tract.

6 632

...._-_-...

The Muckleshoot tract was close  Seattle and that southern portion
of Puget Sound where ships from the San Francisco area and other ports
around the world received lumber products for’ export. The 1>0P°gI‘aPhZ?’
of the area was favorable for lumbering operations since only about 11.5%
of the terrain is classified as rough and precipitous.

After considering all the above factors, a prospective purchaser
would have been aware that there was, in 1859, no immediate value for
1110St- Of the timber. A prospectivebuyer would, however, have recognized
its potential value which would have to_await the arrival of the railroads and the development of adequate overland routes as well as the
exhaustion of the millions of acres of more accessible and readily marketable timber which lay alorg the shores of Puget Sound. A prospective
purchaserwould also have considered the existing danger of damage to the
timber from fires which were causing thousands of dollars in damage to
the Washington forests every year. A prospective buyer would have been
aware that some of the timber along the White River could have been cut
and floated to the sawmill in Seattle. A prospective purchaser would
also have considered the fact that the Euckleshoot tract was not too
distant from the waters of the southern part of Puget Sound and was not,
therefore,’ too remote from a ready market for its timber. The Commission
believes that a timbeman would, after weigihing all the factors referred
to above, have been willing to buy and a seller willing to sell the Huckleshoot tract on March 8, 1859, for a consideration amounting to 85 cents
an acre.

While there is no evidence of sales of comparable timber tracts at

33' Prior to the evaluation date in this case, there were sales in 1861,

5 633 

l862_. and l863 of tracts of timber land to Pope and Talbot-- at a price of
$1.50 per acre. However, these sales involved the choicest timber land
not more than a mile to a mile and a half from the shores of Puget Sound
and were located within the immediate vicinity of the mill at Port Gamble.
The later sales of timber land at prices ranging from $3.15 to $6.00 an
acre occurred 15 to ho years subsequent to the evaluation date in this
case and are, therefore, too remote in time to be given much weight in
consideration of the fair market value of the Muckleshoot tract in 1859.

8 The record fails to support a finding that in 1859 the Muckleshoot
land would have been valuable for any agricultural purposes other than
the utilization of some of the land along the river valleys for the subsistence of settlers. Thus any value of the land for agriculture would

have been nominal. The land did not possess any known minerals.

In the case of the Nooksack Tribe of Indians v. The United States,

 

Docket No. 1:6, decided this date, the Commission placed a value of 65
cents an acre on some 80,590 acres of land located in the extreme northwestern section of the State of Washington. However, that land was more
remote from a ready market for its timber, the topography of the area was
considerably more rough and mountainous and white settlement of the area
was several years behind that in King County in areas adjacent to the
Muckleshoot tract. Accordingly, the value of the Huckleshoot tract on
March 8, 1359, would have been greater than that of the Nooksack land
on the same date.

After considering all the evidence in the record, it is the conclusion of the Commission that the 101,620 acres of Nooksack land had an

average fair market value of eighty—five cents per acre on March 8,1859,

663

.__
L...”
1.

Or $8653?7o0Oo

-As the lands were taken by defendant without the payment to the
Huckleshoot Tribe of any compensation therefor, the clamant is entitled
under Clause LL of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act to an

award in the sum of $86,377.00, less such offsets as may be allowable

under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

‘who M4 HO1t
Associate Cozmnissioner

We concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J . O'Marr
Associate Comissioner

 

