BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE csssxc NATLION, )
Petitioner, 3
v, 3 Docket No, 21
THE UNITED STATES OF AEERICA, ;
Defendant. g
Decided: December 29, 1955
Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell
Attorney for Petitioner

C. Lenoir Thompson, with whom
were Claude Pepper and Charles
Bragman,
Attorneys for Intervenor, The
Creek Nation East,
Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General,
Perry W. Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant.
OPINION OF THE COgyISSION
Witt, Chief Commissioner delivered this opinion of the Commission:
LOCATION OF LOHER CREEKS
It is generally agreed that the Friendly or Lower Creeks occupied
the lower or southern part of the Creek:donain in Georgia and Alabama
at the time of the Jackson treaty of August 9, 181%, which was guaranteed
the Creek Nation by the Treaty of August 7, 1790, 7 Stat. 35. (Find. 2).
Colonel Benjamin Hawkins, one of the first agents appointed to the Creek
Nati0D. recognized the division between the two groups of that Nation

and located them as follows; “By the expression ‘Loser Creeks‘ is meant

1+ 1142

those on the waters of Flint and Chattahoochie; and ‘Upper Creeks,‘
those on the waters of Tallapoosa, Coosa and Alabama." (American
State Papers, 2 Indian Affairs 8M8), This general location of the

Lower Creeks conforms to that recognized by the Creeks in their Memorial
to Congress in 1853 (C1. Ex. 32, pp. l—8) and that of the Indian Bureau.
(Cl. Ex. 32, pp. 9-1M), Thus, while the principal towns of the Lower
Creeks, such as Coeeta, Cussetta, etc,, were considerably north of the
treaty line in Georgia, it is plain lands south of that line were also

those of the Lower Creeks.

AREA OF LOWER CREEK LANDS

 

Having determined that the Lower or Friendly Creeks occupied the
lower or southern part of the Creek domain in Georgia and Alabama, it is
necessary to fix the boundaries and acreage thereof. As to a more definite location of these lands it is stated in the letter of the Commissioner'of Indian Affairs, dated January l7, l853 (Claimant's Ex. 32, p. 11)
that all the ceded lands in Georgia and a portion of those in the southeastern part of Alabama "belonged exclusively to the lower or friendly
Creeks men n

The Jackson treaty definitely fixed the Lower Creek boundaries of the
ceded area in Georgia, for the Creeks ceded by that treaty all their lands
in the state lying south of a line starting at a point on the Chatahouchie
(Chatahoochee) river where the Sumnochico Creek empties into the Chatahouchie, "thence east from a true meridian line to a point which shall
intersect the line now dividing the lands claimed and owned by the state

of Georgia." The eastern terminus of tlis line is no doubt the point where

M 11;?it intersects the west boundary of the Creek cession of June 16, 1802,

7 Stat. 68. (Royce, southern tract MM in Georgia).

So the part of the
181k cession in Georgia extends between the treaty line on the north to
the southern boundary of the state and between the Chatahoochee river on
the west and the west line of the 1802 cession on the east.

The acreage Of this area was estimated by the General Land Office
in l85U to be 7,612,800 acres.

(See letter of Commissioner of G.L.O.

dated April 18, 185M, Part of Cl. Ex. 36). This figure is accepted since
it was an estimate made by the agency best qualified to determine it.
As to the area of the Lower or Friendly Creek lands extending into

southeast Alabama, determined by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to

be theirs, the Commissioner of the General Land Office, on March 30,

185M, determined that the part in Alabama comprised 1,373,853 acres.

(See 01. Ex. 36(c), and the.nap, Cl. 3:; M,,whieh apparently is the one
referred to in Ex. 36 (c), a letter dated March 30, 185M). Adding this

acreage to the 7,612,800 acres in Georgia, the total acreage of the Lower

Creek lands is 8,986,653 acres. It will be seen by referring to the map,

Ex. U, that the Alabama part lies south of the northerly treaty line and
extends south to the southern boundary of Alabama and west from the
Chattahoochee river to the line shown'on the map, Ex. U, which is the
township line between 23 and 2% East.

The total acreage of 8,986,653 is confused by the fact the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Lea, in his two letters of January 17 and 21,
1853 (part of Cl. Ex. 32) uses the figure 8,8h9,9¥O, and Commissioner
Manypenny in his letter to the Secretary of the Interior on August 1,

1851*. 01.. Ex. 140, mentions the difference between the Indian Bureau’s

ll 11114

figure and that of the General Land Office. In discussing this difference
and the method of determining the western boundary of the Lower Creek
lands he said:

It has been a delicate duty to attempt to fix a line nhich
does not appear to have been formally and specifically laid down.
But upon the authority of the reports to the War Department, before, during and after the war, it appears that the "Friendly
Creeks" were mainly those known as the Lower Creeks who resided
on the eaters of the Flint and Chattahoochee rivers, with a few
of the Upper Creek towns residing on the Tallapoosa; and that
the "Red Sticks" or those who became hostile were exclusively
Upper Creeks and resided on the waters of the Tallapoosa, Coosa
and Alabama. Taking this data in connection with the memorial
of the Creek nation of Indians which accompanied the letter from
Mr, Sebastian - as the claims therein named refers to the locality
of the friendly Indians ~ and supported in some measure by the
report of Col, Benjamin Hawkins, in August 1815, who stated the
line of the capitulation included "nearly eight millions of acres"
that belonged to the "friendly Indians, over and above all the
hunting grounds of the friendly Upper Creeks” - as a basis, it
has appeared to be a just assumption that the true point of separation between the parties would be the highlands which separate the
respective waters on which they resided. Therefore, following
the northern line of the territory acquired to the point where
the waters of the Upper are separated from those of the Lower Creeks,
to fix an initial, it has appeared necessary to draw an arbitrary
line due south to the Southern boundary of the ceded territory as
the nearest approximation to the true boundary of the respective
parties that can now be arrived at. Upon this basis the number of
acres of land lying east of the line and belonging to the friendly
Creeks, would be according to the estimates of this office 8,8h9,9UO,
and according to that of the Commissioner of the General Land Office
as shown by his letter referred to and one written on the 30th to
8,936,653 acres.

It appears, therefore, that we must decide between the Bureau's
figure and that computed by the General Land Office. As will be seen
by reference to the letters from the General Land Office of February 3,
1”, March 30, and April 18, all in 1853, (C1, Exs. 35 (a), (b), (C), (d))
the G. L. 0. Was requested to compute the acreage of the Lower Creeks
within the boundaries fixed by the Indian Bureau, This apparently was not

done until 1353, (see Cl. Ex, 36 (0)), so prior to that time and at the

M 1h5

time of Commissioner Lee's 185} letters, (Ex. 32) the estimate of acreage
was made by the Indian Bureau. The fact that the matter of acreage was
referred to the G. Li 0. indicates that the Indian Bureau was not sure of
its estimate and asked the G. L. O. to make the computation. we believe
the latter agency was better equipped and qualified to determine the
acreage and that its determination of 8,986,653 acres must be accepted
as the most reliable figure for the Lower Creek area based upon the evidence now before the Commission.

Edgar E. witt
Chief Commissioner

Approved:

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

1: 11:6

