1 Inda c1. Comm. 156 , "o C V     V C C 156
Before the ' I

IR*ZA§ CLaIE§ CCKHISSIG

Po . Ac  a   5-. 
EDDIE WARIOR. on she relation of
the Creek Freedman associations an
ozgaalzei group,

Claimantso

vso Docket sot 25

)
) —
)
3
)
3
)
)
UNITED STAEES os MERICA¢ )
)
)

Respondento
Mr. Cecil Bo Roberesoa and
Horace O. Pollara for the Claimants, 4

E=€:r.°}, Balgsh Ao Bazmegr 
Mro Leland Lo Ycsoo with

Q‘,

‘E . 3 ‘
woos was aro assistant

sterner General a- Cevifsl ,
.1’, " .2‘ " - -. .1‘.
oazeoao lor one Eespusaent,

N18 4 3949 C‘
' OPIHIOE OF THE COMMISSIOHo

Holto Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission;

Ehis claim is presented by Po Ac Lewis; Xenophon Jones and Edéie
sorrioro on the relation of the Creek Freedman Association. The petition
alleges that the claim is brought on behalf of sale Association which is
an organizes group of Greek Ereeénen, consisting of a thousand registereé
members from three Freedmen towns: .d for all other Creek Freedsen and

"-"I.-\ .2 -up ‘ ' I '*. '* 9 Q C -I I
oaeir respectlte £9lTSo Astaoned to toe petztzong maxaed Exnzozt 33”» is

a statement and resolution which recites in substance that the fullblood

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 156 ‘ '15?

but that the Freedmen who are members of the Creek Tribe felt they were
left out of that action and should have a committee of their own to act
for the Creek Freedman in presenting claims of the Freedmen against the
Government. That in order to realize this a number of Greek Freedmen
held a meeting and called themselves the Creek Freedmen Association. apu
pointing the three above named Freedmen as a committee "to act for the
Freedman members of the Creek Tribe and represent them in all treaty vie»
lations and claims that Freedmen members of the Creek Tribe may have against
the Government."

It is apparent from the allegations of the petition and the said exhibit that even though this claim is brought by the three members on behalf

1,...

0 4-. a----- H '0
“’ *‘“ “ ' ti-" ’* ** be eonsidered as being a class action on §uua¢+

UL wilt) A5-"z'E5QClu3.u4.u.LLg .:.u t.:-<':.1.11
of the three members and all other Freedman and their descendants. as
authorized by the Indian Claims Commission.Act (60 Stat. 10&9). Therefore

for the purposes of the Respondent's motion to dismiss because of lack of

jurisdiction we shall herein consider the claim as a class action by the
three named members on behalf of themselves and all other Freedmen members
of the Creek Tribe. and their respective descendants.

For convenience we will hereafter in the opinion refer to the claimants
as the "Creek Freedmen."

The allegations of the petition are in substance as follows:

The claimants are Freedman of African descent who are. or whose
ancestors were. enrolled as members of the Creek Nation pursuant to Article

2 of the Treaty of June in, 1866 (1% Stat. 785) and Section 21 of the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 156 158

€393:-D

Curtis Act of June 28, 1898 (30 Stat. #95).

The original agreement with the Greek Tribe of 1901 (31 Stat. 861)
provided in.Section 3 thereof that all lands of the Creek Eribe, with some
exeeptions;'were to be allotted to the citizens of the tribe so as to give
each an equal share of the whole in value. as nearly as could be made, by
allotting to each citizen 160 acres of land to be selected by his. The
standard value of an allotment was $l.Ob0.00 represented by 160 acres of
land.valued.at $6350 per acre. It further provided that any allottee receiving lands of less value than such standard value might select other
lands, whichs at their apyraised value. was sufficient to make his allotment equal in value to the standard so fixed.

Sect1on.3 of the same agreement further provided that when the allotu
ment of 160 acres had been made to each citizen. the residue of the lands»
not reserved.or otherwise disposed of. and all funds arising nder the
agreements were to be used for the purpose of equalizing allotments so
they would all be made equal in values

l e claimants received their allotments but they were of less value
than the standard value of $1,oto,oo and it is alleged they have never been
given the opportunity to select other tribal lands. nor received money out
of other funds of the Creek Tribes to equalize their deficient allotmentss

It is further alleged that monies received from sale of unallotted
lands have been used for purposes inconsistent with the aforesaid agree—
ment and also that by various acts of Congress, subsequent to the ab ve

agreement, there have been added certain ncwshorn children and minors,

1 Ind..C1. Comm. 156 159

which has further diverted the funds of the Creek Tribe. and that by the
Act of March. 1909 (35 Stat. 781) Congress reduced the standard valuation
from $1,000.00 to $800.00 per 160 acres and provided for equalization of
allotments out of tribal funds on that basis.

The claimants request that the rolls be examined to ascertain the
names of the Creek Freedman whose lands were appraised at less than $6.50
per acre and they be paid such sums as to make their allotments equal in
value the standard valuation of $1,000.00.

The respondent has filei its motion to dismiss the petition on the
main ground that the Commission lacks jurisdiction in that none of the claims
asserted in the petition are “claims against the United States on behalf of
any Indian tribe, band. or other identifiable group of American Indians.“

An.examination of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act
(so Stat. 1014.9) shows that it is provided that this Commission shall hear
and determine five specified types of claims against the United States. on
behalf of an Indian tribe. band. or other identifiable group of American
Indians. It will thus be seen by the language of the foregoing provision
of the Act that jurisdiction is conferred.upon the Commission to entertain
claims of three classes of claimants. namely. "tribes." "bands" or “other
identifiable groups" other than a tribe or ban s There is obviously no
Jurisdiction granted to hear and determine claims on behalf of individual
Indians.

We do not believe. judging from the legislative history of the

C 160
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 156 “'5

ll

Act that it was the intention of Congress this Commission should have

Jurisdiction over individual claims. It is usual that when Congress does
intend to include individuals as claimants in jurisdictional acts that it
expressly designates indivieuals as aistinct from tribes, bands or groupso

cfo Blackfeather V39 United Statesp 193 U950 358, 378» This was not done

by Congress in the Indian Claims Commission Act.

 

1] Hearings on HqEs 1198 and Hoan 13b1, Pa 77: before Committee on

Indian Affairs. House of Zhpresontotivese 79th Congress; 1st
Session. Ehis conversation in saii hearing was between are Jo
C. MeCaskill9 assistant Comnissiene? of Indian Affairs; and

Chairman Jackson of the Reuse Cemnittees

Mr. {cCASKILLo Those were inditiéual elaimsa I
think they woul& not come within the purview of
this bill at allb Zhis bill, I think: if I am not
mistaken? only relat s to tribal claims or claims
Of b&DdSo

Chairman JACKSON. That is the wording of both billso

Mro‘McCASKILLo t would not cover individual claims
Of  2423.8 4:

Chairman JAC’SO1¢ The langueve reads:

The Conm'ssien shall hear and determine all
claims of any nature whatsoever against the United
States on behalf of any Iniian trite“ band, or other
ident‘fiable group of aerican Indians * * *9

Mia MCCASKILL. I do not think we have regarded this
as ayplying to individual claims.

Oha1rman.JACKSOHg E0; I would not think it was the
intention of Consress to ac theta That is a seed

. b E:
pointo

1 ind. c1. Comm. 156 151

-5;

We recognize the duty of this Commission to hear and determine all
Indian Claims that are within the grant of jurisdiction in the Act. but
that grant has its limitations and the Commission does not have the authority to extend its jurisdiction by implication to cover individual
claims: the iurisdiction of the Commission is limited to tribal. bands
or common group claims in which the members of the group have a common
interest in the subject matter;

The question then is whether the claims asserted here are those of
a group with common group rights. which rights have been violated. or are
a number of separate and independent individual claims of Freedmen.members
of the Creek Tribe whose individual rights have been violated and have
Joined their claims in a common suit.

The respondent‘s position is that. under the allegations of the
petition claimants at most are severally entitled to receive such.sums
as. when added to the appraised value of their respective allotments, will
equal an amount of $l,Oh0.00; which shows that the claims asserted are
individual in character and in fact, and therefore not within the grant
of jurisdiction to this Commission.

It is admitted.by'claimants that the Freedmen became members of the
Creek Tribe by virtue of the 1866 Treaty and the Curtis Act of 1898. and
as such members were entitled to share in the Creek lands.

It is apparent from the allegations of the petition that the claims

here are on behalf of only those members of the Creek Tribe of African

1 Ind._c1. Comm. 156     ' ‘  ~ ‘ -162, . .
..-7 ..

descent who have received allotments of less value. in variant amounts.
than.the standard value of $l.0h0.00. and to whom there has never been
allotted.other lands. nor payment of tribal funds to eqalize their respective allotments. The claimants would have the Commission arrive at
the amounts due by ascertaining the names of said Creek:Freedmen whose
lands were appraised at less than $6.50 per acre and allow them such sums
as may be due than to make their allotments equal in value to the standard
value of $1.0#0.00. In other words. under the allegation of the petition.
the Commission would have to determine the amount each individual claimant
claims he is entitled to receive under the 1901 Greek agreement by adding
,to the appraised value of his respective allotment such.sum as would bring
the amount up to $l.Oh0.00. This clearly concerns the rights of each indi—
vidual Freednen who was allegedly denied the full value allotment promised
him and constitutes his own.personal individual claim which is separate
and.distinct from the other Freednen who may have also been denied full
allotments. All that has been done here is to combine the several individual claims into one action. This is even admitted.by claimants in their

3/

written response to the motion to dismiss.

 

Q] Claimant's Response to motion to dismiss. Brief and.Argument, page 4w

“Certainly. their rights (Freedman) arise solely out of their
enrollment and membership in the Greek Tribe. The Creek Freedmen
Association is merely the agency created for the express purpose
of presenting the individual claims of the several Freedmen. collectively; otherwise, each individual Freedman would have to file
his separate claim and thereby create a very burdensome situation.

! The Greek Nation of Indians is and has been a permanent organization‘
but there never has been a permanent organization of Froednen. * *-"

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 156 I - C - 163

..8 ..

The Supreme Court in the case of Blackfeather vs.'United States. 3?

Ct. Cls. 233: 190 U58. 368, was called.upon.to consider this question of

E independent individual claims being asserted in a common suit under a

jurisdictional act which.provided that claims of the tribe or band were
to be entertained. The Court in substance held that claims for the den
struction and loss of personal property of individual Shawnee Indians
caused by the depredations of white settlers, were claims of individual
members of the Shawnee Tribe of Indians and that jurisdiction over the
claims of individual members of the Shawnee Tribe was not included in the

grant of jurisdiction to the Court of Claims by the Act of 1890 (26 Stat.

C 636) to hear and determine t.e rights of Shawnee Indians to money, lands

and rights which.nay be due to "the said Shawnees" under treaties and agree—
ments. nor was such jurisdiction conferred by the second Act of 1892 which
enlarged the scope of the earlier Act so as to include all claims of the
Shawnee tribe, or band; of every description whatsoever arising out of
treaty relations with the United States. rights growing out of such treaties;
and from contracts. expressed or implied, under such treaties.

In a later case in 1935 before the Court of Claims in the Sioux Tribe
of Indians vs. United States, 89 Ct. Cls. 31. 38 in an.action.by the tribe
to recover for the alleged failure of the United States to fulfill its
obligation to furnish seeds and agricultural instruments to heads of
families. members of the tribe, which were promised them in a.trcaty, the

iourt said in its opinion:

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 156' i 9 164

In addition to the fact that the evidence submitted is
not sufficient to justify the conclusion that the United
States has violated the provisions of Art. 8. we are of the
opinion that the plaintiff tribe cannot maintain suit and
recover on this character of claim for the reason that it
is not a tribal claim but concerns the rights of and obliga—
tions to individual Indians. members of the Sioux Tribe. * * *
Blackfeather v. United tates 190 U.S. 368, 37¢; 375: 378.

The Jurisdictional Act of June 3, 1920, 41 Stat. 738, authorizes
plaintiff to institute suit in this court only for amounts
claimed to be due such tribe or band, or bands thereof. as
tribal claims. The jurisdictional act does not give the

court jurisdiction to hear and determine the legal and

equitable claims of individual Indians. Cherokee Nation vs.
   Ct. C130 13 3] 1+0

The petition is dismissed.
So we see that the Supreme Court and the Court of Claims. in construing
such statutes permitting the Government to be sued for tribal or band claims.

:1

have refused to consider thereunder common actions for individual and in»
dependent claims.

Therefore. we do not believe that it makes any difference whether or
not these claimants constitute an identifiable group as referred to in the
.Act. and even if we assume that they are such a group, the fact remains
that the claims being asserted here are not common group claims but instead
are independent individual claims and which this Commission does not have
Jurisdiction to entertain under the Indian Claims Commission.Act.

The motion of the respondent to dismiss will be sustained.

Chief Commissioner Witt and Commissioner O‘Marr concur in the above

opinion.

kugust 4, 1949

