1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 683 _* 683
BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

JOSEPHINE Proms MITCHELL, et al., )
On Relation to Omaha Tribe of )
Indians of Nebraska, g
Petitioners, g
V. ) lbocket No. 85
)
UHITED STATES or AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )
Appearances:

William J. Froelich and Henry A. Stanbnry,
with whom were Alfred D. Raun and Julius

,D. Cronin,

‘Attorneys for Petitioners

Balph.A. Barney, with whom was Mr. Assistant

Attorney General.A. Devitt Vanech,
Attorneys for Defendant

Decided: December 19, 1951

OPINION 9;: ram ooze-11 ssxon

Holt, Commissioner, deliverei the opinion of the Commission:

This case is before the Commiosion on the Government's motion to
dismiss the petition of the petitioners herein on the ground that the
Commission lacks jurisdiction because the petition asserts claims of
individuals, and not "claims against the United States on behalf of
any Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of American Indians," as contemplated and required by section 2 of the Indian Claims
Commission Act (25'U.S.C. 70a).

The claim is presented by 21? named individuals who allege that

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 683 584

each petitioner named is of one-fourth or less Omaha Indian blood,
"being descendants of members of the Omaha Indian Tribe of Nebraska,
known as the 'Barada—Peters' group“ of the Omaha Tribe. The basis of
the claim is the alleged failure of the Government to recognize that
the petitioners or their ancestors were Omaha Indians, and therefore
denying them the benefits that were granted to members of the Omaha
Tribe.

The claim of petitioners, and each of them, consists of the
following items; (1) compensation for the value of allotments of lands
in the Omaha Tribe's reservation in Thurston County, Nebraska, which
it is alleged they or their ancestors were entitled to receive as
Omaha Indians; (2) for their share of annuity payments made to the
Omaha Tribe, which they allege they or their ancestors should have
received as Omaha Indians; and (3) for interest upon the monetary
value of both of the foregoing claims. A fourth claim for compenw
sation for the value of certain improvements made on lands occupied
by petitioners has been eliminated by the admission of counsel for
petitioners in their response to defendantis motion that this particular claim is not a ‘common claim" and, therefore, not within the
jurisdiction of this Commission.

The petition.alleges in substance that petitioners are descendants of one “Ta~ing~the—hae," a full blood Indian woman who
married a Frenchman named Michael Barada, and especially from.Antoine
Barada and Margaret Barada Sloan, two of the children born of that

marriage. That pursuant to the act of Congress dated August 7, 1882

1 1:26.. =31}... Comm. 683

3

(22 Stat. Bhl), and theamendatory Act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. 630),
the petitioners or their ancestors were entitled to allotments of land
on the Omaha Tribeis Thurston County Reservation in Nebrasha,‘and annuity payments by reason of their being of Omaha Indian blood. The
petitioners living at the time of the foregoing enactments, and those
since 1882 who have died, whose heirs are now petitioners, were not a
recognized as Omaha Indians and, therefore, were refused allotments
and annuity payments. This refusal was based upon the alleged misunderstanding, animosity, unfair dealings, discrimination and prejudice of some of the Omaha Indian tribal council of that period, as well
as ofiagents of the United States. The petition contains an extensive
recital of these various acts of injustice, gross inequities and prejudices complained of by petitioners, and which they allege entitled them
and each of them, to a judgment to compensate for the loss sustained,
and annuity payments due them.and each of them._
The petition sets forth the names of the various petitioners

and their ancestors in paragraphs 15 through 100 thereof, together
with the amount they allege each individual petitioner is entitled

to recover on the lst claim for loss sustained because of the Govern,ment‘s failure to allot them lands in the Omaha reservation. They

further state that the amount due each claimant as a share of the
\

annuity payments is not known.to them; however, there is set forth

in paragraph 13 a statement of amounts payable to the Omaha Tribe

under various treaties, totaling over a million dollars, of which

payments they claim each petitioner is entitled to receive a share as

685

J

‘a.-..:.:£.'."1.:"‘

1 Ind. (31. Comm. 683 686

' an Omaha Indian. The petitioners, and each of them, ‘pray for loss of

the value of the Thurston Reservation lands which they were denied,
their share of annuity payments they or their ancestors should have
received as Omaha Indians, and interest on the amount due on both
claims.

The defendant does not question any of the alleged facts; but, in
support of its motion to dismiss the petition, contends that the claim
asserted therein is simply a common action of the individual petitioners
who severally seek to recover for individual claims---and since the Indian claims Commission Act does not confer jurisdiction on the Commission
to hear and determine individual claims, the petition should be dismissed.

1-his Commission decided in the Loyal Greek case, ,Doc}:::et No. l,
the Creel: Freedman case, Docket No. 25, and the Underwood case, Docket
No. 39, that the jurisdiction of this Commission does not extend to
individual claims of Indians, but is limited to the consideration of
claims of a tribe, band, or other identifiable group of Indians who
have a common claim. The only question then for determination is the
character of the claim presented here.

The petitioners urge that the petition does allege a common claim
of an identifiable group of Indians knot-zn as the Antoine Barada—Peters
family and who, as a group of mixed blood Omaha Indians, were denied
recognition as members of the Omaha Tribe, and, therefore, the rights
and benefits they were entitled to as Omaha Indians. While it may be

true, as petitioners suggest, that it is possible to identify the

.1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 683 687

numbers of the Antoine Barada—Peters family, such.identifiability is
not in itself sufficient to create an "identifiable group“ under the
Indian Claims Commission.Act and permit the prosecution of a groqp

claim unless such a claim is common to the members of the group, and

not simply a common suit for individual claims. Loyal Creek case,

J”\ supra.

It appears that the provision for making allotments in severalty
on a portion of the Thurston Reservation in Nebraska to the Indians
of the Omaha Tribe was contained in the act of Congress of 1882 and
the Amendatory'Act of 1893, supra. By the act of 1882, as amended,
‘it was_provided, in effect, that, with the consent of the Omaha Tribe,
the Secretary of Interior was authorized to allot the Indians of said
tribe a quarter section of land in the Thurston Reservation to the
head of a family, and to all the others a one—eighth of a section.
Pursuant to the provisions of the above acts, allotments were made
_ by the Secretary of the Interior to the Omaha Indians residing on the
reservation in the tribal relation, with no distinction being made
between those of the full blood and of mixed blood. In addition,
allotments were made to such others of mixed blood as the Omaha Tribal
Cmincil recognized and declared to be members of the tribe entitled
to share in.the allotment of the tribal lands, but who'were not residents, in the tribal relation, of the reservation at the time the
acts were adopted.by Congress. Petitioners, or their ancestors, come
within this latter category, except they were among those mixed bloods

not recognized as members of the Omaha Tribe, and were therefore refused

688
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 683

allotments, and annuity payments.

It will be ohserved that under the act of 1882, as amended, the
right to an allotment in severalty of the Omaha tribal land was a
personal right conferred upon the individual Indian, depending on
whether said Indian was in fact a recognized member of the Omaha Tribe.
Thus the wrongful failure or refusal of the Government to recognize
that a mixed blood Omaha Indian was a member entitled to enrollment,
in the tribe, thereby denying such Indian the allotment of land and ,
other benefits granted to members, would, in our opinion, be a violation of the personal right of the individual Indian concerned. It
would follow that a claim for damages resulting from such violation
would certainly be the_personal claim of the individual Indian sustaining the loss, and would not be one in which other Omaha Indians
with like claims would share a common interest.

Counsel for petitioners, relying upon the decision in the Loyal
Creek:case, supra (Doc. No. 1), contend that a group claim is asserted
for the reason that it asks damages resulting from the failure through
discrimination against petitioners as a group to include them as
members of the Omaha Tribe, and, that while it might be necessary
later to determine the amount of the recovery each individual pe~
titioner was entitled to receive, this does not change the character
of the claim. In the Loyal Creek case the claims were originally individual claims of those Creek Indians who remained loyal and as a result
suffered the loss of their property during the Civil War, and we held

that by various treaties between the Creek.Nation and the United States

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 683 689

and certain acts of Congress, the Loyal creeks were recognized by the
Government as a group; that the Government by agreeing to submit their
claims to the Senate of the ‘United States for determination  pay
the amount it. found to be due  created a “common claim." The amount
awarded by the Senate was but partially paid so the claim presented to
this Commission was for the balance oi‘ the award made by the Senate,
and so oi‘, course did not involve any question as to the validity, of
individual claims or the amounts each member of the gro1_1p_was entitled
to receive.

It is clear that the decision in the Loyal Cree}: case does not
apply here, for it is not shown in the present case that the Government has ever dealt with nor in any manner recognized petitioners as
:3. group, and, oi‘ course, there has been no conversion of individual
claims into a "comon claim" as was done in the Loyal Creek case.

A question similar to the one under consideration was presented
and considered by this Commission in the Underwood case (Doc. No. 39),
decided October 18, l91L9. In that case the plaintiffs were an alleged
group of some 375 persons claiming to be Chickasaw Indians by blood
by reason of being descendants of an Indian woman, and who asserted
that they were wrongfully denied enrollment as Chicmsav.-Is, thereby
being refused the benefits granted a member of the Chickasaw Tribe.

In sustaining the Government‘s motion to dismiss on the ground the
claims were individual and not 1.-ri thin the jurisdiction of this Commission, it iwas pointed out in the opinion that ”this Comzzission would

have to determine the right of each individual claimant to enrollment,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 683 690

and if so entitled then the amount each is entitled to receive by reason
‘thereof. This clearly shows that the claims asserted are the personal,
individual claims of each claimant and that the claim is, in fact, not
one common to the group, but is simply a common suit for-individual
claims." See also Creek Freedman case, supra (Doc. No. 25).

We believe the.petitioners in the present case, by the allegations
and prayer of the petition, have asserted an individual obligation between the United States and each of the petitioners, and in considering
the alleged claim it would be necessary for the Commission to first determine the validity of the claim of each petitioner, and if entitled
to recover, then the amount of loss sustained. In our opinion this
shows plainly that the claim asserted in the petition is not a common
is a combiuation.of personal, individual claims in a common
suit, which this Commission does not have jurisdiction to determine.

For the above stated reasons, the Government's motion to dismiss
for lack of jurisdiction is sustained and the petition dismissed.

It is so ordered.

Chief Commissioner Witt and Commissioner O‘Marr concur in the

above opinion.

December 19, 1951

