1 Ind. c1. Comm. 149   ' 149
RRRORR THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

ICLIDE F. THOMPSON. WILLIAM r uLERs

)
HERBERT A. BELLAS, HENRY MILLER. )
MANUEL coRDovR. RRCRIR RcNRINNRY. )
LLOYD RARRINGTON. SATURNINO E. CALAC. )
W. G. NRLKRR. LAWRENCE BURGELL. )
FRANKIE MOOREHEAD and ARTHUR RRRRRA. )
members. and as the representatives )
of. and on the relation of the )
INDIANS or CALIFORNIA. )

)
)
)
)
)
)
)

Petitioners,

Docket No. 31

Defendant.

Ernest L. Wilkinson and John W. Preston,
with whom were Francis M. Goodwin.
Frederic A. Baker, Sam Clammer, Paul M.
Niebell and John W. Preston, Jr..
Attorneys for petitioners.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was A4 Devitt

Vanech. Assistant Attorney General,
Attorneys for defendant.

MAY 6 1949
OPINION

PER CURIAM: .A.motion to dismiss the original petition was filed herein
by the defendant and presented to the Commission on March 21. 1949, and orally
argued by the attorneys for all the parties to said original petition. There
was also argued at said time a similar motion directed to the petition in the
case. Federated Indians of California v. United States, Docket No. 12. At
the conclusion of the arguments in this case and Docket No. 12, counsel for
the claimants in both cases informed the Commission of their intention to cone
solidate the two cases and file an amended petition to effectuate such consoli~

dation and at the same time requested the Commission to postpone its ruling

l Ind. C1; Comm. 149 C i i 7 — 8 1509
- 2 a _p

on such motion until after such consolidation. It was also agreed in open

hearing by the claimants in said two cases and the defendant that the motion

Cato dismiss in this cause should be considered as though directed to the av

mended petition. and without further oral argument.

And it now appearing to the Commission that an amended petition was
filed herein on the 28th day of April, l§49 and that the petition in said
cause. Docket No; 12, has been dismissed, the Commission does now consider
the motion of the defendant to dismiss as though directed to the sufficiency
of the amended petition.

As shown by the allegations of paragraph I of the amended petition, this
claim is submitted by twelve named persons who are members of an alleged ident~
ifiable group known as the Indians of California, and who are acting as‘repre—
sentatives of and on behalf of that group.

The Indians of California are defined in Par. II of the amended petition

as follows:

II. Definition of Indians of California:

The Indians of California constitute an identifiable group of
Indians composed of all Indians who were residing in the State

of California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants now living,
as set forth by the.Act of May 18, 1928 (#5 State 602). as amended
by the Acts or April 29, 1930 (46 Stat. 259), and June 30. 19%
(Public ire. 852, 80th Cong... 2d sess.). This identifiable gi-cap
includes the descendants of members of what have sometimes been
loosely described as tribes. bands, rancherias. and villages of
Indians of California, and other individual Indians, who resided
in California at the time of the promulgation of the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hildalgo in l8h8 (9 Stat. 922). hembers_of the group
who were born prior to may 18, 1928. were enrolled as Indians

of California by direction of the Act of Congress approved May 18.
1928 (as Stat. 602), as amended by the Act of Ap1"il 29, 1930

(46 Stat. 259). Members of the group who were born subsequent to
{ay 18. 1928, are to be enrolled by direction of the Act of
Congress approved June 30, l9b8 (Public Law 852: 2d Sess,: 80th
CO.‘.'1go o

1 Ind. Cl..Comm. 149 _ I 151 "
._ 3 And it is further alleged that said Indians of California have been

" known and recognized by administrative and legislative action of the defendant as an identifiable group and a legal entity.

Thus, it is claimed that all the Indians in California whose names appear
upon the rolls, taken or to be taken under the Acts of Congress governing the
enrollment of such Indians, are interested in the claim.

It is further alleged in the amended petition that the Indians of Calis~
fornia have no tribal organization recognized with authority to represent such
group.

The defendant's motion to dismiss is based upon the following two grounds:

(l)~Ihat the "Indians of California" are not an identifiable group of Indians

\as_is contemplated by Section l0 of the Act of August 13, 1936 (60 Stat. lO¢9).

and (2) that the "Indians of Californiad has no tribal organization recognized

by the Secretary of the Interior.

In support of the motion counsel for the Government. in their briefs, ad»

Vance two main propositions, more or less related.

The first ground for dismissal is based upon a construction of the statute '

(sec. 2. 60 Stat. IOH9) creating the Indian Claims Commission. It is contended
that the phrase "Identifiable group“, cannot apply to or cover the Indians of
California because an “identifiable group“ must be an organisation of Indians
political in character, that is. it must be similar to a tribe or band, which
are recognized as political entities. we have this day decided in the Loyal
Creek case. Docket No. 1, that an “identifiable group" may be a group of
I

Indians outside the groups generally known and described as tribes or bands.

and that it may be a group nonnpolitical in character. The conclusions reached

1 Ind, c1. Comm. 149 ~ 152
. . H AL _

in that case apply here. in so far as the contention of the Government concerns

the question that the Indians of California must be a.po1itical group in order

6"

-.

to prosecute its claim before this Commission.

The next contention of the defendant is that the designation, Indians of
California, must be considered solely as a geographical division of Indians
because, it is claimed, that in reality the Indians of California consist of
more than 200 separate tribes, bands or groups which are of a political charac~
ter and, consequently. can not herein be joined as a single entity or group.

In support of defendant's position there are cited in the briefs, cases decided
by the courts, with quotations therefrom, and it has submitted excerpts from_
peovernment publications, reports, etc., tending to support the defendantis
position of the political status of the Indians of Californiaa

On the other hand, the petitioners. in their brief and amended petition,
cite many Congressional acts, and submit in their brief, excerpts from Congressional Committee hearings decisions of courts, etc., as evidence tending
to support their position that the Indians of California is a recognized legal
entity authorized by the Act of August 13, 1946, to prosecute their claim.

From the above brief summary of the contentions of the parties it will be
seen that an issue of an important fact has been raised, which we are asked to
determine on what is in reality a motion for a summary judgment. (See 880.
1l(b) of the Rules of Procedure.)

To add to the dilemma, seventeen groups of sowcalled Mission Indians
located in the State of California have filed a joint motion in this cause
(although before the filing of the amended petition herein) in which they claim

to be groups with organizations separate from and independent of the Indians

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 149 153

.-.5...

of California and who have claims of their own which they desire to prosecute
in their respective capacities.

The above is sufficient, we believe, to show the importance of the
questions raised by the motion and the need of a full hearing on the issue of
fact involved. The above references also show the impropriety of determining
such important issues on a notion such as is presented here. In our opinion
the issues of fact involved in this case as to legal status of the group, for
which the claim herein is presented, are of such importance and difficulty
they should only be determined when raised by an appropriate pleading and after
hearing the evidence on the issues of fact so raised.

In view of the above. it foliows that the defendant's motion must be

overruled.

May 6, 19#9

