1'-Ind. c1. Comm. 422 422

EFORE  IITJIAII CLAUEIS COMMI SZON

cm suncs on PIUTE nnazxnxs 0:5‘
mm roman MALE."EUR ns szanwm on,
IN ossoom,

Petitioners,
Docket I~To,._. 17

‘VS;

UNITED sures on £~.»fE3RIC!-..,

Defendant,

Mr. 0,3. McConnell, withjwhom
was Mr, Bernard J. Long,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

LIessrs., Ralph A. Barney and
Leland L, Yost, 1-3;; th :z3:;.c::: was
Mr, Assistant Attorney General
A. Devitt Vanech,

Attorneys for Defendant,
DEC 2 9 ‘.950

FIIIDIEGS 93 renew

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact in the above
entitled case‘,

1. The petitioners herein are Snelce or Piute Indi-ens now resid-ing in the State of Oregon who assertthese claims as the descendants

"I

of the_Snal-:e or Piute Indians who resided on the former Is;ie..s.heur Reservati on. The I-ialheur Reservati on wa.s_1ocated imrnedietely north of

Malhenr Lake, in east central Oregong The claims are presented on

behalf of all 1'ne::1'oers of said group and all persons rsho S11.-.'E.ll be

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422  - 423

- 2‘;

considered as entitled to participate in any judgment which may be

rendered.

2. Among the first treaties concluded with Indian tribes and
bands occupying the territory east of the Cascade Mountains in Oregon
was:

(a) The treaty of June 9, 1855 (12 Stat, 9h5) with the

Walla Walla, Cayuse and Umatilla tribes of Indians in which

they ceded a tract of land in northeast Oregon lying between

the Columbia River and Blue Mountain, including on the south

a.portion of the north fork of the John Day River.

(b) On June 25, lS55 a treaty (12 Stat. 963) was also
concluded with the Confederated Tribes and Bands of Middle
Oregon in which they ceded an area in the north central part
of Oregon lying between the Columbia River on the north and
HMO latitude on the south. This cession contained a portion
of the lands later included in the Malheur Reservation.

3." The territory in east central ahd southeast Oregon lying south
and southeast of the_land ceded by the Walla Walla, Cayusc and Umatilla
Tribes and the Confederated Tribes under the treaties of June 9 and
June 25, 1855, was inhabited by a number of separate tribes or bands

’ of Shoshonean Indians, about when the Government had practically no
knowledge until after 1860. The earliest historic account of contact
by white man was by the explorer Peter Ogden, who visited the Harneyh

Lialheur Lal-:0 region in central Oregon in 1825., He noted in his journal

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 - I I 424

_ 3 w

meeting a large number of "Snake" Indians in the area when he described as a wandering tribe consisting of both "Upper" and "Lower"
Snakes, the first war-like and the latter as timid. after l8h8 when
the Oregon territory was established, these Indians in eastern and
southeast Oregon were known and referred to generally by Government
officials and others as "snakesd or "Snake or Shoshonee" Indians,
with a distinction being nade between those bands in the north of
the area who were called "snakes and Bannocks," while those in the
southern part of the area were classed as Northern Piutes because

of their close relationship to the.Piutes of northern.Ncvada, These
India; erred th1‘o'o.g11oU.t the a,1"ea of east central and sout'neast Oregon in separate bands or groups. They did not have permanent
villages or camps but each band usually had a favorite wintering site
or sites to which its members returned after the hunting and gather—_
ing seasons. Each band or group ranged over such territory as was
found necessary to furnish a livelihood during the hunting and gathering seasons. There were no fixed boundaries between the areas occur
pied and used by each of the different bands and each band felt free
to use_any hunting or gathering ground where food was available.

U. (a) By an act of Congress (13 Stat. 37) dated March.25,

186M, the President was authorized to conclude a treaty with the

‘Klamath and.Modoc and Snake Indians in southeastern Oregon for the

purchase of the country occupied by then.

(b) On October 11;, 1861;, a treaty (16 Stat. 707) was concluded

18118.

1 Ind. C1. ‘Comm. 422' ' t 425 ...h..

with the Klamath and Modoc Tribes and Yahooskin Band of Snake Indians,

wherein they ceded to the United States an area of land lying in the
south central part of Oregon and northern California. The Klamath Reservation was established out of the cession and located on Klamath Lake
near the southern border of Oregon. This cession also contained a

small portion of the lands later included in the Malheur Reservation.

(c) On August 12, 1865 a treaty (134 Stat, 683) was also concluded

with the Well--Pahr-Pe Tribe of Snake Indians whereby they ceded to the

I United States a tract of land lying in the east central part. of Oregon
.  were to move to the Klamath Reservation. This cession embraced
tapiproximately the west one-third of the lands later included in the

Malheur Reservation, and also overlapped in part both the cession made

by the Confederated Tribes of Middle Oregon in the treaty of June 25,
1855 and the cession by the Klamath, Modoc md Yahooskin Band of Snake
Indians in the treaty of October 11}, l861L. .
5. Ca) There were a number of other bands or groups of Snake

or Piute Indians in southeast Oregon who were continuously hostile to
the white man from the time Oregon was established as a territory in
This hostility continued until in 1866 an aggressive campaign
was undertaken against them by the Army and by the latter part of

1868 the majority of them had surrendered and were collected in camps
near various Army posts in southeast Oregon under military surveillance.

They were visited in the fall of 1868 by J, W, Huntington, Sug erintendent

of Indian Affairs in Oregon, who had made the trip to personally ascertain

1 Ind. c1.‘ Comm. 422 ' 426

.,..5.

their condition and take measures as he could to insure p5FC9o After
visiting the various camps, Huntington held a final council'wé}d the

chiefs and headmen of these Indians at a.camp near Fort Barney and

. negotiated a treaty which was signed by Huntington and bj the chiefs

and headmen of the various bands on the part of the “Snake or Shoshone

Indians," which treaty reads as follows:

Treaty'made this tenth day of Dec. An Dr 1868 at
Fort Harncy Oregon between the United States represented
by J, W; P. Huntington, Supt. Indian.Affairs and the
Snake or Shoshone Indians represented by ¥e—yoa~ue—wa,
Gsharnee, E~he»gant, Po—nee, Chow»wat—na-nee, 0w~its,e
and Tash—e—go, Chiefs and Head men.

irticle l H Hestilities heretofore existing between
the 1,-g’_.r1'_r"_‘l_'.:3s and the Ind.i_;msd parties to this treaty cease
from this date. No penalties or punishment to be inflicted for acts done by either party during the war,

Article 24- The Snake Indians acknowledge the
dominion of the United States and agree henceforth to
submit to its authority and obey such Laws as may'be
enacted for their government and guidance.

Article 3 H It is mutually agreed that nhen any
crime depredation or offense is committed by an Indian
of the Snake Tribe he shall be delivered up to be
punished according to law, and likewise when any crime
or injury is perpetrated by any white man upon the

ilndians aforesaid the punishment shall be inflicted
according to the Laws of the United States and the
State of Oregon.

Article M — The Snake Indians agree that they will
reside upon such reservation as may be hereafter allotted
to them and that they will obey the authorities lawfully
placed over then. And the United States hereby guard ~
tees protection to such Indians in person and in property
while upon such Reservation,

Article 5«— Future provisions will be nadaby'the
government of the'United States for the permanent location

1 Ind. c1. Comm._422 U ' 427~
.. 5 ..

0f_the Snake Indians and for their education, government,
food and clothing and for allotment of lands in severalty
to them when their advancement warrants it.

Article 6 ~ Complaints may be made by the Chiefs or
Head men of any offense committed by whites to the agent
in charge of the Tribe or to any other officer of the
United States in the vicinity and in case wrong has been
done or crime committed redress is guaranteed”

Article 7 — This treaty is only preliminary to a
more complete treaty to be made hereafter under the

direction and authority of the Government of the United
States.

Done at Fort Barney Day and Year above written by
the parties whose names appear hereto and in the presence
of the Subscribing Witnesses.

J. W, P. HUHTINGTON (L s)

vm_roU—wr—ra. X (L s)
Gsn;..::-ass X (L s
E-I:'Z=:‘.-.-s’3—A3.\IE1J X (L s)
1=o..n:~1e X (L s)
.cHow.-r-n r.:~n.=.-zen“ X (L s)
OW-ITS X (L s)
TASE-E-GO   X (L s)

Witnesses: .
W. R, PARNELL
, 1st Lt. 1st Cavalry PVT Maj'UsS.A.
Army Camp Harney Oregon
W; F. Rice *
2nd Lieut 23d Inft Bat Capt'U.SaA.

(b) The foregoing treaty was not presented to the Senate for
ratification and was not ratified. So far as the record shows, no
treaty or agreement has ever been consummated by and between the United

Stat¢s and.the Indians who signed the unratified treaty on December 10,

1868 .
6. In November, 1869, A. B. Meacham, Superintendent of Indian

Affairs in Oregon and Colonel Elmer Otis of the United States.Army

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 428

-7...

held a council meeting covering several days with the Snake or Piute
Chiefs We-ah-we-wah, E-c-«gen, Pen-oe, Or:--itz--e, O-che-ho, Chock-tote

and Teheah~ne for the purpose of requesting them to move to the

Klamath Reservation to reside, but all of them except O—che~ho and

Chock~tote declined to move.

7. On March 8, 1871 Superintendent Meacham, in a letter to the

.Commissioner of Indian Affairs, recommended

. that the President withdraw for eighteen.months all
that portion of the country in the State of Oregon situw
ated between the forty-second and forty-fourth parallels
of latitude, and from 117 degrees to 120 degrees of longitude, excepting so much as may have been or may be granted

for militerv or wagon road purposes, with a view of select:

-— w—¢—--I-cup tug,-U‘!-P‘;

ing an Indian reservation, on which to consolidate Indians

east of the Cascade Mountains in said State, excepting
those who may select lands in severalty from the reser'vation or reservations on which they are now located, and
the President instruct me to proceed at the earliest
practical time to select such reservation.

This recommendation ofimcachamis was approved by the Acting Commissioner

of Indian Affairs on March l0, l87l and by the Secretary of the Interior

on March ls, 1871, and the withdrawal of the lands as recommended was

directed by'Executive order dated March 1%, 1871.
8. (a) On September H, 1872 the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
wrote the following letter to the Secretary of the Interior:

Sir: I have the honor to incloso herewith a report,
dated the 22nd ultimo (and accompanying map), received
from T. B. Odeneal, Esq., superintendent Indian affairs
for Oregon, reciting the action taken by him relative to
the establishment of a;pr0pOS0d reservation on the headwaters of Malhenr River, in that State, for the Snake or
Piute Indians, under instructions contained in letter to
him from this office, dated the 6th of July last.

' l.Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 429
N 3 _ ”

Superintendent Odeneal defines the boundaries of
the tract of country selected by him for the proposed
reservation as follows: 2

‘Beginning at the mouth of the North Fork of the
‘Malhour River; thence up said North Fork, including the
waters thereof, to Castle Rock; thence_in a northwesterly direction to Strawberry Butte; thence to Soda Spring,
on the Canyon City and Camp Harney Road; thence down
Silvios River to Malheur Lake; thence east to the South
lFork of the Malheur River; thence down said South Fork,
including the waters thereof, to the place of beginning
(to be known as Malheur Reservation), including all lands
within said boundaries, excepting so much thereof as may
have been granted for military or wagon-road purposes.‘

I respectfully recommend that the tract of country
embraced within the foregoing limits be set apart and
reserved as an Indian reservation, and that the President
be requested to issue an Executive order accordingly.

It is also requested thatthe papers inclosed be

returned to this office,Very respectfully, your obedient servant,
F2.A. Wglker,s

s Commissioner.
The Secretary of the Interior.

(b) The Acting Secretary of the Interior forwarded the Commissioner's letter to the President on September 12, 1872, statingthat he approved the recommendation of the Commissioner and recommended that the President direct the same to be carried into effect.

The Executive order was signed by the President on September 12, 1872,and is as follows:

Let the lands which are fully described in the
accompanying letter of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
be set apart as a reservation for the Snake or Piute Indians,
as recommended in the letter of the Secretary of the Interior

of this date.

Us so Grant

1 Ind. c1. com. 422 -430

«.9...

‘(c) On May 15, 1875. an additional area was added to the Malheur
Reservation by Executive order. wThe order is as follows}

It is hereby ordered that the tract of country in
Oregon embraced within the folloeing_describcd boundaries,
viz: Commencing at a point on the Malheur River where the
range line between ranges 39 and H0 east of the‘§illametto
Meridian intersects the same; thence north, on said range
line, to a point due east of Strawberry Butte; thence west
to Stranbcrry'3utte; thence southeastwardly to Castle Rock;
thence to the west bend of the.North Fork of the Malheur
River; thence down and with the said west bankin the
Malheur River; thence along and with the Malheur River
to the place of beginning, be, and the same hereby is,
withdrawn from sale or settlement, except such lands within
said boundaries as have passed or may pass to The Dalles
Military Road Company, under act of Congress approved
February 27, 1867 (vol. 11;, p, 1409), and to the Tiillamette

1._r."\'I1§"¥_‘!r h?1f1 r‘...cr5v-can 1rTr‘n-171*!-n-in ‘.HT'§1-E-I-n-r--tr Dav-‘H (‘.f\1"~1a-ur-av’!!!
C7 V ' - H -I‘ -' .

"l'|1"IIq (191
-...-............. - - can -- 5.;---v on. v v\--- -' M...»-I-dv& A-4--nun vn..—a-- ‘; -III-'-‘H1...---. hf \Jd—apg__V--.0 ’ Iuvl-I-b‘-vb‘-Id»
.

act of Congress approved July 5, 1866 (vol. l , p. 89),
and the same set apart as an addition to the Malheur Indian
Reservation set apart by Executive order of September 12,
1872.
‘ U. S. Grant.

9. By'Executive order dated January 28, 1876 most of the land
added to the Malheur Reservation area by the Executive order of May 15,

1575, supra, was restored to public domain and the Halheur Reservation

area was redefined, The order is as follows:

It is hereby ordered that the tract of country in
Oregon lying within the following described boundaries,
viz: Beginning at a point on the right bank of the Malheur
River where the range line between ranges 38 and 39 cast .
of the Willamette meridian intersects the some; thence
north on said range line to a point due east of the summit
of Castle Rock; thence due west to the summit of Castle
Rock; thence in a northwesterly direction to Strawberry
Butte; thence to Soda Spring, on the Canyon City and Camp
Barney Roan; thence down Silvies Creek to Kalheur Lake;
thence due east to the right bank of the South Fork of
the halhour River; thence down said right bank of the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422

431

South Fork to the Malheur River; thence down the right
bank of the Iialheur River to the place of beginning,
except such lends within these limits as have passed

or may pass to The Dalles military road on the north,
and the Willamette Valley and Cascade Mountain military
road on the south, be, and the same is hereby, withdrawn
from sale and set apart for the use and occupancy of the
Pinto and Snake Indians, to be knotm as the Malheur
Indian Reservation; and that portion of country set
apart by Executive order of Hay 15, 1875, not embraced
in the limits of the above described tract of country
is hereby restored to the public domain.

U. S . Grant.

10. I (a) I In the fall of 1873 various roving bands of Indians in

gsmltheastern Oregon and adjacent areas in Nevada and Idaho were collected by the defendant end placed on the Ma.lheur Reservation.

(b) By 1875 there were over 700 Indians residing on the Malheur

Reservation. They were classified as Piutes, Bannocks and Snake Indians.

(0) In July, 1877 there were 759 Indians on the reservation, 201%

—of when were classified by the officials in charge as Snakes under

Chief Egan. The rest were classified as Piutes, which included the

followers of Chief T.’e—-on’-1.70-*.7..-3., and listed the %Piutes as 150 under
Chief Oits, 288 under Chief Tannehta, and lit]. under Chief Uinnemucca.
(<1) In Februrry, 1878 87 Shoshone Indians were added to the
Malheur Agency, making a total number of SME Indians on the I-ielheur
at that time.
11. (a) Upon the_ outbreak of the Bannock War in June, l8'78, all
the Indians then belonging at the Malheur Agency left the reservation,

4"}

and the majority of then joined the Bannocks in the hostilities and

1- --..-._ .. ..' ¢-:.:.'.‘;..a-'-?—‘5I' -‘F--i'—i'l'I“-H

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 ' 432

depredations against the white settlers and the military.

(b) In the winter of 1878-79, following the end of the Bannock _

Wgr,'the hostile Malheur Indians, consisting of the bands of Chiefs

; Oits, Egan and Taw-wa~dah, togethorrwith Leggins‘ band of Piutes who

\
had not taken part in the war, were removed with their families to

the Yakima.Reservation in Washington for permanent settlement.

12. (3) In January, 1880 a delegation of Piutes headed by Chief
Winncmucca‘visited ?ashington, D. C. and obtained permission from the
Secretary of the Interior for the return to the Malheur.Reservation of
all the Piutes who had formerly lived there. On June 25,'1880 the '
Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs rescinded the pennission for
the return of these piutes' at the Yakima Reservation because of reports that if they attempted to march across the country from Yakima
to the Malheur Reservation it would be attended with great risk of
life on the way, due to the hostile feeling towards them for their
part in the Bannock War. This action by the Commissioner did neti
effect the permission to move on the Malheur Reservation granted to
those Piutes that were living near the Malheur.

‘ (b) The Malheur.Agency was re—opened by the Indian Service in
the latter part of 1878, and repeated efforts were made hr the defendant's agents to resettle the Malheur Reservation with Indians in
the area.whc had formerly resided on the Halheur, but they were unsuccessful so the Malheur Reservation was never again occupied by Indians

433

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 422 I I -12..

after June, 1878.

(c)_ On December 23, 1880, upon-the recommendation of the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs that the reservation was no longer needed
for purposes of Indian occupation, the Malheur.agoncy was discontinued
by the direction of the President.

13; By Executive order of September 13, 1882, the greater portion
of the Malheur Reservation was restered_to the public domain. By*Exh
ccutive order ofimay 21, 1883 the rogainder of the Malheur Reservation,
except a tract of 320 acres, was also restored to the public domain,

and by Executive order of'March 2, 1889 this remaining 388 acre tracti

‘ was also restored to the public domain, This was done without the

consent of the Snake or Piute Indians and without payment to them of

any compensation therefor,

13. (a) The former Molheur Reservation Indians taken to the
Yakima Reservation'began stealing away from the Yakima soon after

their arrival. and by the fall of 1883 all of them, with the exception

of the "Paddy Cap" and “0dtz" bands, had either escaped or been permitted to leave. The largest group of 300 left in the summer of 1883

and headed towards Nevada.

(b) In June, 1883-Paddy Cop's band of about 50 Piutes removed to
the Duck Valley Reservation located in Idaho and Nevada, where, by'Exw
ecutivo order dated Hay M, 1886, the President of the United States
withdrew from sale and settlement and set apart three townships as an

addition to the Duck Valley Reservation “for the use and occupancy of

.- _ . ...L..a'_'..»' (1:-'---*-‘-—*’--'-*3;

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 422 434

-13..

Paddy Cap‘s band of Piutes and such other Indims as the Secretary of
the Interior may see fit to settle thereon.“ In 1887 there were 115
Piutes on the Duck Valley Reservation.

(c) In August, 1881+ Oitz’s ‘band of about 70 left the Yakima.
Reservation and settled on the Warin Springs Reservation in Oregon.

(d) The former Malheur Reservation Indians she were not taken to
Yekiua, so far as the record shows, were last reported in 1880 in the
vicinity of Camp Bidnell in California and Camp 1.IcDemit and the town
of Winnenucca in Ixievada.

15. (a) In 19140 there were 256 Piutes located at Burns, Oregon
under the Unatilla Indian Agency; 59 Piutes atthe *.”?aI'::1 Springs Reser--»
vation in Oregon; and 518 Piutes on the Duck Valley Reservation under
the Western Shoshone Agency in Nevada. The record does not disclose
whether these Piute Indians were former residents of the Malheur Reservation. I

(h) The statistical reports of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
for 1915 show that Indians classified as I-‘aiutes were residing on
Indian reservations in the states of California, Idaho, Nevada, Utah
and Oregon.

16. It has not been established by the evidence that any tribe?
band or group of Snaice or Piute Indians had exclusively occupied, held
and used from time innenorial any part of the lands embraced and de-,

scribed in the Executive order of the President of the United States,

dated Janurssy 28, 1876, and which are heretofore, in finding N0. 9,

 r. _n.;-....I-u_n....._-. . .»...

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 ' , 435

...11;...

specifically described and set forth,

17» In issuing the Executive orders of September 12, 1872,
iay 15, 1875, and January 28, 1876, establishing, enlarging, diminishu
ing and redefining the Malheur Reservation in Oregon, the United States

did not recognize, nor did it intend to recognize or acknowledge the

exclusive use and occupancy, right or title of any tribe, band or

igroup of Snake or Piute Indians in the reservation lands described

in the aforesaid Executive orders.

18. There are no facts or circumstances shown by the evidence
in this case that will justify this Commission in finding that, on
the basis of fair and honorable dealings, the petitioners are entitled
to recover on their claims set forth in Count II of the amended petition
for the value of the former Malheur Reservation lands, or damages for

noncompliance with the unratified treaty of December 10, 1868 by the

United States,

December 29, 1950_

5| ll ‘r. uulmlh

