------—,-n-..-.n--wt-u----..-. . . ..._‘

2 S16

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE TEXAS-CHEROKEES, and ASSOCIATE )
BANDS, on the relation of W.W. Keeler, )
Homer L. Smith, Frank M. Carr, Paul )
Johnson and Joe Rogers, members of its )
Executi'e Committee, )
)

Plaintiffs, g

v. ) Docket No. 26

)

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA, )
)

)

Defendant.
Decided: December 28, 1953

FINDINGS OF FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact upon the issues
of fact raised by the petition and the answer of defendant filed herein
on the 27th day of February, 1952, and pursuant to the order made and
entered herein on the 22nd day of August, 1952:

l. The Cherokee Nation of Indians was originally located east of
the.Mississippi river, and long prior to the year 1811, a small group
of Cherokee Indians, under the leadership of John Bowles, an Indian
Chief, migrated to the St. Francis river country in southeast Missouri.
About the winter of l8llml2, this group of Cherokee Indians moved to
the Arkansas territory and located in the vicinity of Petit Jean Creek
on the south side of the Arkansas river and south of the territory
ceded to the Cherokee Nation by the treaty of July 8, 1817, T Stat. 156.

xney declined settling in this territory. (Def. Ex. 3).

 

.—--..¢..- - — -a -a1wa $P#H"F7":"

2. In the winter of l8l9—20, the Bowles group of Indians, con»
sisting of some 60 families, moved to the Sabine river country in
what was then Spanish territory and known as the Province of Texas.
The original group was joined from time to time after its location in

'5

Texas by other Cherokees and sy members of about a dozen different tribes

located in the United States. The Cherokee Indians, however, formed the
largest part of the group, and Bowles was the Chief of them all. There
were perhaps some negotiations with the Spanish authorities after the
Bowles group located in Spanish territory, but the Mexican revolution

started soon thereafter and the Indians were, or thought they had been,

granted or promised the land described in the petition. This group was

not thereafter considered part of the Cherokee Nation nor did they claim
of receive any part of the Cherokee annuities. (Def. Ex. 3}. They be»

came and were permanent inhabitants of the Texas territory and there is

evidence to the effect that they were citizens thereof.

3. In 1835, the Texas people became dissatisfied with Mexican rule
and called a meeting of representatives from all sections of the Texas
Province, and on the 7th of November, 1835, declared their independence
of Mexico and set up the Provisional Government of Texas. The plan of
government included a governor, lieutenant—governor, and other state
officers, and a council, and on the 13th day of November, 1835, the Conn
vention, which was known as The General Consultation, at which there w-re
Sh delegates, unanimously adopted and signed the following declaration:

“Be it Solemnly Decreed, That we, the chosen delegates of

the Consultation of the people of all Texas, in general con»
vention assembled, solemnly declare that the Cherokee Indians,

2 S18

and their associate bands, twelve tribes in number, agreeagle

to their last general council in Texas, have derived their just
claims to lands included within the bounds hereinafter mentioned '
from the government of Mexico, from whom we have also derived

our rights to the soil by grant and occupancy.

“Ne solemnly declare that the boundaries of the claims of the
said Indians to the land is as follows, to—wit: Lying north of
the San.Antonio road and the Neches, and west of the Angelina
and Sabine Rivers. we solemnly declare that the Governor and
General Council, immediately on its organization, shall appoint
Commissioners to treat with the said Indians, to establish the
definite boundaries of their territory, and secure their confidence and friendship.

"we solemnly declare that we will guarantee to them the peaceful enjoyment of their rights to the lands, as we do our own; we
solemnly declare that all grants, surveys and locations of lands,
here'nbefore mentioned, made after the settlements of said Indians,
are, and of right ought to be, utterly null and void, and that the
Commissioners issuing the same, be and are hereby ordered, immeditely to recall and cancel the same, as having been made upon
lands already appropriated by the Mexican government.

“We solemnly declare that it is our sincere desire that the
Cherokee Indians, and their associate bands, should remain our
friends in peace and war, and if they do so, we pledge the public
faith for the support of the foregoing declarations.

“We solemnly declare that they are entitled to our commisseration
and protection, as the just owners of the soil, as an unfortunate race
of people that we wish to hold as friends and treat with justice.
Deeply and solemnly impressed with these sentiments as a mark of
sincerity, your committee would respectfully recommend the adoption
of the following resolution:

“Resolved that the members of this convention, now present,
sign this Declaration, and pledge the public faith, on the part of
the people of Texas.

"Done in Convention at San Felipe de Austin, this l3th day of

November, A.D. 1835.?! (Pl. Ex. l,.pp. 73-ffh).

E. Pursuant to said declaration, Commissioners were appointed and
instructed (Pl. Ex. l, pp. 75-79). and on the 23rd day of February, l836,
they concluded a treaty between the Provisional Government of Texas "and
the Cherokees and their associate bands now residing in Texas, on the
other part, to-wit: Shawnees, Delawares, Kickapoos, Quopaws, Choctaws,
Bolupies, Jawanies, Alabomas, Chochaties, Caddoes of the Noches, Tahovcattokes, and Unatuquouous, by the head chiefs and head men and warriors

of the Cherokees, as elder brothers and representatives of all other

bands, agreeable to their last council.“ (Pl. Ex. 1, pp. 80-Sh}.

article 2 of said treaty reads as follows:

"It is agreed and declared that the before-mentioned tribes
or hands shall form one community and that they shall have and
possess the lands within the following bounds, to—wit: Lying
west of the San Antonio road and beginning on the west at the
point where the road crosses the river Angelina and running up
said river until it reaches the first large creek below the
great Shawnee Village emptying into said river from the northwest; thence running with said creek to its main source, and
from thence a due northwest course to the Sabine river, and
with said river west, then starting where the San Antonio road
cross the Angelina river, and with the said read to a point
where it crosses the Neches River, and thence running up to the
east side of said river in a northwest direction."

5.

After the conclusion of the treaty referred to in the last
preceding paragraph hereof, the Texans formed a permanent government
known as the Republic of Texas, and said treaty was submitted to the
Senate thereof, and on the l6th day of Secember, 183?, said body acted

thereon and declared the same null and void. (Def. Ex. 1, p. h).

6. Following the rejection of the treaty of February 23, l836,

agitation for the removal of the Indians, who became known as the TexasCherokee Indians, and the associated bands, became widespread, with the
result that the military forces of the Republic of Texas expelled all
of said Indians from.Texas and they returned to their respective tribes
in the United States and became zembers thereof, although part of said
Indians fled to Mexico and remained therein. All the plaintiffs’ ancestors were removed fron.Texas by the end of the year l8hO.
7.i while in Texas, the Indians had formed a loose Confederacy,

and in their dealings with the Texican government and the Provisional

Government of Texas they acted through representatives selected by a

'3

2 520

General Council of the Indians. (Def. Ex. 2).

8. During the period, l839~h0, in which the Indians were being
expelled from the Republic of Texas by the military forces of that
Republic, the United States did not, and has not since recognized any
responsibility to the ancestors of the plaintiffs in this action and
they returned to the United States at the request of the Cherokees in
this country (Def. Ex. 6), who transmitted such request through General
Arbuckle, U.S,A., then located at Fort Gibson;

9. After their expulsion from.Texas and their return to the United

tates, certain members of the plaintiffs called meetings of the

descendants of the original groups, and some meetings were held for the
sole purpose of considering a claim against the United States, and for
the purpose of presenting and prosecuting such a claim. An Executive
Committee was selected and has functioned as such since about the year
1925. That the United States has never had any dealings with the plaintiffs and has never recognized them.as a tribe, band, or identifiable
group of.American Indians; that the ancestors of the plaintiffs emigrated
to the Province of Texas with the intention of remaining there permanently,
and remained there for about 20 years, and until their expulsion by the
Republic of Texas in 1839-hO,

10, After the formation of the government of the Republic of Texas
and its recognition by the United States, a movement was started for
the admission of the Republic of Texas into the United States and the

Congress on March 1, 38hS (S Stat. 79?) adopted a Joint Resolution con~

taining the following provisions:

“That Congress doth-consent that the territory

properly included within, and rightfully belonging to
the Republic of Texas, may be erected into a new State,
to be called the State of Texas, with a republican form
of government, to be adopted by the people of said re»
public, by deputies in convention assembled, with the
consent of the existing government, in order that the
same may be admitted as one of the States of this Union.

“s-% % First, said State to be formed, subject to the

adjustment by this government of all questions of boundary
that may arise with other governments; and the constitution thereof, with the proper evidence of its adoption

by the people of said Republic of Texas, shall be transmitted to the President of the United States, to be laid
before Congress for its final action, on or before the
first day of January, one thousand eight hundred and'forty—

six.

Second, Said State, when admitted into the Union,

after ceding to the United States, all public edifices,
fortifications, barracks, ports and harbors, navy and navy»
yards, docks, magazines, arms, armaments, and all other
property and means pertaining to the public defence belonging to said Republic of Texas, shall retain all the public
funds, debts, taxes, and dues of every kind, which may

belong to or be due

v“-_-n

(.ti.L

d owing said republic; and shall also

retain all the vacant and unanpropriated lands lying within
its limits, to be applied to the payment of the debts and
liabilities of said Republic of Texas, and the residue of
said lands, after discharging said debts and liabilities, to
be disposed of as said State may direct; but in no event

are said debts and liabilities to become a charge upon the
Government of the United States. % % %“

ll. And on December 29, l8hS (9 Stat. l08) the Congress adopted a

joint resolution reading in part:

"That the State of Texas shall be one, and is hereby

declared to be one, of the United States of.America, and
admitted into the Union on an equal footing with the
original States in all respects whatever.”

The adoption of this resolution completed the annexation of Texas to the

United States

tapn :: T-.-'“-'--L
LJ\J,-_C&r 3.59 talbil
1?

Chief Commissioner

   

-r

Louis J. Oimar

Kssociate Commissioner

 

hhn PL Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

