8 Ind. Clo Com. hO _ hO

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CONFEDERATED SALISH AND KOOTENAI

TRIBES OF THE FLATREAD RESERVATION,
MON TAI-EA ,
Petitioner,
V. Docket No. 61

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

'x_./~.-...w~...»'~...a--..«-._.x\...r-.../*~..J\../'~..»

Defendant.ei
Decided: August 3, 1959

FINDINGS OF FACT

-4.. 

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact:
1. The Confederated Salish and Kootcnai Tribes of the Flathead

Reservation, petitioner herein, is an identifiable group of American

- Indians, duly'organized under the'Wheeler=Hcnard Act of June 18, l93h

(h8 Stat. 98h, as amended) and is recognised by the Secretary of the
Interior as being authorized to represent the Indian tribes on said
reservation and petitioner is therefore authorized to maintain this

action under Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat.

l0h9).

2. Under authority of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13,

l9h6, c. 9&9, 69 Stat; 10h9, 25 U. S. C. Sec. 70{a) petitioner timely

filed this claim for the recovery of additional compensation for lh,O62,000
acres of land ceded to the defendant by the petitioner for an alleged

grossly inadeduate and unconscionable consideration which cession was the

8 Indo Clo C033:  LL].

result of dealings on the part of the defendant which petitioner claims

were not fair and honorable with respect to the petitioner. Petitioner
claims the lands, until so ceded, were used, occupied, held, possessed

and owned continuously from time immemorial by petitioner or its predecessor
in interest.

3. Petitioner herein includes descendants of the Confederated Flathead,
Upper Pend d‘Oreille and Kootenai tribes which negotiated a treaty with the
United States on July 15, 1855, (12 Stat. 975', 1'1 Kapp-» 722), at Hell Grate,
Montana, whereby the tribes ceded to the Government the lands described in
Article l of said treaty as follows:

(Royce Cession No. 373)

Commencing on the main ridge of the Rocky Mountains at
the fortyaninth parallel of latitude, thence westsardly on
that parallel to the divide he seen the Flatter or Kootenay
River and Clarke‘s Fork, thence southerly and.southeasterly
along said divide to the one hundred and fifteenth degree
of longitude (1150), thence in a southsesterly'direction to
the divide between the sources of the St. Regis Borgia and
the Coeur d‘Alene Rivers, thence southeasterly and southerly
along the main ridge of the Bitter Root Mountains to the
divide between the headesaters of the Kooswkoesukee Rivera
and of the southwestern fork of the Bitter Host Eiver, thence
easterly along the divide separating the waters of the several
tributaries of the Bitter Root River from the waters flowing
into the Salmon and Snake Rivers to the main ridge of the

Rocky'Meuntains, and thence northerly along said main ridge
to the place of beginning. '

From the lands so ceded the following tract (Royce Koo 373) was reserved
by Article 2 of the treaty for the use and occupation of the confederated
tribes and other friendly tribes or bands which might agree to consolidate with the tribes parties to the treaty'under the common designation

of the Flathead Nation, with Victor, the head chief of tie Flathead tribe,

as the head chief of the said nation:

 

8 Ind. Cl. Con. b0 b2

Commencing at the source of the main branch of the Jocko

River; thence along the divide separating the waters flowing

into the Bitter Root River Irom those flowing into the Jocko

to a point on Clarke‘s Fork between the Canash and Horse

Prairies; thence northerly to, and along the divide bounding

on the west the Flathead River, to a point due west from the

point half way in latitude between the northern and southern

extremities of the Flathead Lake; thence on a due east course

to the divide whence the Crow, the Prune, the So-ni-el~em

and the Jocko Rivers take their rise, and thence southerly

along said divide to the place of beginning.

h. By'Article h of the Treaty of July I6, 1855, supra, the United
States agreed to pay the confederated tribes of Indians in addition to
the goods and provisions distributed to then at the time of signing the
treaty t e sum.of $120,000.00, to be expended under the direction of
the President over a number of years. By Article 5 the United States
agreed to establish on the reservation an agricultural and industrial
school;'blacksmith, carpenter and wagon and plenghnaker’s shops; to
erect one saw—mill and one flouring-mill; to erect a hospital; to
maintain and furnish these facilities and to provide employees to

service‘mhem.for twenty years. The United States also agreed by

Article 5 ‘to pay‘ to each of the Flathead, Kootenai and Upper Pend d'0reilles

‘tribe $500;00 per year for twenty years as a salary to the elected.head

chiefs of said tribes and to build houses and plow and fence 10 acres for’
each of them.

5. iLinguistically the Flathead and the Upper Pend d'Oreille Tribes
are Salish, a language characteristic of many groups of Indians between
Montana on the east, and.Puget Sound on the Pacific coast. The Kcotenai

Indians on.the other hand constitute a ”lin istical island” s eakinc a
I D

8 Ind. 01. Com. hO h3
- 1/

language which has not been related to any other stock." The three
tribes belonged to the Plateau culture area and being the most eastern
of the t&bes of that area and in close proximity to the Plains tribcs
east of the Rocky 2-iountains they acquired many traits characteristic
of the Plains Indians after acquiring the horse in the 18th century.?/
The acquisition of the horse resulted in these tribes making buffalo
hunting a major activity in their subsistence pattern and their biannual hunts east of the Rockies brought them into direct contact with
the Blackfoot tribes who contested their right to hunt in such territory.2/ P

6. Authorities, such as Turney-High, Teit and Claude sehaerier,

who conducted early studies of the Flathead, Pend d'Oreille and Kootenai L

plaee these Indians in what is now western Ivlontana even in pre-white

11/

times. The Plathead according to some authorities in pre-uwhite times
consisted of several loosely related bands which upon the acquisition of
the horse and plains traits consolidated into a single tribal political
entity thatilater joined forces with the Pend. d'0re:?.lleVand Iéootenai

to the north in defensive action against the Plains Indians.‘ Little

is known of the pre-white organization of the Pend dioreille but it

 

.3_—_/ Pet. ‘Ex. 5, p. 6; Def. lib-:. 211, p. 5

_3/ Def-» Ebc» 21:, pp. 13, st; Pet. Ex. 5, pt 29
.£_4_/ D013 E54» 211, pp. 6, 9, 10

5 Def» *- 21:, pp» 29, 30

Hlu*.g.,},j$i~§'!""

Flathead Reservation belonged .j_/ Schaeffer, Def. Etc. }_;0, p. 78; See

8 Ind. Cl. Com. LO 1;],

mould seem that they at one time .‘-'"Oi".i71C':C3. a single “tribe with the Kahspcl
(Lower Pend d‘Or-eillle) until t.he§ jaincéed the horse and became closely
allied with the Flathead and Kootenai.—/ In historic times they have
always been known as a separate tribe, identified as Pend d‘Oreillc.

7. The so-called Kootenai Tribe consisted in reality of separate,
antonomous and independent bands or tribes. Schaeffer and Turney-High
separate the Kootenai culturally into two large divisions -- the Upper
Kootenai who were more under the plains influence and the Lower Iiootenai,
who were located farther to the west and depended more on_ fishing than
they did on the bison hunt. Each of these divisions in turn consisted
of independent bands. Schaeffer states that aboriginally there were
seven hands of Upper Kootenai and three bands of Lower Kootenai.
Schaeffer‘s Agiyinilc (or J cnnings) Band, which he states numbered» probably
not more than 700 moved at some period before 1850 from Jennings eastward
to Kalispel and then south to Elmo, Montana. It is this Agiyinik, or
Jennings Band, to which the ancestors of the Kootenai Indians now on the
7/ Other Upper Kootenai were the Tobacco H
Plains Band, new on a reservation in Canada, and the Te-reed-Efarland Band,
once located on the Kootenay River between Tweed and Harland, Montana,
but which became extinct in early times, and a band once near Libby,
Montana, many of whom moved to Fort Steele some years ago. Of the

§_/ Id. at p. 16

also Def. E‘:2d1ibits 37-13.;
Defo ER. 29’  Petra ms  

u8 Ind. Cl. Com. ho hS

lower Kootenai, Schaeffer identifies two bands, the Bonners Ferry in
Idaho (petitioner_in Docket No. lSh) and a band which lived west of

8/

Nelson, British Columbia, which is extinct." The Bonners Ferry Band

was not a party to the Treaty of July 16, 1855, and'was not represented
at said treaty which ceded to the'United States certain lands in northern
Idaho and northwestern.Montana which were aboriginally'exclusively used
and occupied by said independent band of Kootenai Indianso Petitioner's
counsel herein and counsel for petitioner in Docket No. 15h have stipulated that the Bonners Ferry Band at the time of the treaty was a separate
and distinct tribe of Kootenai Indians and that it owned or occupied a

portion of the area of land ceded by-the 1855 treaty separate from the

lands owned or occupied by petitioner herein. In Docket.No. 15h, decided
Eugust 9, 1957, this Commission (5 Ind. Cl. Comma 255} has &1S0 50 f0Hnd
the Bonners Ferny Band to be separate and distinct and that it exclusively
used and occupied the area of land described in Finding 8 in that case;

8. ‘within historic times the Flathead, Pond d'0reille and Kootenai
Indians were_first contacted in western.Montanao The first recorded
meeting'with any of these tribes occurred when Lewis and Clark on their
famous expedition to the west coast entered the Bittcrroot valley in
1805 and came upon forty lodges of Flatheads, whom.they identified as
”Tushepaws" on Camp Creek near Ross’ hole.2/ The name Pend d'Qreille,
meaning Ear—bobs, was applied to several Salishan tribes. David
Thompson, a fur trader with the Northwest Company in the period 180? __:—

 DCfo Ex.’ 39; pa  
2/ Pet. Ex. 1, p. 10; Def. Ex. 2h, p. 35

.--«.-.

8 Ind. C1. Cons hO Q6

l8l2 and Alexander Henry; the younger, also a fur trader, called them
‘ Kullyspells and they'were also known as Callispellums and Kalispels.
The Kootenai Indians, also known as the Kutenai, Flatbows, Lakes,
Arcs—a—Plats, and Skalzi were known to the fur traders in the early’
19th centry'in what is now western Montana and northern Idaho and in
Canada. Thompson in writing of the Kootenai located them between the
Rockies on the east and the Purcell Mountain range on the west and
in his travels found camps of them near Bonner's Ferryg Idaho, and at
Kootcnay Lake. Ross Cox also a fur trader (about l8lh) wrote of the
Kootenai “tho inhabit a small and beautiful district near the foot of
the Rocky Mountains, and about sixty miles to the northeast of the
Flathead lands." The narrated accounts of the fur traders located the
Flatheads and Pend d"Oreille in the Bitterroot and.Clark Fork valleys.l9/

9. Commencing in 1835 the missionaries began to take an interest

 

in the plateau area. Reverend Samuel Parker, who made an exploring
tour in that.year west of the Bitterroot Mountains wrote: "The country’

of the Flatheads (Salish) is still farther east and south;esst (or the  

Coeur d'Alene), and extends to the Rocky Mountains ..... For subsistence V

they follow the buffalo upon the waters of Clarke and Salmon Rivers t
and often pass over to the head waters of the Missouri .;;.; Their a
country is:mountainous, but intersected.with.pleasant, fertile valleys,i
large portions of which are prairie.“ Of the Pendtd'0reilles, Rev.

Parker wrote that they lived "on the north of Clarke's river and on a

 

‘l9/ Pet. Ex. 1, pp. l—32; Def. Ex. 2h, pp. 3h-hl C

8 Ind. 01. Com. LLO _ 117

lake which takes its name from the tribe." Father D0 31"-1S'i3 established

the first mission (St. Mary's) in the Bitterroot valley near the present
Stevensville in 18141. This missionary stated that the Bitterroot river
was the chief residence of the Flatheads and he recorded that they
camped every year in the spring in Games lfrairie for root digging. The
Pond d'Oreilles, Father De Smet reported, spent the fall generally
along Clark Fork River. In l8b,l he wrote that they lived "at a distance
of four or five days," from St. Mary's Mission. Of the Kootenai, the
priest reported: ‘~"The two tribes of the Koetenays and Flatbows number
over a thousand souls. They are principally divided into two camps,

and are known in their country under the name Skalzi.‘ One of these
camps, numbering about three hundred, inhabits sonnet-i*nes the neighborhood of the great Flathead Lake, and sometimes the great Tobacco Plain
-Yr * *. The great chief oi‘ the Koetenays, named Michael -::-  % his camp .
numbers four hundred souls." ‘In 1851 Father de Smet prepared a map
which locates the Flathead territom in the Bitterroot valley area.

with the Pend d'Orei1les to the north along the Clark's T Fork and the

Kootenai to the north and west of the Pond d‘Oreilles in .the Kootenay

.33!

river area. Father Palladino in his book, "Indian and White in the

Northwest" (19010 wrote: ‘The country of the Flat-Heads was that part

of Montana lying west and at the base. of the main range of tin Rocky

Mountains. It was called in their language Spetlemen, which means

__3-}_/ Pet. Ex. 1, pp. 32--hO. (Map is on 13. 33a).

 

8 Indo Clo C23‘.-'7-is  

=4Lnie
‘place of/bitter root‘, whence same the name of the Bitter Root Valley;
This was, properly speaking? their land and their hamea At times,

however, they could be found for hunting and trading purposes; roaming
12/

about, like other Indiansp in almost every part of the Northwest.”_—

10. In l8§h Governor Isaac Stevens, who later negotiated the treaty
of July 16, l8SS, with these tribes in his report to the Commissioner of

Indian Affairs stated that the Flatheads inhabited “St. Hary‘s g§itterroo§7

‘I
CulA

V

g...

I):or Flathead valley; and the neighborhood of the lake of the same name.

*The tribe was once a pewerful one, but has been much diminished by the

Blackfeet. % %-%“

In this report Governor Stevens estimated the Keotenays and Flatbows (Lower Kootenai) to have a total population of R00 persons. He
also submitted with the 18st repert a map (Pet. Ex. 7(A~9)) showing
"the territories of the several Indian tribes from the month of the
Yellowstone to the Pacific, which as regards the several tribes of the

Blackfeet nation, and those of the Territory of'Hashington, may be relied

upon as a pretty close approximation." On this map Stevens places the

Flathead territory within the area of the Bitterroot river and its tribué

with the Roekies as

an

taries and the Blackfoot Fork and its tributar‘es

the eastern.boundaryt Tb the north Stevens places the Upper Pend d‘

1,. ..
.L1’3‘..c:.

Oreilles in the area of Flathead.Lake and Flat d river with no

 

;g/ Def. Ex. u

8 Ind. Cl. Como hO h?

H o In an

houhoary serarating them from tee homer Pond d‘Oreilles. Immediately
north of the Upper Pond d‘Oroille from the northern point of Flathead
Lake Stevens placed the Kootenai in the territory of the Kootenay'"
river and its tributaries from the Rookes westward to his dividing
line between them and the Lower Pond d‘Oreilleso Stevens did not show
a suhdivision of the Kootenay territory into subvtribcs or hands.
Compared with the Stevens map of 1857 on which are shown the treaty,
boundaries there is remarkable similarity'between the two maps. The
westorh boundary of the Flatheads on the 18st map does not follow the
crest of the Bitterroot mountains as it does on the l8S? map and
appears to take in less territory; On the l8S7 map (attached to Pet.
Ex. l) there is a tabular statement showing the population of the Flatheads to be 500, the'Upper Pend d'Qreilles 700 and the Kootonai SOD a total of 1700 in the tribes at the time of the treaty'of July 16,
1855.

* ll. Turney»High, anthropologist, made a study of the Flatheads
which was published in 1937.‘ In this work the author states, in reporting on the arrival of the Flathead in western.Hontana in the prewhite era, that §the'Bitter Root Valley became the traditional homes
in the minds of many'Flatheads.“+_ %John Ewers in his book on Gustavus
sSohon, soldier and artist, who accompanied GOV€:£GP Stevens on his

treaty'making journeys, wrote that "from the time of their traditional

migration from the west'until their final settlement on the Flathead

 

;§/ Pet. Ex. 7, p. 17

8 Ind. Cl. Com. LO

Reservation in 1891, the true home of the Flathead tribe was the
Bitterroot Valley, between the Rocky and Bitterroot Mountains in the,
.1__1.s/
southwestern part of the present State of Montana." Turney— High
in his publication said that the Flathead might be considered "a semimigratory people” due to their buffalo hunting but that "they con15/

sidered Montana west of the continental divide their home.”

According to Teit the earliest recognized main seat of the Pond d’

16/

jun‘

Oreilles was at Flathead Lake. In 1850 Indian Agent Joseph Lane
reported that the Flathead Indians occupied "from Bitter Root river,
a fork of the Columbia, all the country drained by that stream down
to what is called the Hell Gate, a distance of probably l5O miles."
He reported the Pend d'0reilles to be two bands occupying a large

portion of country, commencing below the Flatheads and "extending to

17/

near Fort Colville and northeast among the lakes.“—"r The report of

P

the Secretary of the Interior for 1857 stated, “The.Flatheads proper
- 18/ I

claim the Bitter Root valley only as their home.”_'i Hazard Stevens,

eon of Governor Stevens, who accompanied his father on many of his H

ips, in Bis book, "The Life of General Isaac I. Stevens” wrote that

The Bitter Root valley was the seat of the Flatheads proper. The

 

H ' c EX. 7, pa  Defo EX. 
it p. 21

I Id at p. h3 (See also Def. Ex. 19, p. hh)

8'Inci. Cl. Com. 5.10 T 51»     H

-Bend d‘Oreilles lived lower down the river, or northward in two bands,

the upper Pend d'Orei1les on the Horse Plains and Jocko prairies, andi
the lower Pend d‘0reilles on Clark's Fork, below the lake of their name,
and were canoe Indians, owning few horses. The Kootenays lived about
the Flathead Riyer and Lake."i2/ Indian agent Thompson in l85h reported the Flatheads occupying the valleys between the Bitter Root and
Rocky'mountains{g9/ T

12. All through.the historic period from the first white contact
until at least the time of the Treaty er July 16, 1855-, the Flathead,
Pend d‘0reille and Kootenay Indians were under constant fear of attack
by the Blackfoot tribes. As early as about l82h Alexander Ross? who

ras in charge of the Flathead Post, reported the presence of Kootenai

Indians at the post who "do not belong here but are driven from.fear
. 21/ of the Piegans and Blackfeet." The Flathead had to battle hie

7Blachfeet not cn1y'on the plains where the latter contested the right

of the former to hunt but had to take precautions against the Blackfeet i

even in their permanent camps in the Bitterroot valley. Governor Stevens

in 1851: reported “that the Flathead tribe had been almost extcrminated by T

the Blackfeet “and the mass of the nation consist of Pend dioreilles,

._ Spokanes, Nez Perce, and Iroquois." In 1850 “on account of the depree _i

dations and constant aggressions made upon them (Flatheads) by the

 

‘lg? Id at p. 60
2/Idat.p.69

1I—-3

 Pet. EKG 7) Po 

°’ a.aaenwg

,-.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. b0 §2

Blacnfeet and their own mivrato ? habits" St. Ha; ‘s mission in the
I o 7% / "Y
2

? Bitterroot valley was abandoncd."”} Hazard Stevens in his book on the

life of his father, Governor Stevens, reported that St. Mary's mission

was abandoned "as too much exposed” to the incessant raids of the Black23/ N  
feet.—_ Agent Thompson in l8Sh reported the Flatheads gradually decreasing in numbers due to the attacks of the Blackfeet “who make frequent incursions into their country; murdering and pillaging all who

gg/

may be so unfortunate as to fall into their powers."

'13. The Flathead, Pend d‘Oreille and Kootcnai Indians parties to
:2‘

the Treaty of July 16, l8SS;;;Ere semi-migratory Indians. _They made
two trips yearly to the buffalo hunting grounds, one in the summer for x
a brief period and the other in the fall which lasted through the

25/

winter._' Small parties remained in their home camps.during each of

~3it these excursions. In addition to buffalo hunting these Indians had to

 

supplement their diets with roots, such as the camas; berries and game
like the deer, elk and mountain goat. Horses being important as a
means of transportation and forpacking, the tribes had large herds
which had to be grazed in their home territories.

1h. The Flathead, Pend‘d%3reille and Kootenai tribes which.ne“gotiated the treaty'of 1855 did.not have exclusive use and occupancy

to all of the area ceded by that treaty. The Bonner's Ferry Kootenai

 

.§g/ Pet. Ex. 7, pp. HO, Eh; Def. Ex. 2h, p. kl; Daft Ex. 19, p. 23
23/ Pet. Ex. 7, p. 5?; Def. Ex. 19, pp. 3 and 21

53] Id. at p. 69

E Def: Ex. 19, P. 

8 Incl. cl‘, com, to '53

Band had exclusive use and occupancy of the lands in the northwestern
part of the cession beginning on the northwest on the International
Boundary at the crest of the Selkirk Mountains and running along the
crest of said mountains in a southwesterly direction to the headwaters
of Ross Creek, thence in a northeasterly direction along the crest of
the mountains between Ross Creek and Bull River to the crest between
Bull River and Libby Creek, thence along said crest to Kootcnay FallS,_
thence in a direct northerly'direction to the International Boundary,
thence westerly'along said.boundary'to the point of beginning. ‘(See

the Kootenai Tribe or Band of Indians vs United States, Docket No. lSh,

   

S Ind. 01. Comm. 156, 11624163. See also Fag. 7 herein.)

15. In the northern part of the ceded territory'the Tobacco Plains
Band.oT Kootenai Indians used and occupied part of the ceded area near
the International Boundary; Schaeffer'S (1935) field notes On the
Kootenai Indians states that this band, the aganahonek, during the
early'part of the 19th century “was located along a small tributary I

(Tobacco River) of the Kootcnay River in present Montana." This band

Schaeffer found rarely went raagaar south than Rexford. Turney?-High

in his study of the Kootenai reported that the Tobacco Plains Band

considered their range as straddling the MontanamBritish Columbia
27 r = I
boundary; To the south of the Tobacco Plains band there was another

_2_§_/ oar. E31. 39 '

31/ Bar» Ex. 29.. p. 23

8 Ind. Cl. Com. hO Sh

xx:

band of Kootenai which occupied the valley of the Kootenay nlver
Etween Tweed and'Warland, Montana. This band, the Agukuatsukink,
according to Schaeffer, died off at an early period, that is before

28/
1850.

16. On the west there was before the Commission an overlapping claim
to the area ceded by the 1855 Treaty. Petitioner filed a disclaimer to

this overlap area. The Kalispel Indians in Docket No. 9h before this Commission, claimed this part of the lands ceded by the Treaty of July 11,

9 1855, to which they were not a party. ‘In Docket No. 9h at 3 hearing b3f0r0

this Commission the petitioner introduced the testimony of Dr. Allan H.

Smith, anthropologist, who prepared two maps, petitioner's exhibits 63

land 6h in that case, on.which he plots the boundaries of the Kalispel

(Lower Pend d'Oreilles) as determined by him through his research.

,§mith's Kalispel boundaries on these maps extend into the 1855 cession

is ., .

-at

Aagehds along both sides of the Clark Fork river from.the treaty boundary

line near Belknap, Montana, southeasterly to below Paradise, Montana,

hand northerly to a point above McGregor Lake and Thompson Lakes. Smith

locates Kalispel winter villages at Thompson Falls, another eight miles

east of the mouth of Thompson Falls, one at Clark Fork at the mouth of

Thompson river, one on the Clark Fork river near Plains, Montana, and

one near Paradise, Montana. Smith indicates on his overlap map (Pet.
Ex- 5h) that the Kalispel's hunted deer, elk, caribou, mountain sheep
and bear in this area within the cession lands. Chalfant, defendant’s

ethnologist in the instant case, also notes on his map (Def. Ex. 22)

 

_2§/ Defo Ex. 

8 Ind: Clo C0330 

the presence of Kalispel winter camps within this area of the cession
lands. Smith testified that the Pond d'Oreilles hunted occasionally
in the Upper Clark Fork in the neighborhood of Plains, Paradise and
that portion of the Clark Fork just upstream from ?aradise, Montana,
but he "assigned it to the Kalispel” because they made “extensive use"

of.it by hunting and because within this area were sites of Kalispel

 

winter villages. (See Tr. lhl-lhh, Halispel case,Docket No. 9h)o In
deciding the Kalispel case (6 Ind. Cl. Comm. 353) the ¢0mmi5Si0n 59“
termined that the use of the part of the coded tract in this region
was not exclusively used by the Kalispel Indians. The overlap area
‘was disclaimed by'petitioner herein. i

1?. The Flathead and Pend d'0reille tribes and the Kootenai band,
parties to the Treaty of July'l6, 1855, had a sense of territorial
ownership or attachment to lands which they and others believed to be
theirs by right of use and occupancy; The record is replete with referenee to the Bitterroot valley being the home of the Flatheadsg of. "

F1athead.Lake and Flathead valley being the territorp'of the Pend d’

toreilles and of lands to the north of Flathead Lake being Kootenai

country; That the Flatheads and the Pend d‘Oreilles had deep seated

SS

attachments to these localities is clearly set forth in the l85Streaty'

journal.when the Flathead chief, Victor, refused to consider any lo-L
cation for the proposed reservation other than the Bitterreot Valley;
while the Pond d‘Oreilles held out for their homeland farther north

_._l______________________
32/ Def. Ex. 2h, p. 833 See Fdg. 9.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. b0 55

30/

«~11

near St. Ignatius Eission in the Flathead valley. Their t€rritOri€S

.4.Jibeing contiguous and the tribes being closely allied there was some
sharing of the areas of these tribes with general Consent that each
could use such areas of the others.

l8. ‘While the three tribes occupied certain fixed locations which
are sometimes called their homeland or the seat of their habitations

they did exclusively use lands around these centers of population. As

C

stated by defendant's ethnologist (Def. Ex. 2h, p. 79):

The valleys lying outside of these nuclear areas of
habitation and within the geographic bounds of the Rockies
on the east and south and the Bitterroot Mountains on the
west, in western.Montana, were used to varying degrees for
several economic ends by the three tribes. Such has been
shown, but whether or not such lands were considered as ,
their own_by these tribes to the exclusion of others is e.
the question raised here. All three tribes cons;der it
their exclusive right to use and roam over these lands,
and.by'right of use claim them as their own. However,
this right did not go unchallenged by the Blackfoot,
Piegan and Shoshoni, and in actual practice, many other
tribes, both friendly and otherwise, made use of portions of the valley system of western Montana.

 

There is no substantial evidence that any other Indian tribe claimed
or occupied the lands ceded by the Flathead, Upper Pond d‘Oreille and
K°0t3n3i Indians in 1855 with the exception of the Kalispel, Bonners
Ferry Kootenai, and the independent Kootenai bands mentioned in the

D preceding findings of fact. Friendly tribes were granted.the right of
trespass through Flathead territor . Blackfoot and Piegan entry into

the lands of these tribes were raids and not for the purpose of use

 

Te

'29/ Def. Ex. 17; see also Def. Ex. 19, p. 2h

—mww—..-w-~—mo -wMw4w@%&%A%q 1an-nu-I-n-u-u--v-1-v----0----0--«O 0--'-H“ -" "

8 Indo Cl. Com. ho

or occupancyo The evidence of any Shoshoni use is meager and
questionable.
19. The Commission based on the findings of fact herein made

and all the evidence of record finds that each of the tribes parties

to the 1855 treaty exclusively'used and occupied certain separate areas
of land within the ceded area. The lands to which these tribes held
Indian title are as follows:

Upper Pend d’0reille Tribe - Commencing at the source
of Rock Creek on the divide separating the watersheds of
Thompson and Little Bitterroot Rivers; thence southenky
along said divide and to a point on Flathead River (as
delineated on Pet. :. 22) east of prescntmday Paradise,
Montana, and just east of the confluence of the Flathead
and Clark Fork Rivers; thence in a westerly direction
along the crest of the northern watershed of the St. Regis
River and southern watershed of the Clark Fork River to
the crest of the Bitterr-cot Mountains (see Pet. Ex. 22);
thence southeastwardly along the crest of the Bitterroot
Mountains to a point on said crest near the source of the
south fork of Fish Creek; thence in a direct northeastu
Wardly direction passing through the presentuday town of
Evaro to the present-day town of Seeley Lake; thence in
ca northeastnardly'direction to the source of Babcock
Creek; thence in.a northerly and northnestnardly direction
along the divide separating the watersheds of the Swan ”
River and the South Fork of the Flathead River to a point
about due east of the present town of Big Fork; thence in
a direct southwesterly direction to the point of beginning.

 

I Flathead Tribe - Commencing on the crest of the Bitterroot Mountains at the southwestern boundary of the Upper
Pend d'Oreille territory at the source of the south fork oft
Fish Creek; thence southeasterly and southerly along the
crest of the Bitterroot Mountains to the divide between.
the headwaters of the Clearwater River and southwestern
fork of the Bitterroot River; thence northeasterly along
the main ridge or crest of the Rocky Mountains to the
divide separating the'waters of the Bitterroot River and
the Waters flowing into the Salmon or Snake River; thence
easterly and northerly along the crest of the Rocky Mounm
tains to a point at the source of Spotted Bear Creek

 

57

Ind. Cl. Com. hC

(see Map, Pet. E:~:.. 22); thence in a direct I-Iesterly direction to the eastern boundary of Pend d'Oreille territory; thence southerly and southwesterly along the eastern
and southern boundaries of'Pe-nd d'Oreille territory to the
place of beginning.

Kootenai Tribe +Libhy-Jennings Band) — Commencing on the
main ridge or crest of the Rocky Mountains at the northeastern
corner of Flathead territory near the source of Spotted Bear
Creek; thence northwesterly along the crest of the Rocky
Mountains to where there is a bend in said mountains just
east of Quartz Lake; thence west to the present-day town
of Pole Bridge; thence west to the divide separating the
watersheds of the Flathead and Tobacco Rivers; thence south"westerly to the source of Good Creez; thence in a direct
northwesterly direction to the present town of Rexford; thence
due west to the crest of'the Purcell Range; thence in a southerly
direction along the crest of the Purcell Mountains passing over
the Kootenai River between Troy and Libby (see Pet. Ex. 22);
thence southerly and easterly along the divide separating the
waters of Clark Fork and Kootenai Rivers, and continuing along
said divide northnesterly to the west of Thompson Lakes and
across Fisher River to the divide north of Thompson Lakes;
thence easterly and seutheastcrly along said divide and across
the stream connccting.HcGrcgor and Thompson Lakes and in an
easterly direction south of HcGregor Lake to the divide separating the watersheds of Thompson and Little Bitterroot Rivers;
thence southerly along said divide to the source of Rock Creek
which is the northwest corner of Upper Pond d'Oreille territory; thence northeasterly along the northern Upper Pond
d‘Oreille boundary; thence southeasterly along the eastern
boundary of Upper Pond d’Oreille territory'to where the
northeastern boundary of Flathead territor* meets it; thence
along said northeastern boundary of Flathead territory to the
place of beginning at the source of Spotted Bear Creek at the
crest of the Rocky Hountains.

 

20. The Commission finds that the Flathead Tribe, Upper Pend d‘
Oreille Tribe, and Kootenai (Libby»Jennings Band) Tribe were consolidated and merged into a single tribal entity by‘the provisions of the

Treaty of July'16, 185 , l2 Stats 975, II Kapp. 722. The Commission

S8

__ ,#_:—-...—-— —- —--8 Ind. 01..., Com. to S9

finds that most of the members of the formerly separate tribes eventually
settled on the reservation set aside by the 1855 treaty and that descendants of said tribe reside thereon to the present day; Since the
date of the treaty when the tribes agreed to consolidate or merge the
United States has dealt with the newly formed tribe as a single entity.
The Commission finds petitioner, The Confederated Salish and Kootenai
Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, to be the snceessor-in-interest to
the formerly separate tribal entities.

21. The Commission finds that the effective date of the Treaty
of July 16, l8S5, by which the Flathead, Upper Pond d'Oreille and"
Kootenai Tribes, parties thereto, ceded their Indian title to the
separate tracts of land described in Finding 19, is March 8, 1859,
namely; the date the treaty was ratified.by the Senate._ The case will
now'proceed toia determination of the acreage involved, the value of L
the lands as of the effective date of the treaty; March 8, 1859; and‘
the issue of whether the consideration paid was unconscionable, leaying

to a further proceeding the question of offsets, if any;

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Erma FIG 

 

Associate Commissioner

