643a

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE FORT SILL APACHE TRIBE OF
THE ST. OF OKLAHOMA

THE I»mR::«1 SPRING BAND OF APACHES ,
EX REL. SAM HAOZOUS

THE CHIRICAHUA BAND OF APACHES,
EX REL. JAMES KAYWAYKLA, sa.

THE FORT SILL APACHES,
EX REL. BENEDICT JOHZE,

Petitioners,

V. Docket No. 49

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

‘s./\uJ\./\-/\u/\u/\../\u/\./\u/‘u-/K./\..J\./\./V-of

Respondent.

Appearances:

Mr. Grady Lewis, with whom

was Mr. I. S. Weissbrodt,
Attorneys for Petitioners.
Messrs. Leland L. Yost and
Frederick B. Ugast, with

whom was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General A. Devitt Vanech,
‘ Attorneys for s+spondent.

OPINION gg jr;_1_1«j. OOHMIHSION

PER CURIAM: The petition in this case is filed by four petitioners,
The Fort Sill Apache Tribe of the State of Gblahoma; The Warm Spring
Band of Apaches, on the relation of Sam He;2ons; “he Chiricahua Band
of Apaches, on the relation of James Kaywaykla, Sr.; ane The Fort Sill

Apaches, on the relation of Benedict Johze. The petition alleges that

_ g -. ' . ’. _. *..
._ _-_-__; ______ __ ___,_-_-,;,-_,-.,_«;,.-_.ggag_;...a.;..£.2u:.1¥.4-\«.c. 4...-cal‘:

643b

-2each of the four above named petitioners is an identifiable group of
American Indians. It is further alleged that, of the four petitioner
groups named, only “The Fort Sill Apache Tribe of the State of Orlahoma“
has an existing tribal organization recognized with authority to represent it, and that the other three groups are each represented by an
individual member thereof who brings this proceeding as the representative of all the members of his particular group.

The claims asserted in the petition are based upon the alleged
wrongful removal by the respondent of the Harm.Spring Band of Apaches
and the Chiricahua Band of Apaches from their respective ancestral
homes and reservations established therein for them, and the subsequent wrongful arrest and imprisonment of the Warm Spring and Chiricahua
Bands and 450 of their members (being all the members of said bands
known to respondent) for a period of 27 years.

The respondent has filed a motion requesting the Commission to
enter an order: (l) severing from this proceeding, and from each other,
the claims based on the alleged =rongful removal of the Warm Spring
Band of Apaches and the Chiricahua Band of npaches, and requiring that
the statement of each claim be set forth i? rcgarctc petitions, on the
grounds that the claims asserted in the p: iticc rte separate claims
which cannot be joined in one action; and (2) dismissing Erom.this prow

ceeding all of the above named petitioner groups except “The Fort Sill

643c

-3Apache Tribe. of the-. State of (‘:lc‘I.ahon1.a,” on the g}."C‘UI1ClS that they are
improper parties petitioner.

In support of its motion as to a severance of claims, the respondent contends the Chiricahua Band of Apaches and the Warm Spring
Band of ipaches are shown by the allegations of the petition to have
been separate bands of Indians occupying separate ancestral homes at
the time of their alleged wrongful removal therefrom; and that each
of the transactions or occurences on which the claims asserted in the
petition are based--the removal of each of the two bands, and the later
arrest and imprisonment of both bands collectinely--took place at a
different time and at a different place, so the claims are improperly
joined in one petition.

We agree that it is apparent from the allegations of the petition
the Warm.Spring and Chiricahua Bands were independent bands of Apache
Indians occupying different areas of ladd as ancestral homes at the
time the alleged wrongial removal claims arose. Therefore, one band
would not have any interest in :42 other band's claim for injuries
sustained by it. It follows that the petitioners are not entitled
as a matter of right to join in one petiti r tie separate claims for

wrongful removal with the claim for unlanf-1

arrest and imprisonment,
which occurred at a still later time and at a different place. However, joinder of parties and claims is now treated by the courts more

as a trial problem and not a pleading problem, and permissive joinder

643d

of plaintiffs and their claims in one action against a single deH1

fendant is generally allowed when it is or trial convenience in
disposing of claims.

we think the facts alleged in the petition show that the claims
asserted, although claims of different bands of Indians, do arise out

of a series of similar acts and occurrences more or less related, and

we believe they can well be determined by the Commission in a single

trial.

we now come to the second portion of respondent's motion, requesting the dismissal of all petitioners except “The Fort Sill Apache
Tribe of the State of Oklahoma.”

It is the contention of the respondent that neither the “arm Spring

\l

Band of Apaches nor the Chiricahua Band of apaches is a presently existing identifi_ble tribe, band, or group on whose behalf a representative
action may be maintained under Section l8 of the Indian Claims Commission
Act (25 U.S.C. 70i}, agi, therefore, any claim on behalf of either band
may be maintained only by a successor, if any exists.

The respondent would justify its contention that neither the Warm
Spring nor Chiricahua Bands is a presently sweating tribe, band, or
group, upon a statement made at a prior or i hearing in this proceeding
by one of petitioners’ counsel: ”* * * is we have pleadtd, there was an

utter destruction of the two bands * * *.” In this connection we note
3

that the statement had reference only to the question of whether in case

643e

-5of recovery it would be a general recovery for the two bands. The
use of the quoted statement in the course of an oral argument made

in answer to an unrelated question does not, in war opinion, indicate
that counsel intended to abandon the allegations made in the petition
that each of the petitioners in question is an identifiable group of
Indians.

The reason advanced by respondent in its brief for the dismissal
of the petitioner, “The Fort Sill Apaches,” is that it is not an existing group of Indians constituting a separate entity from "The Fort Sill
Apache Tribe ot the State of Oklahoma,” and it is argued that if it is
such an existing group, the relator, Benedict Johse, is not entitled
to bring a representative suit on behalf of its members since he is a
member of the Fort Sill Apache Tribe of the State of Oklahoma, the petitioner group alleged to have an existing tribal organisation recognized with authority to represent it, In this connection, it must be
admitted that the real parties in interest in the claims presented are
the Warm Spring and Chiricahua Bands of Apaches. That neither band has

1

an existing tribal organisation is shown oy the allegations of the petition. So it is apparent from the petiti‘v chat mewbers of the two
bands and their descendants have been set -p therein as petitioner
groups in alternative capacities. This is admitted by c unsel for

petitioners in their brief.

We think the question, then, is whether such groups of Indians as

-5the Warm Spring Band of Apaches and the Chiricahua Band of Apaches
do in reality exist and are capable of being identified, and if not,
does there exist a legal successor or successor: to said bands, such
as “The Fort Sill Apaches” or “The Fort Sill spache Tribe of the State
of Oklahoma,” who would have authority to present the claims on behalf
of the two bands. These are issues of fact which we believe can only
be determined after a full and complete hearing of the evidence bearing on such issues, and, in our opinion, the petitioners should be
afforded the opportunity of establishing by proof which of the alleged
petitioner groups, or group, may maintain this action before any of
the petitioner groups are dismissed.

On the basis of this opinion the motion of respondent will be

overruled.

643f

' 1 r. J 

‘Sam-\'.‘4'_JL.. '.-Ia

