BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CAIDDO TRIBE OF OKLAHO1*.iA,' ET AI». .
Plaintiffs,
Becket No. 225

V.

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA,

\..J"%..I‘~uu"'~.‘4'\...#’\../\..-/\.../Va...’ .

Defendanto
Decided: March 8, 1956

§}NDINGS‘Q§ Eggg

_1. _Plaintiffs herein, the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma, is a duly
incorporated tribe, chartered under the aet of June 2%, 1936, (U9
Stat. 1967). They assert their claim under authority of the Indian
Claims Commission Act of dogma: 13, 1935 (60 Stat. 1oh9)° The indi—
vidual plaintiffs are members of the Caddo Nation ani Eribo, as well
as members of the group entity for whom they sue and as such are so»
titled to maintain this action. {Evideotial findings of fact sustain—
ing are embodied in findings following, numbered 3, M, 5, 6, 7, 8 and
9.)

2o Plaintiffs‘ petition filed August 8, 1951, alleged various
causes of action including a claim for inadequate consideration under
the Treaty of July 1, 1835 {? Stat. h?0) (?et, h)o Under an order by

the Commission of Becember 1§, 1934, the evidence and issue new to be

determined was limited to the question of title and ownership of the

‘\

t°rrit°TV Claimed by Plaintifi under this treaty and the area thereof,

all other issues being postyoned. Under the Commission‘s order, the

exact acreage possessed by plaintiffs prior to and at the time of the
Treaty of July 1, 1835, is at issue.

In_the petition of the Caddo Tribe, et al., plaintiffs made
various claims for land in Texas and else where tags described in
the Treaty of July 1, 1835. Counts 2 and M of plaintiffs’ Claim have
been dismissed (Tr. 603, ff., 607~608, and order of the Indian Claims
These counts of the

Gomission of March 1, 1955. Tr. 603, ff).

petition cover land in Oklahoma and Texas. Since these counts were dismissed, the only claim for land remaining in the petition covers the area
described in the Treaty of 1835.

3.

offsets, of approximately one million acres of land ceded by the Caddo

Plaintiffs seek to recover the value, less proper credits and

Nation to the United States under the Treaty of July 1, 1835. The said

land lies in northwestern Louisiana and southwestern Arkansas, westerly
of the Red River, between said river and the line of the State of Texas,

and is identified by Royce as cession 202. The boundaries as given in

Article I of the treaty are as follows:

Bounded to the west by.the north and south line which
separates the said United States from the Republic of
Mexico between the Sabine and Red rivers wheresoever the
same shall be defined and acknowledged to be by the two
governments. On the north and east by the Red River
from the point where the said north and south boundary
line shall intersect the Red river whether it be in the
Territory of Arkansas or the State of Louisiana, following the meanders of the said river dean to its junction
with the Pascagoula bayou. On the south by the said
Pascagoula bayou to its junction with the Bayou.Pierre,
by said bayou to its junction with Bayou Wallace, by
said bayou and Lake Wallace to the mouth of the Cypress
bayou thence up said bayou to the point of its intern
section with the first mentioned north and south line
following the meanders of the said watercourses; but

if the said Cypress bayou be not clearly definable so
far then from a point which shall be definable by a

line due west till it intersect the said first mentioned
north and south boundary line, be the content of land
within said boundaries more or less.

M. It appears from the evidence that the term ”Caddo Nation" is
a generic term and includes all those members of the Caddoan linguistic

stock who resided in the general area under consideration. In order to

make less confusion when referring to the aboriginal occupants of the
area the terms “Hasinai," ”Kadohadacho,” and "Natchitoches," which refer
to the three major confederations in this general area, will be used.

5. The Kadohadacho Confederacy was originally made up of the five
following tribes: Kadchadachog Petit Caddo, Upper Hatchitoches, Upper
Nasoni, and Nanatsoho {SW&RtOB, l9h2: 12-13; 1952: 3l7»320). The Upper
Yatasi and the Cahinnio joined the confederacy later in the period before
1800. The Hasinai Confederacy was made up of at least ten tribes including the Hainai, Eacogdoche, Anadarko, ani Lower Nasoni. The Natchitoches Confederacy was made up of the Doustioni, Quachita and Natchitoches.
The Lower Yatasi joined them at a later date (Swanton, 1952: 205~207).

The Hasinai Confederacy can be eliminated from consideration in this matter
since they were an eastern or southeastern Texas group whose area was outside of the treaty boundaries and it was not until after 1835 and most of
the Kadohadacho moved into Texas that their respective histories merged,

6. Those tribes which comprise the present plaintiffss called the

Caddo Nation, are the following: Kadohadaoho {Cadodacho), Petit Caddo,

\

Upper and Lower Natchitoches, the Ada: (Adaesl, Yatasi, Nasoni (Nessonites)s

1'

and Nanatsoho (Natsoos}. These names are those used by Suanton and the

bracketed ones those used by the petitioners. These groups were the
remnants of the Kadohadacho and Natchitoches Confederacies along with
the Adai which is generally not included in either Confederacy. These
tribes had drawn together in a central location on the Red River between
Cypress Bayou and Sulphur Fork or Sulphur River after 1800.

As stated in finding 5 the Caddos removed to Texas after 1835.
From Texas these same Indians were eventually removed into what is now
the State of Oklahoma (Pet. Ex. 109). as indicated by Swanton (ibid)
and as testified to by members of petitioner tribe, the traditions and
ancestry of the members of the present Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma identifies
them as descendants of the original Caddo Indians of Louisiana who were
parties to the Treaty of July 1, 1835,

7. Contact with the natives of this area was first made by De
Soto's expedition in 1532. After the death of De Soto the expedition
was led westward by Luis de Moscoso and net the Nasoni along the Red
River. Thqyapparently continued westward into the Hasinai area. The
next contact came in 1687 when La Salle's expedition.rede'its nay fF0m
the southwest into Hasinai territory where Lasalle was murdered and six
survivors of the expedition continued northwest until they reached the
Kadohadacho villages at the Great Bend of the Red River. The first
village contacted was the Upper Nasoni village on the south side of the
Red River. They crossed the river and sent on to the main Kadohadacho
Village where they met a Cahinnio Caddo who went east with them t0 the
In 1690 Henri de

Cahinnio village near the Ouachita River in Arkansas.

Tonti set out to find the remaining members of the Lasalle expedition.

He reached Eetchitoches on February 17, 1690, and continuing north he en»
countered the Yatasi on March 16 and the Kadahadacho on the 28th. He was
told by the Eedahadacho that the Upper Natchitoches and the Upper Nasoni
villages were a ,art of the Kadghadacho confederacy.

In 1691 the Spanish sent Teran to explore the country around the
Hasinai and he arrived among the Kadohadacho on November 29. After BXploring the area for a week he returned to the Hasinai country because
of lack of supplies,

In 1703 a Frenchman, Bienville, was sent to look over the Red
River country and he was accompanied by St. Denis who was to bGC0m9
famous in the annals of the country, They reached the Red River at the
village of the Boestieni, near that of the Lower §atcLitoches. From
there they caatinued ue river rrtil they reached the village of the
Yatasi where they were told that the Kadohedaeho village lay farther
D0rth. The two of them turned back but almost immediately St. Denis
returned to the Lower Natchitechee country where he obtained a guide
who took him into the Kadohadacho Confederacy at the Great Bend of the
Red Rivera

On December l7, 1718, Bernard de La Earpe left New Orleans and
went up river to Eetchitochess where he arrived in January 1719. Here
he found both Eatchitoches end Deustioni Indians, as well as some Lower
Yatasi. He eontihued on up river througa the nearby Adai territory to
Sulphur River. 5e traveled up the Sulen r River and then verland to
There he met eith the chiefs of the Kado»

the Upper Nasoni village.

hadacho, Naeatsohs, and Upper Eetehitoches towns. The Constant Contact

with these Indians continued through the French and Spanish until the
transfer of the Louisiana Territory to the United States in 1803.

Throughout the greater part of this period the tribes comprising
the Kadahadacho Confederacy continued to occupy the aboriginal area
above and below the great bend of the Red River as shown on defendant's
exhibit 38-A. Around the year 1777 there was a severe epidemic which
killed hundreds of Indians in the area, as well as the Wife and Children
Of Athanase de Mezieres, the Spanish Lieutenant Governor of Natchitoches
District. Swanton states that the Caddo tribe alone lost some 300
People. At the same time the Osage Indians to the north began a con»
tinued state of warfare against the Caddcs and as a result they began
to consider moving from the principal village, which was apparently the
Upper Nasoni village on the south side of Red River above the great bend.
With the death of Mezieres in 1779 the contemporary reports became scarce
but in a letter of March 27, 1790, the Commandant at Natchitoches, Luis
De Blane, wrote to Governor Miro that the Great Caddo had been forced to
move their village location two years ago because of the continual war
being waged on them by the Osage Indians and that again in the preceding
month they had moved; this time into the village of the Petit Caddo on
Caddo La‘.<:e. (Pl, Ex. 78, p. 36).

There is abundant evidence to the effect that from the time of
first contact until approximately 1788 the principal tribes of the
Kadahadacho Confederacy lived to the north and northwest of the area
ceded by the Caddos in the Treaty of July 1, 1835.

The only villages

within the area were those of the Yatasi and Petit Caddo, while the

remainder were south and west of the treaty area. The four main tribes

living north and northwest of the treaty area were the Kadahadacho. Upper
Nasoni,'Upper Natchitoches, and Nanatsoho.
From the first contact with the Indians of the general area the

remarkable development of agriculture became apparent. There are frequent

references to the agricultural achievement of these people and one reference

mentions fields stretching for five or six miles around a village. They

were not a nomadic people, but rather were well settled. Their only moves

apparently came when the fields began to wear out around their village, or

else when they were forced to move by enemies. Swanton states that "the

Caddo had reached a stage of development where they depended for their
livelihood more upon the products of their fields than their gleanings from

the wilderness." He characterizes them as sedentary agriculturalists who

‘I

also did some hunting.

8. With the purchase of Louisiana by the United States in 1803,
the first American agent entered the territory. In 1805 Dr. John Sibley
was appointed agent and he established a post at Natchitoches where the

Spanish had been. Defendant‘s exhibit 2 is a historical sketch of the

Indian tribes of Louisiana written by Sibley. In this sketch Dr. Sibley

states that the Kadohadacho lived on Caddo Lake about 35 miles west of
the main branch of the Red River and that they had been there only since
1800. Their former home had been far to the north on the south bank
of the Red River at a beautiful prairie with a lake in the middle and
the Yatasi lived on Stony Creek about half way between the Kadohadacho

and that the Indians had left this Village in 1791. The Eatchitoches

335 the Adai lived below the Yatasi on Lake Macdon about 20 miles from

1420

they then_were since time immemorial is obviously not correct.

the old Spanish post named for them. The Natchitoches lived at a village

about 25 miles above the present city of Natchitoches. This apparently
refers to the Upper Natchitoches and not the Lower.

As a result of the Freeman-Custis expedition up Red River in 1806
the most detailed map of the river up to that time was made. This Nicholas
King map indicates the location of the old Caddo villages and does much

to corroborate the fact that the Caddos no longer occupied the area above

the treaty cession.

Swanton indicates that there were never any other tribes in the
area claimed by the Caddo and that it is extremely doubtful that there
were any valid claims by white people to the area where the Caddo settled
when they moved down around Caddo Lake. The claim of the Caddo in their
memorial to President Jackson in 1835 that their villages had stood where
They had

lived north.and northwest until the late l700‘s. there is no

However,
reason to doubt seriously that members of both the Caddo and Natchitoches
confederacies had been in the area for a long time, if not from time immemorial. The archaeological situation within the treaty area is not too
well developed. It is true that there was occupation of the area below
Sulphur River after 1800 by the Caddo and prior to that time by the
Petit Caddo, Yatasi and others. The actual physical occupation was, in
archaeological terms, very brief and this could account for the absence
of or failure to find archaeological remains which are identifiable as
those of the Kadohadacho Confederacy.

Despite their move from the original villages both Sibley and the

Freeman—Custis expedition indicate that these Indians still maintained

4 208

a claim to their former area despite the fact that they had been forced
out of it by the Osage.

9.

There followed a succession of Indian agents until Captain

George Gray was appointed on December 1, 1819. Until that time the

agency had been located at Natchitoches. Gray moved it to Sulphur Fork
where a small military detachment was located. Due to trouble with
whiskey smugglers he moved again in 1823 down to Caddo Prairie where

he could better control the trouble,

In 1825, Gray notified the Secretary of War that the Caddo chief

had requested that boundaries of the Caddo land be set. Gray then

suggested to the chief that Sulphur Fork and Cypress Creek be considered
his boundary lines as they were generally known as such (Def. EX. 35).
Mchenney of the office of Indian Affairs replied on July 9, 1825. that

the chief's request was reasonable and asked Gray to examine the matter

and report (Pl. Ex. 108). On September 30, 1825, Gray reaffirmed that

the Caddo boundaries were as he had stated, commencing at Sulphur Fork

following the Red River to Cypress Bayou (Def. Ex. 9 and 10). When Gray

died in 1828, Thomas Griffith was appointed and died shortly thereafter.

In 1830 Jehiel Brooks was appointed agent. He moved the agency house to

a Point south of Cross Lake on the bluffs overlooking the Red River valley.
The correspondence of Bnooks makes little or no mention of the location

of the various groups of Caddo Indians immediately preceding the Treaty

of 1535. By this time, though, the pressure of white settlement was

becoming very great. However, the shift of the Caddos into the treaty

area was apparently completed by the end of the eighteenth century. The

14 209

Sibley and Freeman-Custis papers (Def. Ex. 2, 3u(c) and 36) indicate that
to be so and it appears to have been accepted by the foremost authorities.
From information and surmise it would appear that the Natchitoches and
ddai had moved up to join the other Caddo group sometime during the period
between 1800 and 1835. This move marked the merger of the Kadohadacho and
Natchitoches Confederacies and paved the way to the Treaty of July 1, 1835,
which was negotiated by Jehiel Brooks as United States Commissioner.

10. Brooks‘ position as agent was terminated in July of 183M and
he returned to Washington where he received instructions in March, 1835,
to negotiate the treaty with the Caddos. The Caddos had memorialized the
President sometime during or before January, 1835, to negotiate a treaty
for their lands. In the memorial they had set the following boundaries:
"These lands are bounded on one side by the Red River, on another side
by bayou Pascagoula, bayou and Lake Wallace, and the bayou Cypress; and
on the other side by Texas.” (P1. Ex. 1142).

In this same memorial the Caddos requested the confirmation of a
reservation which they said had been made to Francois Grappe and his
three sons. This reservation was described by them as commencing at
the lowest corner of their lands on the Red River, (as above described)
and running up the river four leagues. and one league from that line
back, so as to make four leagues of land. This reservation was said by
them to have been made a great many years ago under the Spanish.

In pursuance of this memorial, President Jackson requested the
Secretary of War to appoint a Commissioner to negotiate the treaty

and Jehiel Brooks was appointed. Brooks was given a copy of the

1; 21o

report by a C01. Many in which the Colonel described the Caddo lands

as the boundaries had been set by Captain Gray. Brooks then proceeded

to Louisiana where he hired a man by the name of Laricin Edwards, his

former interpreter, to assemble the Caddo for the negotiations. About

500 of them came to the agency and it appears that this was about all

of the Caddo who survived, with the possible exception of perhaps a

hundred or so. Brooks then held a council with the chiefs and agreement

was reached after a few-days. The boundaries as set in Article I of the

treaty are as follows:

Bounded to the west by the north and south line which separates
the said United States from the Republic of Mexico between the
Sabine and Red Rivers wheresoever the sane shall be defined and
acknowledged to be by the two governments. On the north and
east by the Red River from the point where the said north and
south boundary line shall intersect the Red River whether it

be in the Territory of Arkansas or the State of Louisiana,
following the meanders of the said river down to its junction
with the Pascagoula bayou. On the south by the said Pascagoula
bayou to its junction with the Bayou Pierre, by said bayou to
its junction with Bayou Wallace, by said bayou.and Lake Wallace
to the mouth of the Cypress bayou thence up said bayou to the
point of its intersection with the first mentioned north and
south line following the meanders of the said watercourses;

but if the said Cypress bayou be not clearly definable so

far then from a point shich shall be definable by a line due
west till it intersect the said first mentioned north and

south boundary line, be the content of land within said
boundaries more or less.

By articles supplementary to the treaty the reservation to the Grappes
requested in the memorial to President Jackson was confirmed and in

addition thereo Lartin Edwards was granted one section of land, Both

the treat and the supplementary articles were ratified b" Con ress,
- . J

and signed by the President on February 2, 1836, The consideration to

the Caddo under the said treaty was $30,000 in money and goods.

11., We think it unnecessary to make any findings as to the facts
involved in the case of United States v. Brooks (10 How. M31) because
same are fully set out in the Courts’ Opinions. Suffice it to say that
it is our construction of the judgment rendered that same was not a
determination, that the Caddo Nation and Tribe had Indian Title to the
lands involved¢—but that the holding merely recognized that whatever
rights the Indians had in said land had passed to the Grappes and their
grantees, as had the interest of the United States in said land, and
therefore the United States was denied any recovery thereof.

12. Based on the preceding findings and the evidence supporting
same, this Commission finds that the Caddo Indians who were the remnants
of the Kadohadacho and Natchitoches Confederacies and the predecessors
of plaintiffs in interest, abandoned and did not use and occupy the
aboriginal area claimed above the Sulphur River, but that they did
continue to use and exclusively occupy in the usual Indian manner after
1800 and until July 1, 1835, when they entered into the treaty with
the United States, the land described as follows, to wit:

Starting at the point where the Sulphur River joins
thee Red River; thence up said Sulphur River to the TexasLouisiana line; thence south along said line to the point
where Cypress Bayou or an extension thereof intersects

the said line; thence following the meanders of said Cypress
Bayou until it meets Boggy Bayou; thence down said Boggy

34 212

Bayou to Wallace Lake and continuing along said Lake and
Wallace Bayou until it intersects the Red River; thence up
said Red River to the point of beginning.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

