BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TEE DELAWARE TRIBE or INDIANS, )
Petitioner, %
v. ; Docket No. 27~A
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 3
Defendant. 3
APSENTEE DELAWARE TRIBE DE )
OKLAHOMA, DELAWARE NATION, ex rel. )
W. E. EXENDINE and'MYRTLE HOLDER, )
Petitioners, g
v. g" Docket No. 241
TEE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, 3
Defendant. g
Decided: January 21, 1954

PRELIMINARY STATEMENT

Separate petitions were filed in these cases, the first by the
Delaware Tribe of Indians, Docket No. 27-A, and the other by the Absentee
Dereware Tribe of Oklahoma, Delaware Nation, ex rel. W. E. Exendine
and Myrtle Holder, Docket No. 241. Both claimants base their claims
on a strip of land ten miles wide and extending west from a north and
south line (Def. Ex. 46.(a) (1)) about 45 miles west of Leavenworth,
Kansas. This strip is provided for in the treaty of September 24,
1329, hereafter referred to as the "outlet", and it is so referred to

by the parties in their pleadings and briefs. East of the east end

of the “outlet” was a large area ceded to petitioners referred to in the
briefs as "residence lands," but this area is not included in these
claims since the claims are only for the "outlet." The claimants are
not in agreement as to the western boundary of the outlet, the Absentee
Deiawares cle"ming the western terminus to be much farther west than

the claimant in Docket No. 27—A.

Because the two groups, who represent all groups of the Delaware
Tribe or Nation of Indians, are asserting the same claim, the Commission
on January 22, 1953, entered its order in the two Dockets, 27-A and 241,
consolidating them “for the purposes of trial on the merits." Thereafter, and on April 15, 1953, evidence was concluded by all parties and
the claims were 8ubmitt8d'tO the Commission on the question of the
Governnent*s liability in accordance with the rule of the Commission,

leaving for later determination the amount of damages should it be

determined that the claimants were entitled to recover. (Sec. 22 (f).

I“
F23
(D
"U
{D
W’
H1
H‘
[-31
0
9
9:
CH
13"
52’
(D
'U
H
('0
U!
(D
F35
V;
(D
CL
C0
(D
‘U
93
N
P)
C I’
H)
Ti
"'3
0
“U
0
U)
(D
0I‘?!
So
CLHo
33
00
U)
0
1"’?!
H‘:
C0
0
H‘

or petitioners had been joined in a single petitione
ngly, the Commission makes the following findings of fact

A -- nun I‘
4.3:.‘-..:‘u.D\..).,.a

as apglicahle to both claimants:

"j'l'P""\7‘j"'_""\'-_"""|("| »-°~*-1 ‘rt 14 fer“!
-3 .«i:.‘.'i .--A1‘J';3 Kin‘: .'.{A'..‘-3.! .'.’-.

 

l. The petitioners in Docket K0. 27uA and Docket R00 241 represent

the entire Delaware Nation of Indians and are authorised by the Indian

Claims commission Act to present and prosecace the claim of said Nation.

2. On October 3, 1818, 7 Stat. 188, by treaty of that date, the
Delaware Nation of Indians ceded to the Enited States all their claim
to land in the State of Indiana. As part payment for their Indian~

land the Snited States by Article 2 of said treaty agreed:

tin consideration of the aforesaid cession, the
United States agree to provide for the Delawares a
country to reside in, upon the west side of the Mississippi, and to guaranty to them the peaceable possession
of the same."

After the conclusion of this treaty the indiana Delawares joined
other Delawares then located in southwest Missouri on the James Fork

of the White River.

3. Considerable time elapsed after the 1818 treaty was concluded

I
—u..\

in obtaining a satisfactory location west of the'Mississippi River for
the Delawares but they finally selected an area at the forks of the
Kansas and Missouri rivers and on September 24, 1829, 7 tat. 327,
concluded a treaty with defendant which contained the following provisions:

Whereas the foregoing Treaty stipulates that the
United States shall provide for the Relaware Nation, a
country to reside in, west of the Mississippi as the
permanent residence of their nation; end whereas the
said Delaware Nation are now willing to remove on the
following conditions from the country on James’ Fork of
the White River in the State of Missouri to the Country
selected in the fork of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers,
as recommended by the Government for the permanent residence of the whole Delaware Nation; it is hereby agreed
upon by the parties that the country in the fork of the
Kansas and Missouri Rivers extending up the Kansas River
to the Kansas line and up the Missouri River to Camp
Leavenworth and thence by a line drawn westwardly, leaving a space ten miles wide north of the'Kansas boundary
line for an outlet; shall be conveyed and forever secured
by the Enited States to the said Delaware Nation on their
permanent residence: and the Unitei States hereby g;edges
the faith of the Government to guarantee to the said

2 539

Delaware Nation forever the quiet and peaceable possession
and undisturbed enjoyment of the same against the claims
and assaults of all and every other people whatever.

sis treaty was in fulfillment of the obligation of the defendant under

the treaty of 1818, in fact, was supplementary to that treaty.

4. The Treaty of Sertember 24, i829, was ratified by the Senate of
the United States in a resolution dated May 29, 1830, as follows:

Resolved (twowthirds of the Senators present concurr‘ng), that the Senate do advise and consent to the

ratification of tee suyplcmentary article concluded at
Council Camp on James’ Fork of White River in the State
of Missouri, the 24th day of Sugtembar, 1829, to a Treaty
between the United States and the Beiaware Endians made
the third day of October, 1818: Pro ided, that the

‘D-..

i-esident of the Enited States with all convenient dispatch, emnloy a surveyor at the usual rate of compensation
for like services, to run gnzlines of the country by the
foregoing lreaty granted to tIe said Delaware Nation of
Indians, to establish certain and notorious landmarks,

ac urztely and permanent1y.to distinguish the boundaries
of the said granted country and of the said outlet

reserved in this Treaty; that the said ~urveyor run the
lines and fix and establish the boundaries of the said
treated eountr" and the said outlet in the presence of an
area: to be designated by the Delaware Eation; and that it
shall be the duty of the said surveyor to report to the
President of the United States his proceedings in the
premises, together with a map or draft of the said granted
eountr and the said outlet; and that when the President
shall be satisfied that the said proceedings have been concurred in and approved of by the agent of the said Eelaware
Nation, he shall also approve of the same by his signature
and seal of office and cause ore copy of the same to be filed
among the archives of the Government and one copy to.be
delivered to the agent of the Belaware Nation, for the use of
the said Nation, and which shall be thereafter binding and
-onelusive upon the respective garties to the foregoing

e
T‘

 

 

 

   

 

*eaty. (Emphasis added‘. (Der. ex. 43}.

5. Pursuant to the Senate resolution (Finding 4), Isaac McCoy was

agpointed to make the survey required ty the resolution (Def. Ex. 44).

McCoy had with him John Quick who had been appointed by the chiefs and

_ __ 4‘ ._,‘..‘_....,._n4-q~¢-r'A|-I-'warriors of the Delaware Nation to represent said Nation in surveying and marking the lands'assigned to it by the treaty of September 24,

1829. (Def. Ex. 46(d)).

In locating the "outlet" McCoy started on the Kansas Riéer where
the eastern boundary of the Kansas Reservation crosses that river and

from there he ran north along the east line of the Kansas Reservation

to the northeast corner thereof. From this corner he ran a line due

north 10 miles to a point he designated as the "N. W. corner of the

Delaware Lands and commencement of the Northern line of the Delaware

I

outlet * W." (See Def. Exs. h6(a) 1, and 46(5) 1). This north and south

line formed the eastern boundary of the outlet and the western boundary

of the ceded lands lying east of that line and which McCoy referred to as

“the lands designed for the residence of the Delawares.” From this socalled boundary line McCoy surveyed the outlet west tor a distance of

"210 miles west of the State of Missouri" as it was then (1830) bounded.

(The western boundary line of Missouri was not changed from a line due

north of the confluence of the Kansas and'Missouri rivers to the Missouri

River until June 7, 1836, 5 Stat. 34).

In his report of the survey of the Delaware lands (filed in Indian

O fice on.April 20, 1831) he said, concerning the survey of the "outlet,"

at pages l8~l9 thereof:

"After compreting our survey of the lands designed
for the residence of the Delawares we extended our
________ 2

survey or the Delaware outlet (so called) to a goint
two hundred and ten miles west of the State of Missouri.
The termination of the line was on Solomon river, about
one hundred and forty miles west of the western village

at present occupied by the Kansas on the south and about
4;"!

0 4!
~yoJ-----c ......4.0-. '-9' ‘

arses west of the Republican Pawnee villages on the
nort.. The latter is the most westwardly Indian settlement tswerds the Rocky Mountains, from Red river six hundred
miles north. we stopped about forth miles within the region
ahounding with Buffaloes, *lks, Antelopes, etc. We saw many
and killed what we needed for use.“ (Pet. Ex. 109, pp; l7~l9).

 

... .._.-.--... «....--. ..--cu»-~ -|-""'v1vr-r"'|'
......_..—._....-... . - "" "' "

2 540

2 541
Retyped

6. On September 28, 1830 (Def. Ex. 46—D), the Delawares approved
the survey referred to in Finding 5 and thereafter, and on February 11,
1831 (Def. Ex. 47), the President approved such survey and on March 24,
1831, proclaimed the treaty of September 24, 1829.

In approving the survey for the Delawares, said John Quick certified as follows:

I John Quick, 2nd Chif of the Delaware nation of
Indians having been duly appointed by the Chiefs and
Warriors of my nation to attend to the surveying and
marking of the lands assigned to my nation in the forks
of the Kanzas and Missouri Rivers, by the treaty with
the United States of September the Eéth 1829, having
performed the duties required of me by my nation, do
certify:

Ihat, I have accompanied Mr. McCoy from near the mouth
of Kaozas iiver across our tract of land to Cantonment
Leavenworth, thence avross it again in another direction
to the Kanzas agency, thence to our western limit on the
Kansas River;- ?hence I accompanied him in his actual
survey and measurement of our land, 24 miles to the northeast corner of the Kansas lands, where a large mound was
repaired in my presence, thence ten miies to the northern
limit of our land, where another large mound was made these two mounds being at the commencement of the outlet,thence on the trial line to Cantonment Leavenworth on
‘Missouri River. I have seen the inlet of about two miles
on Missouri River and four miles back, for the use of the
military post now called Cantonment Leavenworth. I have
not only seen the limits of the land, but most of the
land itself.

with the country I am well pleased. It is good. with
its boundaries as shown to me, and as exhibited on a map,
both agreeing, I am perfectly satisfied knowing them to
be precisely as required by the treaty by which, we obtained
a claim to this land.

The measuring and marking of our lines, are not yet
completed. Mr. McCoy has from my first joining his party
insisted that 1 should continue with his until the surveying of the land for settlement and the outlet should be
completed, but my nation have instructed me to remain no
longer than to see the limits of the land assigned us for
settlement. My nation wish to remove to this country
immediately, before the commencement of cold weather, and
they wish me to return to aid them in removing. Moreover
the removal of my own family requires my presence, and my

. . -n4u«_.uu..ocJ-hi’--' age and infirmities forbid me to remain longer on this
surveying tour. Nor, is there any necessity for me to
remain longer, since I am perfectly satisfied that the
terms of the treaty are complied with and my nation have
instructed me to return, they being anxious to remove on
to the land immediately.

Centonment Leavenworth his
September 28th 1831 John 2 Quick
' mark
2nd Chief of Delawares
Signed in presence of and Special Agent.

7‘: 5': -3': fr

And thereafter, John Campbell, Sutwindian Agent of the Shawnee Agency

as

CDSI. Ex. 46-D), also certified as follows:
Shawnee Agency November 1st 1830

I hereby certiiy that I have exam'ned, alone, Capt John
Quick, the agent chosen by the Dellawares to attend the
surveying and marking of the Dellawares lands north of
Kansis river on his return to his people from said service,
and find that Mr. McCoy wished said Quick to cantinue wit
him until; the marking of their lands was completed, and

that said Quick returned to his tribe sooner than had been
desired in compliance with the instructions of his nation.

I have further ascertained that the said Quick is
perfectly satisfied with the surveying and marking of their
land, and their outlet anddeeeming it unnecessary for him
to remain longer with the surveying party he left it.

I further say that since-said John Quicks return to his
nation, their first Chief William Anderson, with many others,
have moved on to their lands, said.Amneran1declares himself
well pleased with their new country, and entirely satisfied
with the report of their agent John Quick, relative to the
surveying and marking of their lands and the outlet.

7. In a letter to the Secretary of War, dated January 29, 1829, Issac

hccoy sunlsrreed the meaning and purpose of an outlet as follows:

By outlet, is understood a slip of land extending from
that more particularly stipulated in the treaty as being
designed for settlement, west, into the uninhahitable regions
of the desert and the mountgins. * * “ lac object of these
outlets is that each. §ribg/ may have access to hunting
lands in the West.

...-.—u-s—-— -..-u.-u-. .- .. ...._,.____,___ __ ___. ___ [___ ___ __ _._.,_._..__..____._...-...—. -._.... .. . __._... . . . _.._._,____._,_..__ ___. __

2 543

O

-s
IIa,.a. I§9Q

rile- to the l829 treaty, provisions for outlets had been included
in several treaties with other tribes, so at the time of the Delaware
treaty of September 24, 1829, the assignment of an outlet to a tribe
had a definite meaining both to the Indians and to the Government.

 Ex. 42, pp. 20421),

The Delawares began occupying the “residence lands” (that is, the

Lands iv ng east of the "outlet”} in 1829 and 1830, but at no time during

over 24 years of use of the "outlet" did the Delawares establish any
permanent settlements or villages on the “outlet.”

0

o. The "0etlet";erovided for the Delaware Indians by the Supplementary Treat‘ or September 24, 1829, was, according to the custom of

tee t'mes, intended as a passageway or road to the hunting grounds to

_u
-.-_,..

tee rest, and would have been so understeed 'y all parties concerned

in 1529. The fact that there was "no game on the land designed for the
residence of the Delaware Endians and that they were going a great’
distance to hunt” establishes both the necessity and the purpose of the
assignment of an "outlet" to the Delawares. (Def. Ex. 5).

9, By the Act of March 3, 1853, 10 Stat, 226, 238, the President
was authorized to negotiate with the western tribes for extinguishmcnt
oi Indian title to their lands and Commissioner Manypenny conducted
Law negetietions on the part of the Government. Preparatory to such
negotiations the Del were Tribe or Nation of Indians, throught its
Council, appointed several of its members to represent the Nation at

seen negotiations and gave them ‘nil power to make a treaty with

defendant. Def. Ex. 57, dated April 3, 1854.

. - -..-4 A.n$-ii-J-h-all

2 544
Retyped

10. On May 6, 1854, 10 Stat. l048, the authorized representatives
of the Delaware concluded a treaty with the defendant containing the
following provisions:

Article 1. The Delaware Tribe of Indians hereby cede,
relinquish and quitclaim to the United States, all their
right, title and interest in and to their country lying
west of the State of Missouri, and situate in the fork
of the Missouri and Kansas Rivers, which is described in
the article supplementary to the Treaty of October 3, 1818,
concluded in part on the 24th September 1829, at Council
Camp on James’ Fork of the White River in the State of
Missouri; and finally concluded at Council Camp in the fork
of the Kansas and Missouri Rivers on the 19th October l829;i
and also their right, title and interest in and to the
"outlet" mentioned and described in said supplementary
article; excepting that portion of said country sold to the
Wyandotte tribe of Indians by instruments sanctioned by Act
of Congress approved July 25, 1848, and also excepting that
part of said country lying east and south of a line beginning at a point on the line between the land of the Delawares
and the halfbreed Kansas forty miles in a direct line west
of the boundary between the Delawares and Wyandottes, thence
north 10 miles, thence in an easterly course to the point
on the south bank of the Big Iron Creek which shall also be
on the bank of the Missouri River where the usual high water
line of said creek intersects the high water line of said
river.

Article 2. The United States hereby agree to have the
ceded country (excepting the said "Outlet”) surveyed as soon
as it can be conveniently done, in the same manner that the
public lands are surveyed-- such survey to be commenced and
prosecuted as the President of the United States may deem
best. And the President will, so soon as the whole or any
portion os said lands are surveyed, proceed to offer such
surveyed lands for sale at public auction in such quantities
as he may deem proper, being governed in all respects, in
concluding such sales by the laws of the United States respecting the sales of the public lands; and such of the lands
as may not be sold at the public sales, shall thereafter be
subject to private entry in the same menner that private
entries are made of the United States lands; and any or all
of such lands as remain unsold after being three years sub—
ject to private entry at the minimum Government price may by
Act of Congress be graduated and reduced in price until all
said lands are sold; regard being had in said graduation and
reduction to the interests of the Delawares and also the
speedy settlement of the country.

up.

2 545
Retyped

Article 3. The United States agree to pay to the
Delaware Tribe of Indians the sum of $10,000.00; and
in consideration thereof the Delaware Tribe of Indians
hereby cede, release and quitclaim to the United States
the said tract of country hereinbefore described as the
‘outlet’. And as a further and full compensation for
the cession made by the First Article, the United States
agree to pay the said trihe all the moneys received from
the sales of the lands provided to be surveyed in the preceding Article after deducting therefrom the cost of survey—
ing, managing and selling the same.

Article 6. The Delawares feel now, as heretofore,
grateful to their old chiefs for their long and faithful
services. In former treaties, when their means were scanty,
they provided by small life annuities for the wants of these
chiefs, some of whom are now receiving them. These chiefs
are poor and the Delawares believe it their duty to keep them
from want in their old and declining age. It is the wish of
the Delawares, and hereby stipulated and agreed, that the
sum of $10,000.00, the amount provided in the Third Article
as a consideration for the ”0ntlet" shall be paid to their
five chiefs to wit: Captain Ketchem, Sarkoxey, Segondine,
Neconhecond and Kockkatowha, in equal shares of $2,000.00
each to be paid as follows: To each of said chiefs, annually
the sum of $250.00 until the whole sum is paid; Provided
that if any one or more of said chiefs die before the whole
or any part of the sum is paid, the annual payments remaining to his share shall be paid to his male children, and in
default of male heirs than to the legal representatives of
such deceased chief or chiefs, and it is understood that the

3

small life annuity stipulated for or former treaties shall be
paid as directed by said treaties.

The provisions of the treaty respecting the cession of the outlet and the
consideration of $10,000 therefor were well understood by the petitioners,
the Delaware Nation (Def. Ex. 59) as well as the disposition of said sum
(Pet. Ex. 129), which was paid in accordance with the terms of Article 6
thereof to the chiefs named in said Article. (Def. Ex. 61).
11. By the Act=of July 1, 1902, Congress conferred "jurisdiction

upon the Court of Claims to examine, consider and adjudicate with the

right of appeal to the Supreme Court of the United States by any party

2 546
Retyped

in interest feeling aggrieved at the decision of the Court of Claims,
any claim which the Cherokee Tribe, or any band thereof, arising under
Treaty stipulations may have against the United States, upon which suit
shall be instituted within two years after the approval of this Act;
and also to examine, consider and adjudicate any claim which the United
States may have against said tribe or any band thereof."

Under the provisions of this Act the Delaware Tribe filed twelve
petitions in the Court of Claims, namely, Nos. 23104, 23162, 24067,

24645, 24926, 24927, 24928, 24929, 24930, 24931, 24932, and 24933.

12. Petition No. 24928 contained among others the following

allegations:

Paragraph 3(b). "That plaintiffs are descendants of

the Delaware Tribe of Indians who removed from the States

of Indiana and Ohio in accordance with the provisions of
treaties made with defendant and entered into on October 3,
1818 (7 Stat. 188), and August 3, 1829 (7 Stat. 327), and
upon such removal plaintiffs settled on a reservation
provided for them in the State of Kansas, as described and
set apart for the use of said tribe of Delaware Indians in
the said treaty of August 3, 1829. That subsequently plaintiffs removed to the Indian Territory and became residents,
members and citizens of the Cherokee Nation by virtue of
their compliance with the provisions of a certain agreement
made between said Delaware Tribe and the said Cherokee Nation
on or about April 8, 1867.”

Paragraph 3(d). "That plaintiffs have succeeded to all the
rights of property formerly enjoyed by said Delaware Tribe
including all causes of action or choses in action belonging
to said tribe and including the cause or causes of action
hereinafter set forth."

Paragraph 10. "That the land in said State of Kansas
described as aforesaid in said Treaty of September 24, 1829,
was subsequently surveyed and was found to contain 38 square
miles only, or only 924,160 acres, so that it turned out
that the said lands received by the Delawares in exchange

for said Indiana lands were less in acreage to the amount

2 547

J‘:

01.

'.‘ -I I"
..1 3 .3.)

*o"'-Q

1'1 32..-‘n.—.I-.

,340 acres, and that by reason of said deiicieney
i cage said Delawares were deprived of at least

§5,b33,?60.C0 which represents the value of 3,555,840
acres ot Zadiana land of the value of $1.50 per acre.

'1'"... .- .....

rat, the outlet referred to in said reaty of September 24,
1829, MQS 0,000 acres, but that
the said Deiawares were not the owners thereof and merely
had an easement or right of way therein, and that sub»
seqaentiy the rights of said Del wares it said outlet were
purchased by the defenaant under a certain T'eaty of May 6,
185% {10 Stat. 1048), for the sum of $10,000.00 only and
t,at at the time of the evsotiatioa at said Ereaty of

L-‘-‘G:-3
"" ._ .. ,..,.'f .. / " '1!) ...'»' - .... 1'..- FR
ZD's.'?.iJ1..x.--,.-..3tZ‘*..:’.' 2-+ , 3.? 4.9 , {.;‘}.c: "5/a.;....I:.'.

ft”:
found to contain about 1,00

oi the rights in said outlet
d to said Selawates did not exceed the sum of $5,000.00."

. ‘F’ 1,: -".1.
SJ. L-an-2. upkAt the end of the above petition was a verification by Richard C.

Adams, who was a Delaware Indian ané an attorney in fact of the De"ware

In‘ ‘' " -"- . -:4 . ‘HS’: .- 3'1-. - a- -'3 ""' 4- 1-. -. A --u . I  '."'- "' ‘C '
rae_aas, plazntar 3 1n sard actron, who swore neon oath: that LQ¢ LOSE“

;o;n5 petition and all matter therein tated are true to the best of his

1* 4- --1 -\ ‘A, .: ..... r.. .3 ‘pg ‘ .: J: F‘ H 1... 3
AKuHaedoQ, rniormattoa and oelrer.” {Unto use 61 .
4- --u on -9 n o- a I ("3
13. By tee Act ot Airrt 21, a334, 1; was yrovaeed 1n Sectxon zr
"—.. .1‘ : ..,..-ae_eJr ‘Tee Secrtta-y

..-.. .-.1. --,..._. - 1:: -1- 1-,.. _, .. ~-‘~ :_ .3 1_ -2. 1 .2
to tea Beraeare Trxbe or rnaaaas res1d1ng rt Lae Cuetosee batten, as

said tribe shall in council direct, the sum of $150,000.00 in full of

"' " . - 4 Q -J O Q G 9 -, " 1' '.‘ _’
alt creams and demaaes of sale trlbe agalnst the Ua1tee States, a,a the

*3 -"-‘ " ' ": 1 ‘r-. - - - -can --\- " ‘J F ‘ -\-\ 9- a-"1 .- -I 9' - . v-- .w -I. "' .-"I " f ' .'\"P‘?’ I-:. ‘I.
sage rs a-seby ano_o,:iated ane mane rmmeaiacely avarraoxez PfCv;u3Q,

 

teat said sum shall be paid only atter the tribal authorities, taere““ “' F"-'4 ’ - gn-u.- -3.9-. _-\ . -0-'-II--b uavr -5 4:09‘. . . "'3 ‘ 4. 1'
tato eaiy and $ycCa:LCa11y aathorlsed by the LaLb€, shall have szgnee a
1- -— ,-9 -1- o’... — ...... --._, .4 . ,\ .'.g I. 1... .V.-.'... .-- L. ._,  3:: 5..-. -133 tat?-3.1.

such payment it in full of a11 claims ané demands

"‘ " '-'s I u.- A . 4-1 -\ -no- 1: . ‘ '1 , -.. -‘.4. -_-._4., ‘I.-. .5...‘ — _.-...‘,.. a A ‘-5! I. I 1
or eve y aame aae natare or sald Deraware ;uQL&uS aéainst the onrtee
‘T "“- .-1 -'_-w.~ __

'1 C
».. ' -‘V "
1--4’ -'.»O'.1n mph: 5:! ’ X‘-J‘; L

eh writing shall be subject to the approval of the President

ul.

the United States and shall have grovided for the éiscoatintance of

run».

all actions pending in all courts wherein sa;d Belaware Indians are

' .n-._..-\.-..-.q._——-..|-...¢- a--.-.—---l-u-I---M "‘- plaintiff and the United States defendants."

03..

In accordance with the terms of this Act, the Delaware Tribe

inaians executed the specified release in the manner reoaired, the

release being approved by the President on January 10, 1905. The

cases enumerated in Finding 11 were dismissed on the stipulation of
the parties on January 9, 1905.

The amount appropriated by the Act was credited to the Delaware
Tribe by treasury warrant on April 21, 1904, and was disbursed in per

capita payments to members of the Tribe and in payment of attorneys‘

fees in the years 1906 to l92§, inclusive. (Pet. in 27~A,,Ex. 12,
pp. 223, 796-7).

14. The release referred to in the last preceding finding was

the following form (Def.-Ex. 64):

”We,;the business committee of the Delaware Tribe
of Indians, residing in the Cherokee Nation by due and
specific authorization of said Tribe in general council
assembled, do hereby state that the payment of $150,000.00
by the Secretary of the Treasury to said Delaware Tribe
of Zndians.in purshance of an Act of Congress approved
April 21, 1904, is in full of all claims and demands of
every name and nature of said Delaware Endians against
the United States and do hereby authorize and request
the Attorney General of the United States and the attorneys
in fact of said tribe, Messrs. Richard E. Adams, John
Bullette and Walter 5. Logan, or either of them, by proper
motion of stipulation to cause to be dismissed all actions
or suits pending in any court wherein said Delaware Indians
are plaintiffs and the United States are defendants."

Edgar E. Witt
s A’

Louis J, 0”Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

war M. Holt

.&-In-5

   

Associate Commissioner

2.548

.. ..‘,.—_¢-vsll-V-IIUIV-'-I-I"-""V""-"'

._______..-....—-.o-. ..

