.hIEE UNITZD SEATES OF AMZRIOA.j

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TEE DELAEIRE TRIBE OF INDlAES,
Petitioner
Vo Docket No. 27-3

Defendant.

ABSENTEE DELAR1RE TRIBE OF
OKLAHOMA¢ DELAHAEE NATION,
EXIREL. W. E. EXENDINE AND
MZETEE HOEDER,

Petitioners.
v.

Docket No. 231

THE UNITED SEAEES OF AHERICA,

\.l\-./\..I'h..l\.’\J‘-—"-/\.d'\~.l\_nP\..I\.-#\..I ‘huF\....J'\...#\._,('\.,J\_p|§.f\._,p~g_‘p

Defendant.

.J"'n

Decided: August 23, 1955

;.ADDITIONAL FINDINGS Q§_FACT'

The Commission makes the following findings of fact, same to supplement previous findings made on January 21, 195M, and to be a substitute
therefor insofar_as they might differ therefrom:

15. On October 3, l8l8,%7 Stat. 188, by treaty of that date, the
Delaware Nation of Indians ceded to the United States all their claim
to land in the State of Indiana. As part payment for their Indiana.land
the United States by Article 2 of said treaty agreed:

In consideration.of the aforesaid cession, the United

States agree to provide for the Delarares a country to

reside in, upon the west side of the Mississippi, and to,
guaranty to them the peaceahle possession of the same.

3 623

After the conclusion of this treaty the Indiana Delanares joined

other Delawares then located in southwest Missouri on the James Fork

of the White River.

16. Considerable time elapsed after the 1818 treaty was concluded
in obtaining a satisfactory location west of the Mississippi River for
the Delawares but they finally selected an area at the forks of the
Kansas and Missouri rivers. and on September 2%, 1829, 7 Stat. 327,

concluded a treaty with defendant which contained the following provisions:

Whereas the foregoing Treaty stipulates that the United
States shall provide for the Delaware Nation. a country to
reside in. west of the Mississippi as the permanent residence
of their nation: and whereas the said Delaware Nation are now
willing to remove on the following conditions from the country
on James‘Fork of the White River in the State of Missouri to
the_Country selected in the fork of the Kansas and Missouri
Rivers. as reconmended.by the Government for the permanent
residence of the whole Delaware Nation: it is hereby agreed
upon by the parties that the country in the fork of the Kansas
and Missouri Rivers extending up the Kansas River to the Kansas
line and up the Missouri River to Camp Leavenworth and thence by
a line drann westwardly, leaving a space ten miles wide north
of the Kansas boundary line for an outlet; shall be conveyed and
forever secured by the United States to the said Delaware Nation
as their permanent residence; and the United States hereby
pledges the faiulof the Government to guarantee to the said
Delaware Nation forever the quiet and.peaceable possession and
iundisturbed enjoyment of the same against the claims and assaults
of all and every other people whatever.

II!

It is agreed upon by the parties that this supplementary

article shall be concluded in part only. at this time, and that

a deputation of a Chief. or Warrior, from each town with their
Interpreter shall proceed with the Agent to explore the country
more fully. and if they approve of said country. to sign their
names under ours, which shall be considered as finally concluded
on our part; and after the same shall be ratified by the President
and Senate of the Uhited States, shall be binding on the contracting parties.

3 624

Six chiefs and warriors were deputed to examine the country,

approved it and signed their names to said treaty at Council camp in

the fork of the Kansas and Missouri rivers on October 19, l829.

This treaty was in fulfillment of the obligation of the defendant

under the treaty of 1818 and was. in fact, supplementary thereto.

1?. The Treaty of September SN, 1829! was ratified by the Senate
of the United States in a.resolution dated May 29, 1830, as follows:

Resolved (two-thirds of the Senators present concurring),

that the Senate do advise and consent to the ratification

of the supplementary article concluded at Council Camp on
James‘ Fork of White River in the State of Missouri, the Enth
day of September, 1829, toga treaty between the United States
and the Delaware Indians made the third day of October, 1818:
Provided. that the President of the United States with all
convenient dispatch, employ a surveyor at the usual rate of
compensation for like services. to run the lines of the

country by the foregoing Treaty granted to the said Delaware
Nation of Indians. to establish certain and notorious land?
marks. accurately and.permanent1y to distinguish the boundaries
of the said granted country and of the said outlet reserved in
this Treaty; that the said surveyor run the lines and fix and
establish the boundaries of the said granted country and the
said outlet in the pyesence of an agent to be designated by

the Delaware Uation; and that it shall be the duty of the said
surveyor to report to the President of the United States his
proceedings in the premises, together with a map or draft of
the said granted country and the said outlet; and that when the
President shall be satisfied that the said proceedings have been
concurred in and approved of by the agent of the said Delaware
Nation, he shall also approve of the same by his signature and

seal of office and cause one copy of the same to be filed among
the archives of the Government and one copy to be delivered to

the agent of the Delaware Nation, for the use of the said Nation,

and which shall be thereafter binding and conclusive upon the

respective parties to the foregoing Treaty. (Def. Ex. #3).

l8. Pursuant to the Senate resolution (Finding 17): Isaac McCoy
was appointed to make the survey required by the resolution (Def. Ex.

43). He was instructed by the Secretary of War to be governed in

every particular by the Treaty and the resolution and that no detailed

instructions were necessary (Def. Er. hha). Mccoy had.vith him John
Quick who had been appointed by the chiefs and warriors of the Delar
were Ration to represent said Nation in surveying and marking the lands
assigned to it by the treaty of September 21+, 1829. (Def. Ex. 1+6(a)).'
In locating the "outlet" McCoy started on the Kansas River where

the eastern boundary of the Kansas Reservation crosses that river and

lfrom there he ran north along the east line of the Kansas Reservation

to the northeast corner thereof.’ From this corner he ran a line due

north 10 miles to a.point he designated as the “H. 3. corner of the
Delaware Lands and commencement oftthe Northern line of the Delaware
‘outlet ‘ ‘J! (See Def. Exs.‘h6(a)l. and h6(b)l). This north and
south line formed.the eastern boundary of the outlet and the western
boundary of the lands lying east of that line which McCoy referred to

as "the lands designed for the residence of the Delawares." ‘From this
so-called boundary line McCoy surveyed the outlet west for a distance

of "210 miles west of the Stategof Hissouri" as_it was then (1830)

bounded. (The western boundary line of Missouri was not changed from

a line due north of the confluence of the Kansas and Missouri rivers

to the Hissouri River until June 7, 1836. 5 Stat. 3h).

In his report of the survey of the Delaware Lands (filed in Indian

Office on April 20, 1831) he said. concerning the survey of the “outlet,”

at pages 18-19 thereof:

After completing our survey of the lands designed for

the residence of the Delawares. we extended our survey of

the Delaware outlet (30 called) to a point two hundred and.
ten miles west of the State of Missouri. The termination

of the line was on Solomon river, about one hundred and forty
miles west of the western village at present occupied by the
Kansas on the south and about forty miles west of the Republican Parnee villages on the north. The latter is the most

3 626

westwardly Indian settlement towards the Rocky Mountains, from
Red_river siz:hundred miles north. ‘We stopped about forty
miles within the region abounding with Buffaloes, Elks,

Antelopes, etc. We saw many and killed what we needed for
use." (Pet. Dr. 109, pp. 17-19). v

Hccoy also forwarded to the Secretary of War, among_other papers, a

plat of the survey made by him (Def. Ex. h6(a))'which he described as

a.plat “of the whole of the Delaware lands“ (Def. 3:. U6), and the field

notes of the survey (Def. Ex. h6(b)). (He reported that he had furnished

Col. Anderson, the principal Delaware chief, with a.plat of their country.
(Pet. Ex. lO9, p. 36).

19. In approving the survey referred to in Finding 18, John Quick

certified as follows: "

I John Quick, 2nd Chief of the Delaware nation of Indians
having been duly appointed by the Chiefs and_Warriors of my
nation.to attend to the surveying and marking of the lands
assigned to m nation in the forks of the Kansas and Missouri
Rivers, by the treaty with the United States of September the
Ehth-1829, having performed the duties required of me by my
nation. do certify: _ ~

$hat,,I have accompanied Mr. McCoy from near the mouth of .
Kansas River across our tract of land to Cantonment Leavenworth,

thence across it again in another direction to the Kanzas Agency,
thence to our western limit on the Kanzas Biver;- Thence I

accompanied him in his actual survey and measurement of our
land. 2% miles to the northeast corner of the Kanzas lands,
there a.large mound was repaired in my presence, thence ten
miles to the northern limit of our land, where another large
mound was made - these two mounds being at the commencement of
the outlet,-thence on the trial line to Cantonment Leavenworth
on Missouri River. I have seen the inlet of about two miles on
Missouri River and four miles back, for the use of the military
post now called Cantonment Leavenworth. I have not only seen
the limits of the land. but most of the lend itself.‘

With the country I am well pleased. t is good. With its
boundaries as shown to me, and as exhibited on a map, both
agreeing, I am perfectly satisfied knowing them to be precisely
as required by the treaty by which, we obtained a claim to this
land.

The measuring and marking of our lines, are not yet completed.
hr. McCoy has from my first joining his party insisted that I
should continue with him until the surveying of the land for

settlement and the outlet should be completed, but my nation

have instructed me to remain no longer than to see the limits

of the land assigned us for settlement. My nation wish to

remove to this country immediately, before the ccmmencement of
cold weather, and.they wish.me to return to aid them.in removing.
Moreover the removal of my own family requires my presence, and
my age and infirmities forbid me to remain longer on this surveying tour. For, is there any necessity for me to remain longer,
since I am perfectly satisfied that the terms of the treaty are

complied with and my nation have instructed me to return, they
being anxious to remove on to the land immediately,

Cantonment Leavenworth his
September 28th 1831 John x quick
' f mark_
2nd Chief of-Delawares
Signed in presence of and Special.Agent.

I W U C
And thereafter, John Campbell, Sub-Indian Agent of the Shawnee

1Agency (Def. Ex. M6-D), also certified as follows:
Shawnee Agency November lst l83O

I hereby certify that I have examined, alone, Capt John Quick,
the agent chosen by the Dellawares to attend the surveying and
marking of the Dellawares lands north of Kansis river on his
return to his people from said service, and find that Mr. hccoy
wished said Qnick to continue with him untill_the marking of
their lands was completed,_and that said Quick returned to his
tribe sooner than had been desired in compliance with the
instructions of his nation.

I have further ascertained that the said Qnick is perfectly
satisfied with the surveying and marking of their land, and their
outlet and deeming it unnecessary for him.to remain longer with
the surveying party he left it.

I further say that since said.John Quiche return to his
nation, their first Chief William Anderson, with many others,

have moved on to their lands, said Anderson declares himself
well pleased with their new country, and entirely satisfied
with the report of their agent John quick, relative to the

surveying and marking of their lands and the outlet.
20. On February ll, 1831, President Jackson approved the survey

as follows:

-96I

..g..__

3 628

Whereas in pursuance of a resolution of the senate_of
the United States, of the 29th May, 1830, conditionally
ratifying the Supplementary Article concluded at Council
Camp on James‘ Fork of White River in the State of Missouri,
the gkth day of September 1829, to a treaty between the
United States and the Delaware Indians made the third day

of October 1818 (a copy of which is annexed), Isaac McCoy

was duly appointed surveyor, to run and mark the lines
referred to in said resolution; and whereas the said McCoy

having performed the duty required of him by said resolution,
and made report thereof to the Department.of War, accompanied
by satisfactory evidence that these proceedings have been
concurred.in and approved by_the agent of the Delaware Nation.

Bow therefore I. Andrew Jackson, President of the United
states, do also, in pursuance of the further requirements of
said resolution, approve of the proceedings of said surveyor,
and order that one copy hereof be filed with the original
treaty and resolution of the Senate hereinbefore referred to,
in the Department of.State, and that one copy be delivered,
for the use of the Delaware Nation.‘

The treaty of September 2h, 1828 was proclaimed on March ah, 1831.

21. In a letter to the Secretary of War, dated January 29, 1829,‘

S

Isaac McCoy summarized the meaning and purpose of an outlet as follows:

By outlet, is understood a slip of land extending from
that more particularly stipulated in the treaty as being
designed for settlement, west, into the uninhabitable regions
of the desert and the mountains. * * * The object of these

outlets is that each.[3rib§7 may have an access to hunting
lands in the West.

In the same letter McCoy advised the Secretary that the western
boundary of what he considered "habitable land“ was marked by a straight
line running due north and south about 200 miles west of the State of
Missouri.

28. The Delasares began occupying the "residence lands" (that is,
the lands lying east of the "outlet") in 1829 and 1830, but at no time

during over 24-years-of use of the “outlet” did the Delarares establish

any permanent settlements or villages on the “outlet.”

3 62"*

_ The fact that there was;”no game on the land” designed for the
residence of the Delaware Indians and*that they were going “a great
distance to hnnt" establishes the necessity and the purpose of the
assignment of an “outlet” to the Delawares. (Def. Ex. 5).

23. Upon the agproval of the official-survey of Isaac.McCoy
by the Delaware Indians and the Eregident of the United States in
accordance tith the Senate Resolution and'dpon the proclamation of
the 1829 treaty, Isaac McCoy believed that his l50lmilesterminus
established.the western limit of the outlet. The two maps in evidence
drawn by McCoy (Def. Ex. 36A and h6(a)l) show the end of the survey
at 150 miles but have no western boundary to the outlet. However,
there is some indication that McCoy gives the outlet a definite size
and acreage, although the figures vary. In the map, Def. Ex. h6(a)l,
said to be dated 1837 or 1839, there appears under EDelaware Lands"
the acreage_"Acres l,759,36l.77". In_the_18j7 Annual'Eegister of
Indian affairs (27-A. Ex. 21) McCoy describes "the land of the
Delawares“ as follavs:

The land of the Delawares lies north of the Shasnees,

and in the forks of the Kansan and Missouri rivers, eztendr

ing up the former to the Kansan lands; thence north 2#:miles

to the N. E. corner of the Kansan Survey. It extends'up the

Missouri river to Cantonment Leavenworth, a distance of about

23 miles on a direct course; thence with a line westward to

a.point 10 miles north of the N. E. corner of the Kansas

lands, and than in a slip only lO miles side, it extends west

along the northern boundary of the Kanzans, to the distance

of 206 miles from the state of Missouri.

Commissioner Manypenny, in a May 20, 185R letter to the Secretary of

Interior (Pet. Ex. 129), states that the Delaware “residence” contains

according to the estimate of Isaac McCoy 92h,l6O acres of_land and the

“Out Let“ therefrom about 1,318,000 acres.

Most mapmakers of the period show the outlet as extending l5O miles
west or approximately that distance (See Pet. Ezs.l20', 130, 1314, 135;
Def; Eh:.5OB, SOD. SUE. 50G).

Secretary of War, Lewis Sass, in a.February 16. 1832 report to
the President of the United States (Pet. E3. 110, p. 768) estimates that
there has been granted "in round.numbers” to the Delawares_2,000,000 acres.

Pawnee Indian Agent. John Dongherty, by letter of March 30. 1832
to_S1@erintendent of Indian Affairs; William Clark, (Pet. Ex. 116), wrote
that the outlet extends "perhaps 150 miles in length by 10 in width."

21+. By the Act of March 3, 1853. 10 Stat. 226, 238, the President

was authorized to negotiate with the western tribes for extinguishment
of Indian title to their lands and Commissioner Menypenny conducted the
negotiations on the part of the Government. Preparatory to such negotiations the Delaware Tribe or Nation of Indians, through its Council,
appointed several of its members to represent the Nation at such negotiations and.gave them full power to make a.treaty with defendant. (Def.

Ex. 57. dated April 3, 1851+).
25. On May 6, 185%, 10 Stat. 1038, the authorized representatives
of the Delaware concluded a treaty with the defendant containing the

following'provisions:

Article 1. The Delaware Tribe of Indians hereby_cede,
relinquish and quitclaim to the United States, all their
right, title and interest in and to their country lying
west of the State of Missouri, and situate in the fork of
the Eissouri and Kansas Rivers, which is described in the
article supplementary to the Treaty of October 3, l8l8,
concluded in part on the 2Hth September 1829. at Council
Camp on James’ Fork of the White River in the State of
Missouri; and finally concluded at Council Camp in the fork
of the Kansas and.Missouri Rivers on the 19th October 1829;
and also their right, title and interest in and to the

"outlet" mentioned and described in said supplementary article;
excepting that portion of said country sold to the Wyandotte
tribe of Indians by instruments sanctioned by Act of Congress
approved July 25,_l8h8, and also excepting that part of said
country lying east‘ and south of a line beginning at a point

on the line'between the land of the Delawares and the halfbreed.Kansas forty miles in a direct line west of the boundary
between the Delawares and Wyandottes, thence north 10 miles,
thence in an easterly course to the point on the south.bank

of the Big Iron Creek which shall also be on the bank of the
Missouri River where the usual high water line of said creek
intersects the high water line of said river. '

Article 3, £he'United States-agree to pay to the Delaware
Tribe of Indians the sum of $10,000.00; and in consideration
thereof the Delaware Tribe of Indians hereby-cede, release
and quitclaim to the United States the said tract of country
hereinbefore described as the ‘outlet‘. _* * * *_*

26. Inia letter dated May 20, 185% (Pet. 3:. 129), transmitting
the may 6, 18534 treaty to the Secretary of Interior, together with
“a.map exhibiting the country cededi_(Pet. BX. 130), Commissioner
Manypenny estimated that the outlet contained “about one million of
acres”.

The treaty was ratified July ll, 1853 and proclaimed.July 17, l85Up

Petitioners‘ Exhibit 132, which petitioner in Docket 21:1 calls an
“official tabulation" included in the report of the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs for 1856. lists under the heading “No. of acres to which
Indian title has been extinguished or re-acq‘d“ l,538,000 acres from the
Delawaresby treaty of May 6, 185%. Under "3e:n2.°‘rks", this is shown to
consist of 538,000 acres of residence lands (275,000 acres having been
reserved) and 1,000,000 acres of outlet.

27. By the Act of July 1, l902, Congress conferred "jurisdiction

upon the Court of Claims to examine, consider and adjudicate with the

right of appeal to the Supreme Court of the'United States by any party

L11

in interest feeling aggrieved at the decision of the Court of Claims,
any claim which the Cherokee Tribe, or any band thereof, arising_under
Treaty stipulations may have against the United States, upon which suit
shall be instituted. within two yearsafter the approval of this Act;
and also to examine, consider and adjudicate any claim which the United
States may have against said tribe or any band thereof ."

Under the provisions of this Act the Delaware Tribe fi1‘ed‘twelve
petitionsin the Court of Claims, namely, Nos. 2310M, 23162, 27-1067,
2u6lL5, 211926, 214927, 214928, 21929, 211.930, 2l'.93i, 211.932, and 21933.

28. Petition No. 214928 contained the following allegation in

‘paragraph 10 :

"' "' “' "‘ " That the outlet referred to in said Treaty ‘of
September 21!», 1829, was found to contain about 1,000,000
acres, but that the said Delawares were notthe owners
thereof and nerely had an easement or right of way therein,
and that subsequently the rights of said Delawares in said
outlet were purchased by the defendant under a certain
Treaty of May 6, 18534 (10 Stat. 10148), for the sun: of
$10,000.00 only and that at the time of the negotiation of
said Treaty of September 23+, 1829, the value of the rights
in said outlet granted to said Delawares did not exceed the
sun: of $5,000.00.

At the end of the above petition was a verification by Richard 0.

Adams, who was a Delaware Indian and an attorney in fact of the Delaware
Indians, plaintiffs in said action, who swore upon oath: “that the foregoing petition and all matter therein stated are true to the best of his
knowledge, information and belief." (Def. Ex. 62)
29. When the l829 treaty and the official survey in connection
therewith were approved by the President of the United States and when

the 1853-? treaty was negotiated and became effective, it was the understanding of the Delaware Indians halting those treaties and of the

K»!

3' 633 

officials and.representatives of thefhnited States that the width of

the outlet was 10 miles and the length 150 miles.
30. The outlet, when acquired and when ceded by the Delaware

‘Nation, was 10 miles in width and 150 miles in length, consisting of

960,000 acres.

Edgar ~13. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis 3. 0'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. z}1."Ho1t 
‘Associate Commissioner

 

