o 595 3

BEFORE THE IRDIAN CLADIS C -'f.?-EISSION

THE NOOKSACK TRIBE or I2:oIANs
ON REIdTIoN or JOSEPH LOUIS,
CHAIRMAN or THE; on-I.~Ts.dI. COUNCIL,

Claimant,

V. Docket No. 146

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA,

\.l\-/‘u/\-/\u/N-aV\u—/\u./Nu./\uJ

Defendant.
Decided: July 17, 1958

Appearances:
Frederick In’. Post, with whom
was Kenneth J. Selander,
Attorneys for Claimant.
Ralph A. Barney and Donald R.
Marshall, with whom was Mr.
Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant.
OPINION 93 E COMMISSION

Holt, Associate Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This case is not: before the Commission for determination of the
acreage and the value thereof in 1859 of the tract of land described in
Finding of Fact No. 1b. In our original decision filed May 9, 1955,

(3 Inch 01. Comm. M9) we held that the claimant Nooksack Tribe held

Original Indian title through exclusive occupancy and use in l8S9, and
lone: prior thereto, to the tract of land described in Finding 1.1;; that
Said land was taken by defendant on March 8, 1859, without payment of

com ' - ~ - - .
pensatlona am, that claimant was entitled to recover compensation

measured by the value of its interest in the land at the time of taking.
The Commission ordered that the case proceed for the purpose of determining the acreage of said tract of land and the value thereof on March 8,
1859, less such part thereof as may have been acquired by Nooksack Indians
subsequent to 1859, if any.

Further hearings were held before the Commission on these issues

on May 9, 1956, and September 23, 195?. However, no further evidence

was offered with respect to any land within the described tract having
been acquired by Nooksack Indians, so the entire acreage of the tract
is now to be valued as of 1859 for the purpose of determining the amount
of compensation claimant tribe is entitled to recover. Determinations

with respect to offsets will be made following further proceedings on

that issue.

The parties are now in agreement that the Nooksack tract contained

80 ,500 acres of lard.
Claimant contends that since there was "no practical market" for

the lands in 1859, the amount it is entitled to recover should be based

upon the subsistence value of the lands to claimant in 1859, fixed by

claimant at $1,012,500.00. Claimant also contends this amount should be

increased 2.7 times to $2,733, 750.00 because of the decrease in the value

of the dollar between 1859 and the present.

Defendant contends that Nooksack land had a fair market value in

1859 Of $5,000.00, or approximately six cents per acre.

The evidence, as outlined in our findings of fact, discloses that

the Nooksack tract is located in the northwestern corner of the State of

6 597

‘Washington, a few miles south of the Canadian border and approximately

9 miles inland from the waters of Puget Sound. The tract is approximately hS% rough, mountainous land comprising the foothills of the
Cascade Mountains and the Sumas Mountains. The tract is watered by the

Nooksaok River, whose bed and gravel bars account for approximately 8.h%

of the area. The remainder of the tract is level to sloping land. The

climate is moderate and there is an abundance of'rainfall.

In l859 the tract lay within the County of'Whatcom, in the Territory of‘Washington. There was virtually no white population in the
area, the 1860 census showing a population of 352 for the entire County
of Whatcom, which at that time included the area now divided into

'Whatcom, Skagit and San Juan counties. There were no railroads in the

area and the few overland roads in.the Washington Territory lay to the

south of the Nooksack tract. In 1859 virtually all transportation was

',pon water.

The Nooksack tract was located within a band of heavy timber which
covered virtually the entire area west of the Cascade Mountains. The
valuable Douglas fir formed about 7/Bths of the forests’ growth, while
the remaining trees included hemlock and cedar. ‘While the Nooksack
tract contained some fertile river bottom.land, much of it was subject
to flooding and the cost of clearing the heavy timber:made the land
practically valueless for any agricultural purposes other than to proVide subsistence to individual settlers. There were no minerals within

the tract.

Since there is no dispute as to the acreage involved, the question

now before us is the determination of the value of the Nooksack tract

6 59

L5..."on March 8, 1859. The test for valuation of land is the fair "market

value" of the land. As the Supreme Court stated in New York v. Sage,

239 U. S. 57, 60 L. Ed. 1143, ". . . what the owner is entitled to is the
value of the property taken, and that means what it fairly may be believed.
that at: purchaser in fair market conditions would have given for it... .. ."
Both parties in this proceeding agree that there was no "actual

market" for the Nooksack area 111 1859. The evidenceindicates that

there were no sales of large tracts of land in the general area involved.at a date on or prior to the valuation date herein involved. In
the absence of evidence of actual market value, in the sense of willing
B1:,y.ers and willing sellers, resort must be had to other data which would
have been considered by a hypothetical buyer and seller in dealing with
the land in question in 1859. The principles and factors which are to

be taken into consideration in such cases were summarized by the Court

of Claims in 0toe and Hissouria Tribe of Indians v. The United States

 

01' America, 131 C. C15. 593. The Court stated at page 633 that the

 

factors to be considered in the absence of evidence of "market value"
included "the natural resources of the land ceded, including its climate,
Vegetation, including timber, game and wildlife, mineral resources and
whether they are of economic value at the time of cession or merely of
potential value, water power, its then or potential use, markets and transu»

P0I'ta'0i0I1 -- considering the ready markets at that time and the potential

market."

with this brief statement of the methods of evaluating land, let us
examine the 3PPraisals of the expert witnesses of the parties. The claim-‘

antis expert.» Mr. James A. Crutchfield, valued the tract by two methods,

arriving at two figures.

His first method involved a computation of the value of the timber
on the Nooksack land based on an assumed 1859 average stand of 114,000
ft. EM per acre valued at an assumed valuation figure of $1.00 per
1,000 BM in 1900 discounted to 1859 at 8%. To this figure was added an
additional 25 cents per acre representing his opinion that 10% of the
land would have been usable for agriculture and have been valued at
$2.50 per acre net of the value of the timber.

The Commission cannot give much weight to this appraisal. The

record does not contain sufficient evidence upon which to base any

specific estimate of the average stand of timber in the Nooksack tract

On March 8, 1859. Accordingly, I-‘Er. Crutchfield's estimate of 114,000

ft. per acre is pure conjecture. Further, his figure of $1.00 per C .
thousand feet BM for an average stumpage value of timber in Washington

in 1900 is disputed by many of the authorities and cannot, in any event,

have any mathematically computable relationship to a stumpage value for

the Nooksack tract timber in 1859-. The Commission does not believe the

evidence supports Mr. Crutchfie1d's opinion that 10% of the Nooksack
land would have had a value of $2.50 per acre in addition to the value
of the timber.

The opinion of Mr. Crutchfield cannot be given much weight by the
Commission for the further reason that his method of evaluation is not
in accordance with legally approved standards but rather involves methods

based on conjecture and speculation, which methods have been specifically

Tejeeted by the courts and this Commission. Mr. Crutchfield's method was

rejected in U. S. v. 13.110 Acres of Land, etc., 56 F. Supp. 535, in

6600

which the Court stated that, "The separate valuation of timber or rock
attached to land, or valuations arrived at by a process of multiplying
the number of cubic feet or-yards." by a given price per unit, are not

approved bases for evaluation.“ Ivir. Crutchfield-‘s valuation also involved the adding of computed timber values to a computed agricultural

value. This method of proving separately the values of various uses to
which the land is adapted and then adding these separate items of value

to find the value of the land was rejected in Morton Butler Timber Co.,

et ale, V0 U0 St,  F0 2d’ 

   

The second method of evaluation used by Mr. Crutchfield, which is
the method urged by counsel for claimant, involves a computation of the
income which the Nooksack Indians could have earned had they been employed by the white settlers rather than obtaining their own subsistence
from the land which they occupied... Mr..Crutchfield has assumed that the
Nooksack Indians could have each earned an average of $150 a year or a
total tribal income of $67,500. Capitalizing this figure at 6% he has
computed a value of $1,125,000, which he says, must have represented the
value of the tract to the Nooksack Indians since they preferred to make
their own subsistence from the land rather than work for the white man.
From this figure he has deducted lO;'«’$, representing the value of the fishing rights retained by the Indians. Under this method of computation
Mr. Crutchfield found that the value of the tract in 1859 was $1,012,500,
01' about $12.58 per acre.

While this method appears to be based upon assumptions which the

Commission believes are completely unjustified, it is not necessary to

burden this Opinion with them since the method is entirely theoretical

6 601..

and is not based upon any judicially accepted method of evaluating land.
The Commission cannot give weight to an opinion on valuation which is
based on such a method.

I-Ir. Crutchfield has also multiplied both of his appraisal figures
by a 2,? factor, which, he claims, represents the amount by which the
dollar has depreciated since 1859 on the basis of the index of wholesale
prices of the Bureau of Labor Statistics. The law is well settled that,
in the absence of provisions for the payment of interest in the jurisdictional act, unless the taking of land was under Congressional authity in the exercise of the United States sovereign power of eminent domain, the payment of just compensation does not require an increment
measured by interest or arm other standard to be added to the value at

the time of taking. The Assiniboine Indian Tribe v. The United States,

 

1 I.C.C. S30 and cases therein cited. The Indian Claims Commission Act
'60 Stat. 10149) contains no provision for the payment of interest. The
taking in this case was not in the exercise of the power of eminent domain. The claimant is entitled to recover the fair market value of the
lands as of March 8, 1839, but is not entitled to any increment to be
added to the fair market value, whether such increment be computed as
interest, or by multiplying the fair market value by a dollar depreciation
£30)‘-701‘: 03-” by any other means.

The defendant's appraiser, Mr. Vern A. Englehorn, has submitted a
detailed appraisal report containing much material which has been helpful
to the Commission in arriving at an evaluation of the Nooksack area.

Mrs Englehorn has attempted to appraise the land on the basis of its fair

market Value in 1859 assuming a hypothetical seller and hypothetical buyer

and taking into consideration the area’-‘s size, topography, accessibility,

6 602

surrounding sales, population, and factors which would be involved in

its utilization for resale as timber land. However, the Commission
cannot agree with Mr. Englehorn‘s conclusion that the Nooksack land
had only a nominal value not exceeding $5,000, or a little over 6 cents
an acre, as of March 8, 1859.

Both parties are in agreement that the highest and best use for
the Nooksack tract would have been as timber land. A prospective purchaser of the tract would have considered many factors affecting the
price which he would be willing to pay for the timber land. Among the
factors to have been considered would have been the quality of the
timber, its density, its accessibility to both saw mills and markets
for lumber, and the topography of the area.

The record clearly indicates that the Nooksack tract lay within
the heavily forested section between the Cascade Mountains and Puget
Sound. It appears that approximately 90% of the trees in the area
were the valuable Douglas fir and that the ranaining 10% included hemlock and cedar trees which were also valuable for lumbering operations.
In 1859 the Douglas fir was being exported all over the world for use
as spars on sailing ships. Much lumber was also exported to supply the
expanding area around San Francisco.

There is no evidence upon which to base any accurate estimate of
the average density of the forests within the Nooksack tract in terms
of thousands of board feet per acre. A survey conducted by Mr. Henry
Gannett in 1899 revealed an average stand of 3,000 ft. BM per acre
However, Mr. Gannett reported

average for the entire County of whatcom.

that Whatcom County was originally very heavily timbered and that its

6603

forests were probably as dense as those of any other county in the
state, but that fire had destroyed large areas. ‘x-Ehile there is evidence that fires had destroyed some forest land in the Puget Sound area
Prior '00 1359, it appears that the most damaging fires occurred subsequent to the evaluation date. The Commission believes that on the
evaluation date the forests within the Nooksack tract were comparable
in their stand to the average of the surrounding Puget Sound area.
The Nooksack tract was not immediately accessible to the many

saw mills which had been constructed in the Puget Sound area prior to
March 8, 1859. Most of the mills were located in the southern portion
of the Sound in the counties of Kitsap, Jefferson, Pierce and Thurston.
The closest mill to the Nooksack tract was at Bellingham Bay, 15 miles
from the Nooksack area, but that mill had a very limited output, it being reported that the water power failed during the summer and its
market was limited to supplying the small settlement at Whatcom, .

Bellingham Bay. In 1859, timber on the Nooksack tract would have been

considered inaccessible for extensive lumbering operations with the
crude means then being employed by timbermen. . The evidence discloses
that the only timber which was cut commercially was that which stood
within a mile to two miles inland from salt water or a driveable stream.
The Nooksack tract was located 9 miles, at the closest point, from salt
water, and the Nooksack River, which flowed through the tract, was not
driveable at that time due to extensive log jams.

The ships from the San Francisco area and other ports around the
world called at the ports in the southern portion of the Sound where

there was a concentration of saw mills producing the products for

6 60h*' 5

export. There was no evidence that any products from the mill at Bellingham Bay were exported. Accordingly, it appears that the Nooksack area
was quite remote from the ready market for its timber.

The topography of the area would have added considerably to the
expense of cutting the timber since approximately 145% Of the terrain

is classified as rough and mountainous. However, a prospective purchaser would have been aware of the possibility of clearing the log

jams in the Nooksack River and being able to utilize it for transportation to a saw mill located within or near the area.

After considering all the above factors, a prospective purchaser
would have been aware that there was, in 1859, no immediate value for
the timber. A prospective buyer would, however, have recognized its
potential value, which would have to await the arrival of the railroad
and the clearing of the log jams in the Nooksack River to furnish
adequate means of transportation as well as the exhaustion of the millions of acres of more accessible and readily marketable timber which
lay to the south along the shores of Puget Sound. A prospective purchaser would also have considered the existing dangerof damage to the
timber from fires which were causing thousands of dollars in damage to
the Washington forests every year. However, the Commis sion believes that
a timberman would, after weighing all of the factors referred to above,
have been willing to buy and a seller willing to sell the Nooksack tract
On March 83 1859, for a consideration amounting to 65 cents an acre.

While there is no evidence of sales of comparable timber tracts
at 01‘ Prior to the evaluation date in this case, there were sales in

1861: 1852; and 1863 of tracts of timber larxi to Pope and Talbot at a

4-not-u--an.-o «6 505  "
price of $1.50 per acre. However, these sales involved the choicest
timber land not more than a mile to a mile and a half from the shores
of Puget Sound and were located within the immediate vicinity of the
mill at Port Gamble. The later sales of timber land at prices ranging
from $3.15 to $6.00 an acre occurred l5 to 1.10 years subsequent to the
evaluation date in this case and are, therefore, too remote in time to
be given much weight in consideration of the fair market value of the
Nooksack tract in 1859. Likewise, evidence of sales of small tracts
of improved realty in the area has little relationship to an evaluation
of some 80,000 acres of raw land involved in this case.

In Alcea Band of Tillamooks, et al., v. The United States, 115' C.
Cls. 1463, the Court of Claims found that four tracts of land, ranging
in size from h33,lS0 acres to l,lS2,hl0 acres, located in northwestern

Oregon had a value, as of November 9, 1855, of $1.20 per acre. The land

. '.x‘.? fit! I.

in the Tillamook case was also located in the rich Douglas fir region
of the Pacific Northwest. However, as the expert appraiser for the claimant recognized, this land was located in a more highly developed area.

Mr. Crutchfield testified on direct examination as follows:

Q. And right at that point you might distinguish the problem

in the Nooksack area from that which you know to exist in the
Tillamook area?

A. Yes. I read the Court‘s report of that case, and in the
Tillamook area of course the irrigation area had been very
extensively settled before the Puget Sound area had, and the
record indicated there that there was quite a considerable
white settlement, that lumber was actually being exported from
those lands, tramportation facilities had been well developed
and the lands were, at least in part, incorporated within a
regular market community. In some of the lands inwestern
washllfgton I think that same thing might be argued, but in the
case 3-31 Point it probably could not.

Q. You.mean in the Nooksack case?

A. ,In the Nooksack case, yes. white settlement there was

extremely limited at the time, there were a couple of squatters

and n0 more. (Trans. pp. ll, 12, Hearing at Billings, Montana,

Ray 9, l0, 1955).

The record fails to support a finding that in 1859 the Nooksack land
would have been valuable for any agricultural purposes other than the
utilization of some of the river'bottom land by settlers for subsistence
purposes. Thus any value of‘the land for agriculture would have been
nominal. The land did not possess any'known minerals.

After considering all the evidence in the record, it is the conclusion of the Commission that the 80,590 acres of Nooksack land had an
average fair*market value of sixty-five cents per acre on March 8, 1859,
or $52,383.50.

As the lands were taken by defendant without the payment to the

aksack Tribe of any compensation therefor, the claimant is entitled
Under Ciause h o£'Section 2 of'the Indian Claims Commission Act to an

award in the sun of $52,383.50, less such offsets as may be allowable

under the Indian Claims Commission.Act.

hm» M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

‘we concur:

Edgar E. ‘.*3'it‘t.
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. 0'1-Iarr
—_ 
Associate Commissioner

