8 Ind. C1. Con. 78 78

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COHEISSION

THE WINNEBAGO TRIBE AND NATION OF
INDIANS, THE NINNBBAOO TNIBB OF
NEBRASKA AND FRANK BEAVER, MOSES
NHITBBBAB, JOHN IITTLB WOLF, JAI-es
SNONB, AND JOSHUA SANFORD, EX REL
NINNBBAOO TILLBE AND NATION AND THE
NINNBBAOO INDIANS OF WISCONSIN,
NINNBSOTA, NBBBASNA, AND TAB NINNBBAOO TRIBB OF NBBBASNA,

Plaintiffs,
vs. Docket Hos. 2b3, Qhh, 2&5

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, _

\.J\_/\u—P\./\~.J\.,/\./‘Nu/K./\»u’\~.—"m.-’\_/N./\_/‘u./\—J

Defendant.
Decided: August 10, 1959

FINDINGS 93 FACT

Three separate petitions were filed by the Same plaintiffs on be~
half of the Winnebago Tribe or Nation of Indians and were assigned
Docket Nos. 2&3, Zhh and 2hS. IBy agreement of parties the three cases

were ordered consolidated for the purpose of trial. Since the proposed

I findings of fact as to each of said cases are substantially the same,

with the exception of the description of lands involvedineach case,
the Commission's findings of fact hereinafter set forth A111 applp“to

all three cases.

It

The Commission, therefore, makes the following findings of fact:s

1. .At the times of the various treaties involved in this proceeding, the Winnebago Tribe or Nation was an Indian tribe or Nation
residing within the territorial limits of the United States and was re°°8nized by the United States as a political entity.

 

5 Ind. 01. Com. ?{ p 79

2. The plaintiff'Einnebago Tribe of Eebraska is a recognised’
tribal organisation of Einnebago Indians incorporated under the provisions of the Hheeler—Honard act of June l3, 193k (h8 Stat. 98b), and
as represented by individual plaintiffs, Frank Beaver, Moses Hhitobear,
and John Little Wolf, said tribal rganization, along with the individual
plaintiffs, James Smoke and Joshua Sanford, who are Hinnebago Indians
residing in Wisconsin, bring these actions as representative of and in
behalf of the Winnebago Tribe and Nation of Indians and all its members, and are entitled under Section lO of the Indian Claims Commission
Act (60 Stat. 10b?) to maintain said actions in such capacity.

3. The Winnebago, or “Puants", are identified as a tribe of the
Siouan linguistic family and have been knesn to the white man from as
early as 163b, when Jean Nieollet discovered them in Wisconsin near the
Green Bay-Lake'Winnebago area. Other early contacts with the Winnebagoes
were made principally by French explorers, fur traders, and priests,
i.e., (1658) Radisson and Des Grosilliers; fur traders; visited the
Green Bay region and pictured the'Hinnebago as living principally uponi
wild rice; (1665) Eicholas Parrot, a fur trader and French official,
visited the Green Bay area and met the Winnebago; (1670) Father Claude
A110u€Z lasted a mission at Green Bay and spent his5time preaching to
the Winnebago as well as to the Pottasatorie, Menominee, Sauk and Foxes,
who were also living in and around the Green Bay area; (1681), a map
3°°0mP3UYing Earquett's journal pictures a Einnebago village near Lake
winn9bag03 (1721) Charlevoir visited Green Bay erd reported the presence

7' ~-1~ - 19- .. .
Of hinnebago; (1727) rather Gnignas talked to the Jinnobago at a village

8 Ind. 01. Com. 78 80

on Lake'Winnebago; (1761) Jeffreys refers to the Winnebagos and Sac

being toward the head of Green Bay; (1778) Carver cites a 1arge'winnebago
village on a small island near the east end of lake Winnebago; (1806)
Pike reports that the Winnebago had seven villages and resided on the
‘Wisconsin, Rock and Fox Rivers, and at Green Bay. (Pet. Exs. 119, 123,
126; Def. Exs. 6, b0, hh, S1, Sh, S7, 2113 Hodge - Handbook of American
Indians).

b. Around 1670, the Winnebago became embroiled in inter-tribal
warfare to such an extent that they were nearly annihilated by the
Illinois Indians. The almost total destruction of‘Winnebago reduced
their numbers to a pitiful handful and lessened their prominence as an

important and powerful tribe. Father Dablon writing of his Green Bay 1

* Mission circa 1673, stated that the "Puans . . . have been reduced to

' nothing from their flourishing and populous state in the past, having

been exterminated by the Illinois, their enemies." (Def. Ex. 211)
Sometime during the French-Fox'War around 1730 the Winnebago
divided, one group, which was definitely anti-Fox with strong French
affiliation, remained near Green Bay, while the other faction moved
westward touard the Lake Pepin area near the Mississippi Riuer. A few
years later this latter group of‘winnebagoes abandoned this site and’)
moved on down to the Rock River. Spanish reports of 1777 confirmed the
presence of part of the‘Winnebago on the Rock River, a few miles from

the Mississippi River. (Def. Exs. S9, 211; Pet. Exs. 123, 126)

5. Upon British succession to the French interests in Canada around

1760, the Winnebago developed a close allegiance with Great Britain.

 

8 Ind. 01. Com. 78

81

This relationship grew stronger as the Winnebago sided with the English

“throughout the Revo1utionary'Har and also during the War of 1812. In

both struggles Winnebago warriors were actively recruited by the British,

who used them in reckless and savage assaults against the American forces.

6. Not until 1815 did the United States attempt to conclude a

peace treaty with the Winnebago.

At first, the tribe refused to treat,

abut finally on June 3, 1816 at St. Louis a treaty of peace and friendship was concluded with that portion of the Winnebago tribe residing
on the'Wisconsin River (7 Stat. lhh). Thereafter, beginning with the
important treaty of August 19, 1825 at Prairie du Chien (7 Stat..272)
the United States concluded a series of treaties with the'winnebago
Tribe or Nation. .These were:‘ the Treaty of August ll, 1827 at Butte
des Morts (7 Stat. 303); the Treatj of August 25, 1828 at Green Bay‘

(7 Stat. 315) establishing provisional boundaries between the lands.‘

1

of the United States and those of the Indians; the Treaty of August 1,

1829 at‘Prairie du Chienn(7 stat. 60h) ceding that area east of that

_Mississippi River known as Royce Cession lh9; the Treaty of September 15,

1832 at Fort Armstrong (7 Stat. 370), ceding those lands east of the

Mississippi Riuer, known as Royce Cession 17h; the Treaty of November 1,

1837 at‘Washington (7 Stat. Shh)'ceding those lands caat of the

Mississippi River known as Royce Cession 2hS; the Treaty of October 13,

l8b6 at Washington (9 Stat. 878) ceding all their claimed lands and

93Decia1ly those lands west of the Mississippi River known as the "neutral

Eround" and designated as Royce Cession 267; the Treaty of February 27,

1855 at Washington (10 Stat. 1172), ceding those lands granted pursuant

8 Ind. c1. Con. 78 82

to the Treaty of October 13, 18b6, known as Royce Ceeeien 3513 the Treaty
yof.April 15, 1359 at Hashington (12 Stat. llOl) ceding onermif of their
reservation granted under the Treaty of February 27, 1855, Said area
being known as Royce Cession hl6; and, the Treaty of March 8, 1865 at
Washington (lh Stat. 6T1) ceding their reservation in South Dakota which
was created ty'Executive Order as authorized under the Act of Congress

of February 21, 1863, said area being known as Royce Cession h68.

7. Under Article 2 of the Treaty of March 8, 1865, the Winnebago
Tribe was given a reservation in northeast Nebraska on lands formerly
held by the Omahas. There they have remained holding the lands allotted
to them in severalty. Those Winnebago on the Omaha reservation represented

the greater part of the Winnebago nation, yet there were a great many

‘Winnebagoes still living in.Wisconsin. The final effort by the United

States to remove the Wisconsin Winnebago took place in 1873. At that

time it was estimated that approximately one thousand or more of these
Indians remained in Wisconsin. This removal attempt failed miserablywhile bringing considerable hardship and suffering to these Indians.
Since that date no further means have been taken to displace the Wisconsin
'Winnebagoes. In 1907 it was estimated that there were 1,180 Winnebago
living in Wisconsin, while 2,613 were at the Nebraska reservation. (Fet.d
Ex. 123)

8. Other population figures given for the Winnebago throughout
the years are as follows: Jean Nicollet in l63h reported he met with
between hOOO and §0OO“Winnebagoes; Mooney estimates the 1650 population

at 3,800; Pike estimated the'Winnebago population at 1,750 in 1806; in

__..--v«--.3

--.u-r-°

. 78

1820 Horse estimated 5,800; in 1829 John Kinzie, the Winnebago agent,
gave the population as b,h2h; in&l83? and l8h3 they were estimated at
1;, 500; in 1867 there were 1, 750 in Nebraska and 700 in Wisconsin; in

1876 there were l,h63 on the Nebraska reservation and 860 in Wisconsin;

8 in 1886 there were 1,222 in Nebraska and 930 in Wisconsin; in 1910

there were 1,035 in Nebraska and 1,270 in Wisconsin; in 193? there were

1,hS6 in Wisconsin and 1,212 in Nebraska. (Bulletin £5 - The Indian

Tribes of North.Rmerica (1952) - Hodge - Handbook of American Indians).
9. Throughout their recorded history from 163k to the present

there has always existed a Winnebago Tribe or Nation of significant

numbers, well known to the United States Government. The United States

has dealt with them as a tribal entity on many occasions finally locating
part of them as a tribe or nation on a Nebraska reservation. In like

manner the existence of a large group of‘winnebago Indians living in

‘Wisconsin has been well known to government officials. Therefore the

. evidence shows that the petitioner members of the Winnebago Tribe of

Nebraska, as well as the individual petitioners residing in Wisconsin

' are descendants of members of the'Hinnebago Tribe and Nation of Indians

as originally constituted, and with whom the United States has dealt
by treaty on numerous occasions as set out in the Commission's findings
3 through 7. (Pet. Ex. 36)

10. The petitioners herein exert a claim for additional compensation for three contiguous tracts of land lying east of the Missis~
5iPDi River in the present states of'wisconsin and Illinois. Each tract
The three tracts

was ceded to the United States under a separate treaty.

and related treaties of cession in chronological order are as follows:

8 Ind. C1. Com. 78 8h

(a}'That tract of land containing approximately 2,53S,hhO acres
and lying partially in southern Wisconsin and northern Illinois and
officially designated as Royce Cession lh9,.which area was ceded under
the provisions of the Treaty of.August l, 1829 (T Stat. 323);

(b) That tract of land containing approximately 2,183,000 acres
lying imtsdiately northeast and adjacent to Royce Cession 1&9 in.Wisconsin and.officially designated as Royce Cession 17h, which area was
ceded under the provisions of the Treaty of September 15, 1832 (7 Stat.
370);

(c) That tract of land containing approximately 3,?lh,0OO acres
northwest and adjacent to Royce Cession lb? and west and adjacent to
Royce Cession 17b in Wisconsin and officially designated as Royce
Cession 2hS,'which area was ceded to the United States under the provisions of the Treaty of November 1, 1837 (7 Stat. Shh).

11. As originally filed, the petitioners’ present claim consisted
of three separate claims for each area ceded under the respective treaty.
Each claim.therefere carried its own docket number. Ey order of the
Commission dated June 13, 1956, these three cases, Dockets 2h3, Zhh,
and 2&5 were consolidated for the purpose of trial, “upon the limited
issues of'fact and law relative to the plaintiff's right to recover _
against the government . . .“ (Order of Consolidation for Trial 6/13/S6). These issues are the capacity of the petitioners to maintain
this suit and their claim of title to the ceded area based upon either
a recognized or reservation title under the provisions of the 1825
Prairie du.Chien Treaty; or else a good Indian title perfected through

actual exclusive use and occupancy from time immemcrial.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 85

12. On August 19, 1825, at Prairie du Chien, a treaty was conJ

eluded with the Sioux, Chippewa, Sacs, Foxes, Menominee, Iowa,'winnebago, and a portion of the Ottawa, Chippewa, and Potawatomi Tribes of

Indians. The general purposes of the treaty as outlined in the preu

fatory paragraph therein is stated in the folleeing manner:

“In order, therefore, to promote peace among these
tribes, and to establish boundaries among them and other
tribes who live in their vicinity, and thereby to remove
all causes of future difficulty, the United States have
invited the Chippewa, Sac, and Fox, Menominie, Iouay,

Sioux, Winnebago, and a portion of the Ottawa, Chippewa

and Potawatomie Tribes of Indians living upon the Illinois
to assemble together, and in a spirit of mutual conciliation
to accomplish these objects * % *." (7 Stat. 272)

The Prairie du Chien treaty was therefore one of establishing
boundaries between the signatory tribes. No land cessions were called
55?» (Def. Ext 123 - Opinion of the Attorney General, Vol. 5 (1852)).

13. Under Article 5 of the 1825 Treaty, a boundary line was es;
tablished separating the Sioux and Chippewa Nations. Said line is
described therein as follows:,,

It is agreed between the Sioux and the Chippewas, that the
line dividing their respective countries shall commence at the
Chippewa River, half a day's march below the falls; and from
thence it shall run to Red Cedar River, immediately below the
falls; from.thence to the St. Croix River, which it strikes at
a place called the standing cedar, about a day's paddle.in a
canoe, above the Lake at the mouth of that river; thence passing between two lakes called by the Chippewas “Green Lakes“,
and by the Sioux “the lakes they bury the Eagles in," and
from thence to the standing cedar that “the Sioux Split";
thence to Run River, crossing it at the mouth of a small creek
called choaking creek, a long day’s march from the Mississippi;
thence to a point of woods that projects into the prairie, half
a day's march from the Mississippi; thence in a straight line
to the mouth of the first river which enters the Mississippi
on its west side above the mouth of Sac river; thence ascending
the said river (above the mouth of Sac river) to a small lake
at its source; thence in a direct line to a lake at the head

-I-..u-u-.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 - 86

r of Prairie river, which is supposed to enter the Crow Wing
river on its South side; thence to Otter-tail lake Portage;
thence to said Otter-tail lake, and down through the middle
thereof, to its outlet; thence in a direct line, so as to
strike Buffalo river, half way from its source to its mouth
and down the said river to Red River; thence descending Red
river to the month of Outard or Goose creek: The eastern
boundary of the Sioux commences opposite the mouth of Ioway
river, on the Mississippi, runs back two or three miles to
the bluffs, follows the bluffs, crossing Bad axe river, to
the mouth of Black river, and from.Black river to half a day's
march below the Falls of the Chippewa River.

The portion of.the Sioux boundary line which begins at the mouth
of the Black River and runs up said river to a point which is reckoned
as a half day's march below the Chippewa falls is also the common
boundary line to be set between the Sioux on the northwest and that
portion of the Winnebago territory immediately to the southeast (more
accurate1y'described as the northwest line of Royce 2hS). (Art. 5,

7 Stat. 272)
lh. Article 6 established the agreed boundary line between the

Chippewa Ration to the north and that portion of the Winnebago to the

south, represented more accurately as the extreme northern line of

Royce 2h5..Article 6 reads as follows:

It is agreed between the Chippewas and Winnebagoes, so
far as they are mutually interested therein, that the“ a
southern boundary line of the Chippewa country shall come‘
mence on the Chippewa river aforesaid, half a day’s“marchii
below.the falls on that river, and run thence to the source
of C1ear'water river, a branch of the Chippewa; thence south
to Black river; thence to a point where the woods project
into the meadows, and thence to the Plover Portage of the
Ouisconsin..

15. Under Article 7 of the 1825 treaty, the general boundary line
circumscribing the territory of the Winnebago was agreed upon by the

following tribes: ‘Winnebago, Sioux, Sacs and Foxes, Chippewas, and

 

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 87

the Ottawas, Chippewas and Potawatomies of the Illinois. Article 7

5'

reads as follows:

It is agreed between the Winnebagoes and the Sioux, Sacs
and Foxes, Chippewas and Ottawas, Chippewas and Potawatomies
of the Illinois, that the Winnebago country shall be bounded
as follows: south easterly by Rock River, from its source
near the Winnebago lake, to the Winnebago village, about
forty miles above its mouth; westerly by the east line of
the tract, lying upon the Mississippi, herein secured to the
Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawatomie Indians, of the Illinois;
and also by the high bluff, described in the Sioux boundary,
and running north to Black river; from this point the Winne’ bagoes claim up Black river, to a point due west from the
source of the left fork of the Ouisconsin; thence to the
source of the said fork, and down the same to the Ouisconsing
thence down the Ouisconsin to the portage, and across the
portage to Fox river; thence down Fox river to the Winnebago
lake, and to the grand Kan Kanlin, including in their claim
the whole of'Winnebago lake; but, for the causes stated in
the next article, this line from Black river must for the

present he left indeterminate. ismphasis supplied)

 ___j1j

The area so defined includes all of the subject lands, Royce 1&9,
17b and 2hS.

l6.' Because of the uncertainty of the boundaries which might encompass the Menominee claim, it was agreed-byaall thetribes,including
the'Winnebago, that the Menominee would not bebarred to assert their

claim subsequent to the conclusion of this treaty. Article 8 reads as

follows:

The representatives of the Menominies not being sufficiently acquainted with their proper boundaries, to settle
the same definitively, and some uncertainty existing in
consequence of the cession made by that tribe upon Fox
River and Green Bay, to the New York Indians, it is agreed
between the said Menominie tribe, and the Sioux, Chippewas,
Winnebagoes, Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawatomie Indians of the
Illinois, that the claim of the Menominies to any portion
of the land within the boundaries allotted to either of the
said tribes shall not be barred by any stipulation herein;
but the same shall remain as valid as if this treaty had not

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 78 88

been concluded. It is, however, understood that the general

claim of the Henominies is bounded on the north by the Chippewa country, on the east by Green Bay and lake Michigan

extending as far south as Millawaukee river, and on the West

they claim to Black River.

Thus, under Article 6, all the signatory tribes, and in particular
the Chippewa and Winnebago, are put on notice of a future overlapping
claim of the Menominee tribe which will extend westward at least to the"
Black River. The Black River boundary line encompassing a portion of
Royce 2h5 remains indeterminate as of 1825 (Art. 6, 7 Stat. 272). p

17. Finally, under Article 10 of the 1825 treaty, the United

States agreed to recognize the boundaries agreed upon between the partii cipating tribes. Insofar as pertinent, Article l0 reads in part:

"All the tribes aforesaid acknowledge the general controlling power of the United States, and disclaim all
dependence upon, and connection with, any other power.

And the United States agree to, and recognize the preceding
boundaries, subject to the limitations and restrictions
before provided as -H-.v (Art. 10, 7 Stat. 272)

18. Article ll of the 1825 treaty provided that whenever the
President felt the occasion so warranted, the United States would convene at some futdre date, the interested tribes, either separately or

together, in order to settle any of the disputed or indeterminate lines.

Article ll reads in part:

"The United States agree, whenever the President may
lthink it necessary and proper, to convene such of the
tribes, either separately or together, as are interested
in the lines left unsettled herein, and to recommend to .
them an amicable and final adjustment of their respective
claims, so that the work, now happily begun, may be consummated. %*% %" (Art. 11, 7 Stat. 272)

19. On August 11, l827, a treaty council was convened at Butte de

Morts on the Fox River in the then Michigan Territory. Besides the

8 Ind. 01. Com. 78 89

United States the other participants were the Chippewa, Menominee, and

Winnebago nations. The purpose of the treaty was to settle the_southern boundary line of the Chippewa country which was left undefined under

the provisions of the l82S Prairie du Chien Treaty. Article I of the

182? treaty provided as follows:

Whereas, the southern boundary of the Chippewa country,

from the Plover Portage of the Ouisconsin easterly, was

left undefined by the treaty concluded at Prairie du Chien,
August 19, l825, in consequence of the non-attendance of
some of the principal Menomonie chiefs; and, whereas it was
provided by said treaty, that, whenever the President of the

United States might think proper, such of the tribes, parties
to the said treaty, as might be interested in any particular

line, should be convened, in order to agree upon its establishment;

Therefore, in pursuance of the said provision, it is agreed
between the Chippewas, Menomonies and Winebagoes, that the
southern boundary of the Chippeway country shall run as follows,
namely: From the Plover Portage of the Ouisconsin, on a northeasterly course, to a point on wolf River, equidistant from

7% E the Ashawano and Post.lakes of said river, thence to the falls

cof the Pashaytig river of Green Bay; thence to the junction of
the Neesau Kootag or Burnt-wood river, with the Henomonie; "
thence to the big island of the Shoskinaubic or Smooth rock at
river; thence following the channel of the said river to Green '
Bay, which it strikes between the little and the great Bay de

Noquet. (7 Stat. 303)

While the southern boundary of the Chippewa country east of the
Plover portage was fixed, there still remained the indeterminate line

running west from Plover portage to the Blaek River, which line serves

 

Primarily as the north-south boundary line of the Winnebago-Chippewa
Nations. S

20. On February 8, 1831, at Washington, D. C., the United States
concluded a treaty of cession with the chiefs and_headmen of the.Menominee

Nation of Indians. As stated in the introductory paragraphs to the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 r 90

treaty proper, it was intended that the Menominees should define the

boundaries of their country with reasonable accuracy besides making a

cession of certain portions thereof. This they did in the following

manner 1

* % % On the east side of Green Bay, Fox river, and
‘Winnebago Lake; beginning at the south end of‘Winnebago;
lake; thence southeastwardly to the Milwauky or-Hanawauky
river; thence down said river to its mouth at lake Michigan;
thence north, along the shore of lake Michigan, to the mouth
of Green Bay; thence up Green Bay, Fox river, and Winnebago
lake, to the place of beginning. And on the west side of
Fox river as follows: beginning at the mouth of Fox river,
thence down the east shore of Green bay, and across its
mouth, so as to include all the islands of the "Grand
Traverse;" thence westerly, on the highlands between the
lake Superior and Green bay, to the upper forks of the
Menomonee river; thence to the Plover portage of the Wisconsin river; thence up the'wisconsin river, to the Soft

" Maple river; thence to the source of the Soft Maple river;
thence west to the Plume river, which falls into the Chippeway river; thence down said Plume river to its.mouth;
thence down the Chippeway river thirty miles; thence
easterly to the forks of the Manoy river; which falls into

the Wisconsin river; thence down the said Manoy river to

its mouth; thence down the Wisconsin river to the Wisconsin

portage; thence across the said portage to the Fox river;

thence down Fox river to its mouth at Green bay, or the ‘

place of beginning. % * *

21. The boundaries of the Ebnominee country as set out in the
Treaty of February 8, 183l,_carry well into the territory of the Chippewa
nations to the north. That portion of the said boundary line which.begins

at a point thirty miles down the Chippewa River "thence easterly to the

forks of the Manoy river, which falls into the'Wisconsin riyer; thence

.down the said Manoy to its mouth;“ from a point where it intersects

the Black River to its terminal point on the Wisconsin river, cuts
across a large section of the northern and northeastern part of Royce

'2hS, and thereby creating a "Menominee Overlap" of someELJO0,000 acres.

(7 Stat. 3h2)

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 91

i22. As noted in the Commission‘s Finding 10, Royce 2hS was the

J

ilast of Winnebago cessions east of the Mississippi, and was ceded six

years after the Menominee treaty of February 8, 1831. There is not

gmention in the 1837 Winnebago treaty of a Menominee overlap nor is there

any description given of the Winnebago lands ceded thereunder, the treaty
language calling only for a Winnebago cession of "all their land east S
of the Mississippi." S

23. On October 18, l8h8, the United States concluded a treaty of
cession with chiefs and headmen of the Menominee Tribe of Indians,

whereby for a stated consideration,

“The said Menomonee tribe of Indians agree to cede, and

do hereby cede, sell, and relinquish to the United States

all their lands in the State of Wisconsin, wherever situated."

(Art. 2, 9 Stat. 952)

The Menominee cession in-general terms and without further description would include that area within Royce Cession 2&5 referred to
in the previous finding as the “Menominee Overlap.” ,

2h.‘ During thefjfnd Congress (1852-53) an inquiry was made by thei
Committee on Indian.Affairs, United States Senate, relative to uhati
#03933, if any, were due to the Menominee Tribe of Indians for their‘
lands ceded under the aforementioned Menominee Treaty of October l8,i
l8h8;' The Senate Committee published its findings in this matter on
February 15, 1353. (Sen. Rep. hl0, 32nd Congress, 2nd Session). The
Committee iound that the amount of land owned by the Menominee Tribe
of Indians which was ceded under the l8h8 treaty was grossly underestimated as to acreage, and that the difference in acreage results

in failing to include that territory previously claimed by the Menominee’

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 92

west of the Plover portage which area would include the “Menominee

Overlap" in Royce 2hS. The Committee stated its findings in this regard

as follows:

"By the th article of the treaty of the 19th August,
1825, the Menomonees claim Black river as their western
boundary. This claim was made in the presence of the
government commissioners, and the delegates of the Sioux,
Chippewas, Sacs and Foxes, Iowas,‘Winnebagoes, Ottawas,
and Pottawatomies, and was disputed by neither. In the
treaty of the 8th February, 1831, they extend their boundary
even farther west-mmaking the Chippewa river their western
boundary; and for a southern line, west of the Wisconsin,
they take a line from the mouth of the Chippewa, across
Black river, to the forks of the Manoy (now called the
Lemonweir) river, and down that river to the Wisconsin.

But limiting them to Black river on the west, and by the
southern line and the Manoy, as described in the treaty of
1831, we find them to have been entitled to this additional
tract of land, between the Wisconsin and Black rivers,
amounting to 108 townships, or 2,h88,320 acres; which added
to 5,230,2h0 acres east of the'Wisconsin--and which.is now
_conceded to have belonged to the Menomonees--and the amount
of the cession of l8h8 would appear to have been 7,718,560
acres. The committee has searched in vain to find any act
of the Menomonees by which they have ever divested themselves,
or been divested, of this Wisconsin and Black river tract.
On the contrary of such a fact, the committee finds that the
government expressly recognised their title west of the Wis: consin, by the purchase from them in 1836 of about 92,000
’ acres of land west of that river. The Menomonees have never
ceased to claim this tract of country; and both before and
at the time of making the treaty of 18b8, Oshkosh, the head
chief of the Menomonees, and both a good and sensible man,
claimed that his tribe owned nearly 8,000,000 acres in Wise
consin. It was in view of this continued claim that the
Attorney General, to whom.this matter was referred before
the treaty of 18b8, used the following language in his
opinion given on the occasion of that reference: ‘They
(the Menomonees) may cross the'Wisconsin river into the
territory claimed by the Winnebagoes, and show a title
better than theirs, if they have one.'"

And then further, in specific reference to the'Winnebago territory, the

Committee report states:

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 93

"e % %‘Hhatever of usurped title the government may have
seemed to recognize in Hinnebagoes, the Committee are forced
to the conviction that the Menomonees had a ‘better title
than theirs‘ to this tract of country." (P. h, Sen. Rep» hlo)

The Committee report thereafter reviews the extent of Winnebago
title to its territory as defined under the 1825 Prairie du Chien

Treaty in light of the conflicting Menominee claims to a portion of the

area 2

”* * * Title in the Winnebagoes must be found, if found
at all, in the 7th article of the treaty of l9th.August,
l82S. But it must be borne in mind that this article
claims also all east, to and including Winnebago lake, and
concludes with these words: ‘But, for the causes stated in_

the next article, this line from Black river must, for the
present, he left indeterminate.‘

 

 

"In the next or 8th article of the same treaty, the Menomonees dispute the'winnebago title, and claim, as before
stated, west to Black river. In 1831 they reassert their

,_F. title, and that, too, with the approbation of the government;

while the Hinnebagoes never again allude to their claim.to
the country in question, notwithstanding they cede land elsewhere to the government, by treaties of 1829 and 1832. In
1337, however, without designating any particular locality,
they enter into this sweeping and comprehensive stipulation
with the government: ‘Article l.-~The'winnebago nation of

Indians cede to the United States all their land east of the
Mississippi river.’

 

 

 

“Here, then, we have the whole of the Winnebago title or
claim, so far as it conflicts with that of the Menomonees;
while the Menomonee claim starts with the year 1825, is
reasserted in 1831, and again in 1836, when they'sell a
part to the government; and from the beginning down to the
treaty of 18b8, they are in possession and occupancy of the

country; a a e" (Emphasis theirs)
The Committee report concludes that the Menominee had title to this

additional area for which they had not been compensated under the l8h8

treaty, and recommends that an additional amount be paid to the Menominee

Tribe as compensation for these lands.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 78 9h

1)
l..J
CI’)
I \J
U1
*o
H
11-‘
}_ I
H
}_ I
(‘J
e.5_.
C‘)
I3
r I
(I1
33
r—--‘)

S
(D
'1)
e
‘<1

25. By virtue of the lange.ge of th.

01
t

the northern boundary line of the winnebego territory (within Royce
Cession 2&5) lying between the Bleak .i?er on the west and Plover

Portage to the east was left indeterminate subject to the Menominee
claims reaching to the Black River. Therefore the Commission finds that,
consistent with the Menominee claim ef l82§, t.at portion of the Men
nominee boundary line described in the 1831 Menominee treaty which

after intersecting the Black River strikes the forks of the “Haney
(Lemonweir) River" and proceeds to the month of the Nancy River on the

Wisconsin, delineates the exeent of the Winnebago claims northward

within Royce Cession 2&5 under the 1825 treaty.

26. In the cases of Otoe and Missonria Tribe of Indians, et al., v._

   

United States, 5 Ind. 01. Comm. 316 (Dockets ll~A, 138); Sec and Fox

   

Indians of Oklahoma, et al., v. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 367

In In

     

(Docket ISB); and The Iowa Tribes, et al., V. United States, 7 Ind. Cl.

   

Comm. 98, (Docket lS3),_the Commission has f'u:d as a matter of law
that under Article 3, of the 1825 Prairie du Ctien Treaty, the defendant
recognized the title of the Iowa an See and Fox tribes to the area
defined therein.

In its opinion in Docket 158 the Commission concluded as follows:

"In View of our holding made later herein that the Treaty
of.August 19, 1825, called the Preirie da Chien Treaty, is
thought by us to be recognition of title in the participants
thereto to the lands described therein, we think it =nnecessary
to discuss in much detail the ride-ce in the record as to
the use and occupancy of the land claimed by the petitioners»:
this because when Indian title has been recognized it is une
necessary to prove aboriginal title.” (5 End. Cl. Comm. 35?,

mo)

8 Ind. Cl. Coma 78 95

2?. Under the Prairie du Chien Treaty of 1825, the United States
recognized the title of the Winnebago Nation to those lands in'Wisconsin
and Illinois described in Article 7 thereof, subject to claim of the.
Menominee Tribe as set forth in Article 8 thereof, affecting the indeterminate line between the Black River and Plover Portage. The areas
thus recognized as belonging to the Winnebago Tribe include all of

Royce Cessions lh9, 17b and that portion of Royce Cession 2h5 lying

below that portion of the Menominee boundary line, as described in

the 1831 Menominee treaty; which intersects the Black River reaching

to the forks of the Lemonweir River, thence down the mouth of the

Lemonweir where it joins the Wisconsin River. (See Def. BX. 168).

Royce Cession 2hS ~ Winnebago Title to “Menominee Overlap"

   

28. Earliest reports of'a'winnebago village within Royce Cession

 

2&5 occurred in 1793. The village was located at the Wisconsin-Fox
River portage, and was headed by the famous Winnebago chief, De Kau-ry
or "Old Gray Headed Decorah.” This village, which is barely within Royce

0955103 2H5, is well south‘of the Lemonweir River and outside of the
overlap area between the Lemonweir River and the northern boundary of‘
the cession.

(3) .Augustin Grignon, in his memoirs (1857), recalls the early
days of the Winnebago in the Wisconsin-Fox River portage area. He
tells how a trader named Barth first traded in the spring of 1793 with

the Winnebagoes at the Portage and thereupon commenced a settlement.
The“: according to Grignon, “The elder De Kau~ry soon after arrived

there with a few of his people from Lke Puckawa (lake Puckaway), and

in

8 Ind’. 01. Com. 78 95

commenced the Indian settlement on the Wisconsin, about two miles above
the Portage; others came down from Lake Puckawa, and the village increased in size and importance" (Def. Ex. 17). Grignon then tells how
he first wintered at the Wisconsin Portage in 1801-2 and found the
De Kaury's among the most prominent of the'Winnebagoes.

(b) It. Zebulon Pike in the account of his l8OS-6-7 expedition

cites a village at Lake Puckaway and the Lower Baraboo village which

is at the Portage within Royce Cession 2&5. Pike cites 7 Winnebago
villages altogether. (Def. Ex. 211)

(c) Other references to this same village after l8OO are:

John Hays reporting in l8l2 a Winnebago village "on the Bank of the

‘Wisconsin at the Portage.” Captain Whiting (l8l9) mentions a Winnebago village on the'Wisconsin River not far from the Portage; John
Kinzie, 1829 Winnebago census, places the Lower Baraboo River village

8 miles from Fort Winnebago with the Chief old De Kaury (Def. EX. 2ll,

lb, 323 Pet. Ex. 21, 26).

29. Reference to other Winnebago villages within Royce Cession 2hS
are found primarily in John Kinzie‘s 1829 census. Of these villages two

are on.the Baraboo River close to the Wisconsin River Portage, and three

more, close together, are farther down the Wisconsin River on the southern 8

boundary line of Royce Cession 2hS. One other village is noted about

80 miles above Prairie du Chien near the Mississippi River on the western
boundary of Royce Cession 2hS. The earliest reference to this extreme
northern'Winnebago village is 1817. There are no'tinnebago villages
reported at any time above the Lemonweir River within the "Menominee

Overlap."

8 Ind. Cl. 78 97

(a) John Kinzie, Winnebago Indian Agent, completed a census of the
Winnebago Tribe in 1829. He cites 6 villages within Royce Cession 2h5.
They are the aforementioned “Lower Baraboo River‘vi1lage of De Kaury
at Wisconsin Portage; a middle Baraboo River village two miles farther
upstream; an upper Baraboo River village which is five miles farther
.upstream; a Pine River village, hS miles west of Fort Winnebago near
the Wisconsin River; a Little Calf village about 35 miles west of

Fort Winnebago on the Wisconsin River; the village of Waukaushahkaw

‘about 80 miles west of Fort Winnebago on the Wisconsin near the present

‘ ..

town of Muscoda, Wisconsin; the "Upper Mississippi“ village above
Prairie du Chien near present day Lacrosse, Wisconsin. (Pet. Ex. 21)

(b) Major Stephen H. long reported on the upper Mississippi

  village in 181?:

 

“Passed Prairie de la Cross Creek on our right . . . at

the upper part of the prairie was a small encampment of

Winnebagoes. This party belongs to a small band of Winnebagoes, living about six miles up the Prairie de la Cross

Creek, which comes in from.the northeast at the head of the

Prairie. The band consists of forty or fifty men, besides

women and children." (Pet. Ex. 21; Def. Ex. 178)

30. Reports of Winnebagoes hunting within the confines of Royce
Cession 2L5 are few, scattered.and not capable of demonstrating any
concerted, exclusive use of this area as a tribal hunting ground. None
of the reports antedates 1800. Pike reported in 1805-6 that traders '
freqP€ntly winter on the Black River with both Winnebago and Menominee
Indians. ‘While Pike does place'Winnebago hunting grounds “on Lake

hlchlgan; Black River, and the country between Lakes Michigan, Huron,

and Superior,“ he credits the Menominee Indians with similar hunting

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 78 98

areas (Def. Ex. hh, 231). Grignon reported in 1810-11 that one Bauprey

wintered on the Lemonseir River trading with the Winnebago. (Def. Ex. 17).
31. The Commission finds, as set out above, that the evidence in

the record fails to show that the Winnebago Tribe had actual exclusive

use and occupancy from time immemorial to that area withinjhoyce Cession 2&5 north of the Lemonweir River referred to previously as the

“Menominee Overlap." Some evidence of'Winnebago village life beginning

around 1800 within Royce Cession 2hS, but outside of the overlap area,

coupled with isolated reports during the same period of non exclusive

hunting éithin hoyce Cession 2hS, is insufficient to perfect Indian

title in the petitioner tribe, within the "Menominee Overlap“ area.

Conclusion
32.8 From all the evidence as set forth in the previous findings, the

Commission finds that the individual petitioners living in Wisconsin, as
well as the petitioner members of the Winnebago Tribe of Nebraska, are
descendants of members of the Winnebago Tribe and Nation of Indians as
originally constituted and as such are entitled to bring and maintain
this action undersectionlo of the Indian Claims Commission Act in a
representative capacity and in behalf of all descendants of members of i
the Winnebago Tribe and Nation of Indians; and that said Winnebago

Tribe and Nation of Indians participated in the Prairie du Chien Treaty
of.August 19, 1825 (7 Stat. 272), the Treaty of August 1, 1829 (7 Stat.
323), the Treaty of September 15, 1832 (7 Stat. 370), and the Treaty

of November 1, 1837 (T Stat. Shh); and, the Commission finds further

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 78 99

that by virtue of the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty, the Winnebago Tribe
and Nation of Indians had a recognized title to:
(1) All of that area ceded under Article I of the aforementioned

Treaty of.Augnst l, 1829, and designated as Royce Cession 1&9;

(2) All of that area ceded under Article 1 of the aforementioned

—Treaty of September 15, 1832, and designated as Royce Cession 17b; and,

(3) All of that area of Royce Gession 2&5, lying south of the
overlapping Menominee boundary line described in the Menominee Ireaty
of February 8, 1831 (7 Stat. 3h2), where said line upon intersecting
the Black River proceeds to the easterly forks of the Mandy (Lemonweir)
River which flows into the Wisconsin Hirer, thence down to the mouth of
.Manoy River, which area was ceded under the aforementioned Treaty of
November 1, 1837.

‘Theicommission further finds that the Winnebago Tribe and Nation _
has not proven aboriginal Indian title to the “Menominee Overlap“ area
in R0Y08'2h5, nor have they established a recognized title to saidr

"Menominee Overlap" in Royce 2&5.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Iwmt M. Holt
Associate Commissioner"

