7—Ind.Cl.Com. 31 H 31
BEFORE THE Ih=IAN c1: as connzsslom

THE QUIIEUTB TRIBE OF INDIANS, on its
own behalf and on behalf of the HOH
TRIBE OR BAEDS OF INDIANS; HOH TRIBE
OR BAND OF INDIANS, on the relation 0
and represented by SCOTT FISHER, on
its own behalf,

H)

Petitioners,

v. Docket No. 155

THE UNITED STATES OF AHERICA,

\.../\...z\...x‘-—’\_./\__/\._/\../\.../\._/\_2~_./x._/\../

Defendant.

Decided: December l, 1958

FINDIEGS OF FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. The Quileute Tribe of Indians are an identifiable tribe of
American Indians who resided in aboriginal times within the territorial linits of the United States in what is now a northwestern
portion of the State of Washington. ‘We find the identity of this
aboriginal tribe, as such, has been established in this record and
meets the requirements of the Indian Claims Commission Act of
August 13, l9A6. (50 Stat. 1on9; 25 U.S. Code, Sec. 70(a))
BVIDENTIARY FACTS SUPPORTING ULTIEATE FINDING OF FACT NO. I

a. The United States reccgiized this tribe in the preamble
of the Treaty with the Quinaielt, etc. in l855 (12 Stat. 971;

II Kappler 719), sometimes called the “Treaty of Olympia."

7-Ind.Cl.C m. BI 32

b. "Handbook of American Indians," (l9l2) Bulletin 30, Part
II, edited by Frederick Webb Hodge of Smithsonian Institution, states:

"Quileute. A Chimakuan tribe, now the only representative of the linguistic stock, whose main seat

is at Iapush, at the mouth of Quillayute r., about

35 m.s. of C. Flattery, w. coast of'Washington.

A small division of the tribe, the Hoh, live at the
mouth of the river of the same name, 15 m. s. of
Lapush . . . . Salmon are caught in considerable
numbers and constituted an important article of food.
Roots and berries of various kinds are also much used.
Although the woods in their vicinity abound with deer,
elk, and bear, the Quileute seem to have hunted them

but little and have confined themselves to a seafaring
life."

c. The identification of the Quileute Tribe was made by Territorial Governor Isaac 1. Stevens, Superintendent of Indian Affairs,

1

Hr. Simmons, Indian Agent, hr. Gibbs, Secretary, Kr. Frank Shaw, Interpreter and Special Agent, Hr. Tappan, Sub-agent, together with the employees of the party, who took part in a council "with the Upper and
lower Chehalis, lower Chinook, Cowlitz and Quinautl Indians." This
council became a preliminary step to the subsequent Treaty at Olympia

some months later. The council, begun in February 1855, was held "on

3

the site of Mr. Pilkenton's claim a few miles above the entrance of the
Chihalis River into Gray Harbor." Its journal reports:

It was now however found that the Quinaiults did not
occupy the whole country between the Chihalis and the
Makah’s, but that another and distinct tribe, the
Kwilleyutes were intermediate. This was perceived upon
Collecting vocabularies of the languages for comparison
that of the Kwilleyutes proving to be entirely different,
and upon pursuino the inquiry it was further ascertained
that the messengers sent up the Coast had for this reason
not notified them of the Council. Being wholly unrepresented therefore, they were necessarily omitted in the intended negotiation but their numbers are ascertained to be
about 300,

7-Ind.C1.Com. 31 33

The necessity of Ethnological inquiry in concluding arrangements for treating with or locating Indians is strikingly
shown in this instance. (Pet. Ex. 17)

There is a remote possibility that Horatio Hale, philologist of
the United States Exploring Expedition (1838 - l8A2), in reporting on
the tribes of this region may have made bare mention of these Indians
as the "Kwenaiwit1.” (Dft. Ex. 18, p. 212)

Governor Stevens‘ effort in 1854 to take a census of the1;ribes
and bands north of the Chehalis River up to Cape Flattery had been
thwarted by some Indians called "Qui-eets," arned with guns and knives,
‘who stopped Colonel Simmons from crossing‘ the Queets River. (Pet. Exs.

lb and 15)

V

a. James G. Swan published in the "Northwest Coast" (1857), an
account of the negotiations at the above—mentioned treaty council, reporting:

* * * *The features and provisions of this treaty were
these: The Indians were to cede all the territory,
commencing on the Pacific coast, at the divide of the
uaitso (Queets) and Hooch (hoh) Rivers, thence east

between the same along the line of the Quillahvgte
tribe, to the summit of the coast range; thence south
* * *. (Underscoring supplied)

e. Superintendent of Indian Affairs, R. H. Kilroy, reported on
the iden ity and location of petitioner Indians in post-treaty times
(1872):

* * *But one of the four tribes that have been made
parties to the Quinaielt treaty is on the reservation. The Quiliutes, Hohs, and Quits reside at different points and distances north of the reservation,
and say they never agreed to sell their country, nor
did they, to their knowledge, sign any treaty disposing of their right to it. That they were present at

'7-Ind.Cl.Cor:1. 31 "’ 31.,

the time of the treaty with them is alleged to have
been made, but that the paper that they signed was explained to them to be an agreement to keep the peace
with citizens of the United States * * *. They therefore refuse to leave their homes and localities in
which they then and still reside, and move on the
reservation which they (the Quiliutes, Hohs, and Quits)
regard as the homes and property of the Quinaielts.
(Pet. Ex. A0, pp. 339-3&0}

f. Ethnological works of the twentieth and late nineteenth
centuries which mention or identify the Quileutes are several. The
only known works which treat specifically'with the Quileute are discussed by petitioner's anthropologist, Dr. Verne Frederick Bay. In
his testimony, Dr. Ray mentions the unpublished field notes of his
former student, Richard Daugherty, Professor of Anthropology at
Washington State College. Dr. Ray also mentions his discovery of the
long-lost manuscript of Dr. leo J. Frachtenberg as the earliest works
treating with Quileute Indians in any detail. (R. pp. l9—20; Pet. Ex.
93, apparently an extract.) 0

2. 'The Hoh Indians were a small division of the Quilleute Tribe
and resided principally at the mouth of the Hoh River. ( See Finding
No. 3 below)

3. We find this petitioner is the tribal organization of Quileute

Indians whose predecessors in interest, Quileute and Hoh Indians, ceded

their lands, together with other groups of Indians, under the terms

 

a. The Quileute and Eoh were of the Chimakum lingual stock,

'7—Ir1d.Cl. Com. 3]. 35

separate and distinct from the dialects of their Salishan speaking
neighbors. (See Evidentiary Findings lb and lo.)

b. In l877, Dr. George Gibbs made a comprehensive report
for the Smithsonian Institute on Hashington Indians in which he
described the Quileute Indians as follows: (Pet. ea. 20; Dft. Ex. L)

* * *There are two bands of this tribe, the Eeilla‘huit, of Kive-dee-tut, and the Huch, of Kwaat-sat.

(p. 166)

c. In about 1907, Albert B. Reagan wrote “The Hoh and Quileute
Indians, Archaeological Notes." Reagan located the Quileutes at James
Island and at the mouth of the Quilayute River. (Pet. Ex. 78)

d. In l920, Ieo J. Frachtenberg published the “Eschatology
of the Quileute Indians." (Pet. Ex. 86) Frachtenberg most emphatically rejected the“Eoh" as being a separate tribe and defined them as
merely a geographic location of Quileute Indians. He reported :

* * *Earlier writers and particularly Farrand, assigned
three distinct dialects to this group; the Chinakun, the
Quileute, and the Hch. The latter, however, according to
a detailed investigation carried out by the present writer,
shows no particular points of differentiation from the
Quileute variety, and the word Hoh may be safely assumed to
be a purely geographic term * * *.

e. In 192A, Dr. W. C. Macleod pyblished “The Origin of the
State" in which he reported (Dft. Ex. 1&3, pp. 31-32):

* * *In the great Puget Sound area occupied almost
‘wholly by Salish-speaking tribes, there exists the
onlydmo groups, both very small independent political units, representing an independent linguistic
stock - The Chinakum. Thegptnps are the Qmileute
and.the Chinakum Tribes, which, when discovered by
the whites were possessed of a precarious hold of
two separated portions of the shore of the:Sound
and at war constantly with their Salish neighbors
and the Makah Kootka of the Cape, and were on the
verge of extinction.

7~Ind.Cl.Com. 31 35

f. James Rooney's population statistics, published in l928,

explain the decimation.of the Indians of this area in pre-treaty times

as folbws: (Pet. Ex. 85, pp. la-15)

* * * That regular trade of ocean vessels at the mouth

of Columbia l788 marked the introduction of sexual diseases from sailors and traders which soon poisoned the
blood of practically all of the indians west of the Cascades* * *. liquor, introduced in large quantities by
Russian traders, despite the efforts of the Hudson Bay
Company officers to prevent it, is also said to be a potent destroyer along the coast and the Columbian (Farnham)
In l823* * *an epidemic of fever* * *spread* * * and
apparently also along the coast and central region* * *.

It destroyed four-fifths of the natives, practically exterminating the Chinookan tribes * * *but the Salishan* * *
tribes of Washington appear to have escaped. In 1846 the
Columbia tribes * * * suffered another visitation of smallpox. In l8h7 a measles epidemic spread* * *. In I852-3 smallpox, introduced from San Francisco among the Eakah, with
its usual destructive effect among nearly all the tribes of
Washington* *'*wiped out whole villages in some tribes.

‘Washington, Hestern Tribes I780 1907
Makah (Quinnechant) 2000 #38
Quilleute and Hoh 500 295
Quinaielt and Queets l5OO l96

g. The Quileute tribe of Indians of the Quileute Indian Reservation were incorporated and its charter ratified on August 2l, l937.
The Constitution and By-laws of said tribe were approved by the Secretary of the Interior on November ll, l937, pursuant to Section 17 of
the Hheeler Eoward Act of June 18, 193A, A8 Stat. 98A. (Records, Dept.
of the Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs.)

A: The political organization of the Quileute Tribe was an integral part of its social order. This social organization'was dominated

by the concept of class consciousness found throughout the Puget Sound

7 - Ind.Cl.Com. 31 37

areas iziwhich each individual was born into his place, as a slave,

commoner, or of the royalty or “chief” class. The ranking member of
this social structure was-a "leader" or respected “chief” of the village. He was spokesman for the village in tribal matters. Testimony
of Dr. Ray, l Tr. 63-64)

5. Petitioner's aboriginal territory was located along and inland
from the Pacific Coast in the present Stateof Washington between Gray's
Harbor and the Strait of Juan de Fuca. That area had no natural harbors and was so heavily wooded that it was extremely difficult to
traverse by land. Aboriginal conditions of the Quileute Tribe were
undisturbed at the tine of treaty negotiations with the United States
in l855, and remained relatively undisturbed as late as the latter
decades of the nineteenth century. (Dr. Lurie's Testimony, 2 Tr.
pp. 282-283)

6. During February, l855, Governor Isaac l. Stevens scheduled a
treaty council involving Indian tribes west of the Cascade Mountains
‘whose land had not theretofore been ceded. He summoned representatives
of allsuch tribes known to him except the Upper Chinook andfaikacat
Indians. That sunmons included the Quinaielt, Upper Chehalis, lower
Chehalis, lower Chinook and Cowlitz Tribes. The Council was held a
few miles north of the entrance into Gray‘s Harbor. ‘Not until the
beginning of this council did officials of the United 5tates discover
there was a Quileute tribe and that it occupied territory between the
Quinaielt and Makah tribes. After this discovery, Governor Steven:

did not suzmon Quileute representatives to the council but proceeded

7—lnd.Cl.Com. 31 38

to present to theggoups present a draft of a treaty for consideration
and adoption. he'was unable to obtain agreement to its terms.

7. The "Treaty of Olympia," as it is cometimes called, was consummated after the Feb*uary-Earch l855 Treaty Council took place.
Governor Stevens had instructed Colonel H. T. Simmons to explore the
territory between that occupied by the Hakah Tribe and @r3Y’5 Harbor.
(Pet. EX. la) While carrying out this exploration, Colonel Simmons
met with the Qmileute and Quinaielt tribes on their home grounds and

concluded a treaty which Governor Stevens subsequently signed at Olympia,

‘:1

Washington Territory.

The different tribes and bands of the Quineielt and "Quillehute”
Indians ceded all their rightsin.lands occupied by them, bounded and
described in said treaty as follows:

* * *Commencing at a point on the Pacific coast,
which is the southwest corner of the lands lately
ceded by the Hakah tribe of Indians to the United
States, and running easterly with and along the
southern boundary of the said Eakah Tribe to the
middle of the coast range of mountains; thence
southerly with said range of mountains to their
intersection with the dividing ridge between the
Chehalis and Quiniatl Rivers; thence westerly with
said ridge to the Pacific coast; thence northerly
along said coast to the place of beginning. (Treaty
with Quinaielt, etc., 1855, 12 Stat. 791, II Kapp. 71a)

8. The treaty further provided, "in consideration of the above

6

cession the United States agree to pay to the said tribes and bands the

sum of twenty-five thousand dollars* * *,” (Article A). Article 5 further

-w

PP0Vided "The United States further agree togay the sum of three thousand

five hundred dollars” for reservation lands for the tribes and bands.

7~Ind.Cl. Con. 31 39

In 1861, a reservation on the Pacific Coast south of the Quinaielt
River was established by the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for
Washington Territory'for the Quinaielt and Quileute Tribes. Subsequently, in 1873, that reservation was enlarged to its present size
byExecutive Order, and was opened to other tribes of "fish—eating
Indians" on the Pacific Coast. (Pet. Ex. AA) The Quileutes, in 1889,
were set aside a small reservation by President Cleveland at the mouth
of the Quillayute River (Pet. 3:. 46). In 1883, a small reservation
was set aside at the mouth of the Hoh River for the Hoh Indians. (Pet.
Ex. 61)

9. The Quileute villages were situated about the mouth of the
Quillayute River, on James Island, with campsites along the Quillayute,

Dickey, Soleduck and Bogachiel Rivers in aboriginal times. Similarly,

the Villages of Hoh Indians were situated at the mouth of the Hoh River.

Temporary or seasonal camps were maintained by these Indians near their

fish—traps along the respective rivers bearing their names. The locationsof these campsites and villages are shown on Dr. Ray's map. (Pltf.

ea. 73)

Dr. Ieo J. Frachtenberg's manuscript, found by Dr. Verne Frederica
Ray in the American Philosophical Society's library in Philadelphia
(R., p. 20), includes a historical account of the Quileute, dated 1916,
by Arthur Howeattle (Pet. Ex. 93, Q1. 2:1), who was the son of the
last Chief Howeattle of the Quileutes. The last chief died in 1898.
The uncle of this last chief was the old Chief Howeattle who partfeT~

pated in the treaty cession of the Quileute with Governor Stevens.

7-Ind.Cl. Corn. 31 40

This informer reported a long series of “wars” with the aggressive

Makah tribe lasting until "just prior to treaty times". During the
period of these “wars” the Quileute moved to James Island, a natural
fortress, accessible by only two trails hewn by the Quileutes through
rock passages situated at the mouth of the Quillyute River. Just

prior to the treaty, the Quileute moved back to Iapush which was their
only permanent village. From this one permanent village, the Quileutes
established seasonal camps along the Quillayute River and near its cone
fluence with its major tributary rivers. Quileute hunting parties
occasionally went as far as the snow ridges of the Olympics on the east
for deer, bear and elk. Two notable errors seem to appear in the reports
of this informer, namely, that the Hohs were only recent additions to
the Quileute, being originally of the Quinaielt tribe, and the map of
Quileute locations showsthe mouth of the Dickey River flowing into the
Pacific rather than into the Quillayute River. Howeattle also stated
"the Quileute thought they had ceded the north half of he Ozette“,

he further related how, about 70 years earlier (about l8L6?), Quileutes
learned fur—sealing when Chief Howeattle went "on a visit to the
Ozettes," and under "travel", (Ql., 3:131 of Pet. Ex. 93), Howeattle inr
forms “few of the Quiliutes ever tried or had a chance to learn the language of the Makahs (spoken.by the Ozettes) and Qminaults. * * * * The
greatest amount of travel was done between Hoh and lapush* * * *since
both tribes were related (sic) there was a great deal of'friendly visitind at all seasons.“

10. Ozette lake area was not exclusively used and occupied by the

Quilcute Indians,

7- Ind. Cl.Com. 31 Al

"9

a. The Hakah Tribe (Docket No. 60) assert claim to the land
areas northeast of the Quileute Tri e. There is an overlap of approximately ten miles wide of the respective claims of this petitioner

and the Makah Tribe. The Eakah claim the southeast corner of their

aboriginal lands was located at Cape Johnson which is approximately

four miles north of the Quiilayute River. (Dkt. 60, par. III, Orir.

-.3

Pet.)

b. The petitioner, Quileute Tribe of Indians, dispute this
and claim.the northeast corner of Quileute aboriginal lands was at
a point approximately six.miles south of the mouth of the Ozette
River. Thus, an overlap of claims of the petitioner tribe and the
Makah Tribe is described containing a strip of land approximately
ten.niles in width extending along the whole south boundary of the
territory claimed by the Hakah Tribe in Docket 60, and such overlap
includes a large portion of lake Ozette. (Dkt. 155, par. VII of
Amended Pet., filed Dec. 23, 1955)

c. Dr. Verne Frederick Ray on behalf of petitioner conducted
2 research of the area in question (Pet. BX. 125) and his conclusions seem to agree substantially, if not absolutely, with the cession

boundary described in the treaties above mentioned. (5 Tr. pp.733~?3a).

Both Dr. Ray and the treaties of cession seem to support petitioners‘

allegations so far as the location of cession boundar' between the

   

'Makah and the Quilente is concerned. However notxithstandinc these
) 5

considerations of the location of the common boundary as it was de—

scribed in the treaty cession involved and the rather thorough re—

search of Dr. Ray interpreting sale, we find that Ozette lake, and

7—Ind. Cl. Com, 31 #2

necessarily the shoreline surrounding it, was not used and occupied
exclusively'oy the Quileute Indians.

d. Governor Stevens was not well informed on the aboriginal
boundaries of the Indians, Quileute and Makah, in the Ozette lake
area, in fact a hiatus in the reports of "Indians west of the Cascades
and north of Grays Harbor“ existed in the journals and maps of government men and explorers until long after treaty times as to any
exact location.of the north aboriginal boundary of the Quileutes.

Governor tevens' investigator, Special Agent Simmons, was
forcibly prevented by "about 50 Qui—eet Indians" from crossing the
Queets River northward into Hoh and Quileute territory to investigate the boundary in 185A, as he was instructed to do by Stevens.
(Pet.  11.}

Governor Stevens’ assistant, Dr. George Gibbs, indicated his
ignorance of the Quileute, or their territory, in his report dated
March A, 185A, to Captain George B. McClellan, Commanding Western
Division, N. P. Railroad Exploration, in these words, "Still further

north, and between.the Kwinaitl and the Hakahs, or Cane Flatter

   

Indians. are other tribes still unknown, but who by vague rumors
* * *are both numerous and warlike_" At page A29, Gibbs stated,
“The Makahs, or Classets, inhabit the coast in the neighborhood of

Qégguiggttegy, their country extending but a short distance up the

Straits, where it adjoins that of the Clallams. Theirvlanguage is

said to extend half way down to Gray's Harbor."(Underscoring sup 

plied)

7-Ind.Cl. Con. 31 43

The maps drawn by" tevens in 1857 after treaty times completely
omit lake Ozette, as does the Survey or General's Map-of 1865, as
does the W} H. Dall (Gibbs) Kap of 1877, consistently showing the
omission of lake Ozette until Powell's Hap in 1891 (See Pet. Ex.
125). Frachtenberg’s later map of Quileute territory (1919) shows a
mis1abeled.”Dickey River" (Ellen Creek ) as the north Quileute

boundary, six.or seven miles south of lake Ozette. (Pet. Ex. 125)

Simmons’ and Shaw‘s trip down.the coast from Cape Flattery in
1855 was a.renewed effort to supply Governor Stevens with boundary
information, but apparentlyiwas not a thorough reconnaissance,
which is obvious upon noting the omission of lake Ozette from.the
maps of this area for so many years after the treaty'cession.

e. Neither the "Treaty of Olympia", 12 Stat. 971, II
Kappler ?l9, nor the "Treaty of Neah Bay”, 12 Stat, 939, II Kappler
682, with the Eakah Indians, described the common boundary line on
the gound between the Makah and Quilleute Indians, further than the
location of the afore-mentioned common corner of such boundary.
This COIIEK3 in.the Treaty of Heah Bay, and referred to in the
Treaty of Olympia, is described in the former as "running southwardly along the coast to Osett, or the lower Cape Flatteryg
thence eastwardly along the line of ands occupied by the Kwe—deh—tut
or Kwill—eh-yute tribe of Indians, 8 * *." The treaty term “Osett"

is anbiguous because there is a lake, river, island and villa e all

3':

named Osett; but probably the village was the reference point intended by ”0sett” since it constitutes a point most readily discernible

7~Ind.Cl. Com. 3l . Ah

at "lower Cape Flattery?. Evidence extraneous of the language of
the respective treaties must be relied upon to establish what was
the "line of lands occupied by the Kwill—eh-yute tribe."

3. Dr. Roland 1.. Olson in his "The Quinault Indians” (1936)
in classifying the Indians in this area wrote:

* * * * The Ozette, who lived about the lake of that
name and adjacent coast, and the Suez (Tsue‘s?) who
lived along the Suez River, where Makah groups but
probably regarded themselves as distinct tribes.

g. The Ozette were an intermediate group of Indians situated between the Makah proper and the petitioner. The Ozette village,
in pre-treaty times as now, is more centrally located to this dis-'
puted overlap area than either the Makah proper or this petitioner.
we find insufficient evidence in this record to associate the
Ozettes as part of the Quileute tribe.

h. The documentary evidence of this overlap area in treaty
times was indeed vague and scant. Dr. George Gibbs commented in
ihis “North American Ethnology" (1877), thereon as follows: (Pet.
Ex. 20, p. 166)

* * * *North of this (country of the Chehalis) there

were no land-locked harbors, the streams entering the

sea directly and without estuaries; of these there are

several, the largest being the Kwinaiutl, the lob-whilse,

and the Kwillehiut. What is known of this section is

chiefly from the journey of Messrs. Simmons and Shaw, who

followed the coast down from Cape Flattery, in the summer

of l855.

ll. The whole of the Olympic mountain range was a free range
to everyone. (Gunther’s Klallam Ethnography, p. 205) Dr. Ronald

Olson in his study, "The Quinault Indians" (1936) reports (Pet. EX.

12¢, p. 13):

7—Ind.Cl.Com. 31 45V

* W * *Territory. In theory the tribal territory
embraced the whole region drained by the Quinault
river* * *. In practice not a foot of tribalierri—
tory was sharply determined. The southern boundary
is said to have followed* * * to the summit of the
Olympic mountains. The heights above the sources of
the river were more or less common hunting territory

for Quinault, Skokomish, Klallam, and Queets. The

northern limit of Quinault country was roughly along

the northern rim of the watershed to the source of

the Raft river and down that stream to its mouth.

12. In aboriginal times the Quileute Indians very largely
subsisted on fish and seafood. They utilized fishing weirs where
salmon were caught along the Quillayute River. Quileute Indians also
fished on the Bogachiel, Calawah and Soleduck rivers. (R. 295~296)

Along the adjacent Pacific coast Quileute caught smelt, bass, puggy,

Onrifi .<='h, Y-nnlr ~m::.-4 11'»-u-v...-arm‘: ‘I-.-a1-:'L-u4- 9'1...-I-:~-: -1. \.....1"n..........:... ..:_...-.:'a
__., _ ____

, --—-; """"'c> v--~: -----—-»---'2 -----v-----~: -v‘----J-+*-"-'--'---*.~ ‘M-"-‘--*-"
fish shark, herring sardines, stnrgeons, seal, sea-lion,porpoise
and whale. (Pet. Ex. 93, P. 3:57) The Hoh indians fished along
the river bearing their name.

These Indians, Quileute and Hoh, also hunted deer, elk, small
game and birds (Pet. Ex. 7h), including grouse, pheasant, wild
geese, duck, brant, white-crested cormorant, fal an, sea-gull,
puffin, rhinoceros auclid and loon. (Pet. Ex. 93, p. 3§l8)

On little, Quillayute, Haxfield and Forks Prairies near the
afore-mentioned fishing streams, upon which they travelled by canoe,
were gathered gooseberries, red and blue huckleberries, salmon,

-, salal, blackberries- thimble berries and strawberries by
these Indians. They dug camas and white clover roots at Forks and

other prairies. (Pet. ‘£34. pp. 3:27 and 131)

7-Ind. Cl. Con. 31 A6

l3. The Quileute Tribe of Indians, together with their subtribe of Hoh Indians; used and occupied an area of land in aboriginal times described as follows:

* * * *Commencing at a point on the Pacific coast immediately west of the ridge line, which ridge is nearest the mouth of and immediately north of the Quillayute
River, thence northeastward along said ridge line to a
point west of the mouth of larger Creek on the Dickey
River; thence east across Franklin and Coleman Creeks

to the ridge line on the north side of the Soleduck River
and following said reidge line northeastward to the peak

on Gunderson Hill; thence to the confluence of Maxfield
Creek and Shuwah Creek; thence southward along the base

of the Calawah Ridge to a point on the Calawah River opposite the nouth of Elk Creek; thence generally southward
along Elk Creek to the southeast corner of Forks Prairie

on said creek-line; thence following along the line of the
south boundary of'Forks Prairie extended to the Bogachiel
River; thence following upstream along the course of said
river to a point opposite the mouth of Dowans Creek; thence
southward up Dowans Creek to its headwaters at the point of
Iuling Brothers Shingle Kill; thence southaxnnard to the
nearest point in the reverse bend on the north bank of the
Hoh River; thence across the Hoh River southwestward to the
mouth of steamboat Creek on the Pacific Coast; thence north
westward along the shoreline of the Pacific coast and including James Island, to the place of beginning.

EVIDENTIARY FACTS SUPPORTING ULEIEATE FINDING OF FACT NO. l3

 

a. The north aboriginal boundary line of the Quileute began
on the north side of the.mouth of their principal fishing stream,
theQuillayute River, on the Pacific Coast and south of Cape Johnson
claimed by the léakah Tribe in Docket No. 60 (Finding 10)

b. This north boundary encompassed little Prairie, Quillayute
Prairie, the lower portion of Dickey River, northeastward along the
valley drainage of the Soleduck River to inolude Haxfield Prairie.
North of the Haxfield Prairie was used by S'Klallans and other seasonal users of lake Pleasant. (S’Klallan Indians, Docket No. l3h)

47

c. The east boundary of the Quileute extended to the Calawah
Ridge of the Olympic Rance (Finding No. ll) encompassing Forks
Prairie and up the Bogachiel River along the ridge line to the Hoh
Valley. (Finding 12)

d-The south boundary follows the principal drainage area of
the south side of the Hoh River to the Pacific Ocean, the latter
fonns the west boundary of the Quileute territory. The drainage of
Clearwater Creek empties into the Queets River claimed by the Quests
Indians in theChinault case, Docket No. 2&2.

e. The Quileutes’ ancestral land boundaries, as above defined, include the principal drainage areas of the Quillayute and
Hoh rivers and those above named prairies.contiguous_to their
fishing sites. Their lands were generally bounded on the north by
the heavily forested upland regions south of he Ozette, on the east
by the Olympic Hountain Range, on the south by the Queets River drain
age area, and on the west by the Pacific Ocean.

14. The lands described in Finding l3 were part of the lands
ceded to the Unoted States by the erms of the Treaty of Olympia by
the different tribes and bands of the Quinaielt and Quilleute Indians. The treaty was signed by all parties between July l, l85§3
and January 25, l856. This treaty was not ratified, however, until
more than three years later on March 8, l859, and the_date of such
ratification by the United States Senate consitutes the date of

taking. (12 Stat.9'.7l; II Kapp. 719)

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 31 L8

15. Any rightridch petitioner or its ancestors and predecessors in interest may have retained or acquired to any land within
the boundaries as set forth in Finding 13 may be made the subject
of inquiry at the further hearing of this claim.respecting the
credits of defendant and consideration paid to peitioner or its
ancestors and predecessors in interest, and as to the value of

said lands as of the effective date of the treaty, March 8, 1859.

Edgar E.'Nitt
CHlef Commissioner

Iouis J. O'Karr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. I49 
Associate Commissioner

