n .' .-.
I‘: ._ '_.,_,¢
‘den-;-.1 r*'

BEFORE THE IJDIAN CLAIRE C nnlSSION

11-\ 1'"! 7--5 . I ‘
Chnlnknn RIJER R.oE.V;TIO
Ho’? ‘."~_r

D UUTH .'..'.-KC‘ i ".5
Plaintiffs,
V.

Docket No. 192

TH; UNITED srrras OF AM.‘-:nIOA,

\_."\_/‘\_—/\..../\._J\-../‘-..a?\_/\....#‘~..-/\-——/

. Defendant.

Decided: March 29, 1957

Appearances:

Ralph H. Case,
Attorney'for Plaintiffs.

Maurice H. Cooperman, with
‘whom was Mr. Assistant nttorney

General Perry W. Morton,
ttorneys for Defendant.

OPDEION 533 THE COMMISSION

1.?’-3--L

uluu’ Chief Commissioner, delivered.the opinion of the Commission.

This case has been the subject of'a per curiam opinion rendered by
this Commission on June h, 1952. The defendant filed a “Motion.to Dismiss
or.Alternatively to Require Plaintiffs (a) to Separately State and.Number*

the Paragraphs of the Petition, and.(b) to Identify the Coal-Bearing

Lends." Upon consideration of the above notion and.the answer filed by
plaintiffs this Commission determined.and so neld that the prior case of

the Sioux Tribe of Indians V. United.St tes, 105 C. C15. 725, did not

nes Judicata and that Docket Eo. llh now pending before this

Corrmission was not the same claim so as to cause this case to be abated.
above elements of this case have been determined by that

inion they ‘will not be considered herein.

Plaintiffs allege in this case that defendant improperly classified certain of their lands in the Cheyenne River Reservation as non-coal
bearing lands and thereby caused them to be opened for settlement and
that their value as coal lands was consequently lost to the Indians.

This question arose as a result of an Act of Congress of May 29,
1908 .(3S Stat. 1460) wherein the Secretary of the Interior was authorized
to rnake disposition of 1,612,527.86 acres of the Cheyenne River Reservation. He was further directed to have the land examined by the experts
of the Geological Survey for the presence ofcoal bearing lands. He
‘as authorized to reserve any coal earing lands until further‘ action
by Congress. The lands opened for settlement were to be appraised by
three Commissioners. One_ of the Commissioners was to be native of
South Dakota_,_ one a representative of the Indian Bureau, and the other
a persdn holding tribal relations with the Cheyenne River Sioux.

On October 28, l908, the Secretary of the Interior requested the

Geological Survey to make the examination of the area in question in

order to detemine where the coal lands lay. In pursuance of this

&‘
the

request H. R. Calvert and a party from Geological Survey undertook

to survey the area in 1909. He made the follot-zing statement:

The mineral resources of the Standing Rock and Cheyer ..e
River reservations are limited to very small mount of
inpure lignite %° €1- -II-_.' The lignite occurs in such thin beds
and is so impure and so meager in extent that it will never
be of value except for local use but it is treated in considerable

in

{IL

Sl7

1..

—.g.

he nrimary curnose of the
.:-'. 1-’. '

because its study w s
investigation here reported. v

.,< C‘*‘

The Lance and Fort Union formations are coal bearing in
almost every region where they occur. In the area here
discussed, however, th y contain very little lignite but
include many beds of carbonaceous shale containing lenses
of livnite a few inches thick.

ah

There were other geological reports prior to and after l909 and
they were all virtually the same. Mr. C..E. Lesher, who testified as
an expert for defendant, stated that even if today’s knowledge of coal

conditions in the Cheyenne River Reservation had been available in
l909, it still would not have affected the value of the land.which was

In other words the land had no

sold as grazing and agricultural lands.

-additional value as coal lands in.l909 and whatever value that may have

accrued since the, is immaterial. See Chippewa Indians of'Minnesota v.
United States, 87 C. Cls. l, 36-? (l938), affirmed 305 U. 8. E795
Tri-e of Indians v. United tates, 103 C. Cls. 7&1, 7&5
(l9h5_3 E‘wards v. City of Cheyenne, llh Pac. (Wyc.) 677, 688-9 (l9ll).
Plaintiffs rely solely upon the'oresence of coal, without regard

to the question of whether or not the coal had commercial value at that

time. This is not enough to create liability on the part of defendant.

In addition to the physical presence of coal, it must be shown that

I 1
-0- A
Links

there was added value because of coal. The plaintiffs cannot make
such a showing as of l909.

If nothing was added to the value of the land by the presence of

the coal deposits, then.plaint;;fs were not d“naged by their sale as
agricultural or grazing lands and thev cannot prove damages under those
conditions. See Ccneron Develonment Co. v. United States, lh5 F 2d 209,

5 l?

C?

/

nu-qt

? O (C. C. “ S, l9h5) and Searle v. Lackawanna, etc. R. Co., 33 P3»

Plaintiffs contend that defendant has misunderstood the case when
it continues to treat the matter of the coal lands as a commercial

enterorise as the Secretary of t.e Interior did. That was the only

1

manner in which the Secretary could treat them and still comply with

the will of Congress in the matter. Plaintiffs are assuming, without

proof in the record, that Congress was going to reserve any coal bearing

lands in the area for the Sioux Indians. There is just as much orzmore

reason to assume that Congress was going to treat them just as it did
the other coal bearing public lands and sell them at a higher price.
‘The crux of this case lies in the question as to whether or not

the classification of the Cheyenne River Reservation lands as non-coal
lands was proper under the circumstances. This question must necessarily be determined in the light of the s tuation as it existed th n.
‘we obviously are not free to exercise hindsight based upon.the technical and commercial knowledge of today. See Fulton Trust Company'of

New York, Trustee V; McCormack, 257 N. Y. l32, 177 N. E. 397, 77 A.L.R.

1199, 502-3 (1931) .
Conditions in 1909 with regard to the mining of the type coal found
Strip mining was done

in this area were unfavorable to say the least.

Economical commercial ninin of

U’?

by hand or with a horse and.scraoer.
these isolated, undiscovered beds of lignite was not practicable at that
.5‘

The only use to which this coal could be put was as fuel LO?

i‘:':C.iViC3.‘i.1E‘-.1 frrailics .

|....J

The question of the propriety of the classification of the Cheyenne
River Reservation lands as non-coal bearing carries with it the
of whether or not the whole classification system set up by the Secretary
of the Interior for the purpose of carrying out the intent of Congress
was a reasonable system. It must be remembered that the regulations
were established for the country as a whole and not specifically for
this one area. The action.was made necessary by the abuses of the coal
operators who were gathering large coal land holdings by'purchasing
them from.homesteaders who, in.many instances, had gone on the land for
the express purpose of selling to coal companies. As a matter of public
policy it became necessary'to put a stop to the practice and withholding
coal lands from.settlement was the method adopted by Congress. The
Secretary was charged with implementing the program and it was largel
a discretionary‘matter based.upon the recommendations and experience
of the Geological.Survey. In order to have a standard by which to
determine w “t was to be considered coal bearing lands the classification
and valuation regulations were established beginning in 1907. Under the
regulations of l909 lignite had to be 36 inches thick with an overburden
The survey by Mr’. Calvert of the Geological SurV¢Y in l909 failed to snow that the lignite depos'ts on the Sioun.land

9

met tnose qualifications. Tne fact that even today there is no commercial

3
Po
U
|..Jo
1.5
017
O

f lignite in beds of less than 3 feet is a good indication that

the regulations were reasonable. Hr. Dolla-hidtestified that his

5-1

V

operations were in beds averaging 3% to L feet tnick and that he was still

C

making only a “salary” from the operation. This 15 true des

Q-J

ite the prog-.3

._. ‘V 9 Q I 0 9
ress mace in cutting ninin: costs per ton.

ing these regulations to the
land of the Cheyenne River Reservation is not to be criticized. These
lands were no different than any other land in the public domain. They
were being opened to settlement and had to be classified in accordance
The fact that defendant ‘as acting as trustee for the
Indians in the sale of the land does not change the need for compliance
with the will of Congress. So far as t'.e treatment of the coal on these
lands under commercial regulations is concerned, that is what Congress

wanted done. As stated before these lands were no different in that

aspect than any other public land being opened for settlement.

So far as the rustee relationshi, is concerned there has not

been shown any violation of fiduciary duty by defendant through the

VJ. uué Secretary of the Interior. Defendant treated these lands

the same as it treated the public lands. As stated many times the trustee

is not an insurer of the property of the cestui que trust. If we were
to followithe theory of plaintiffs that the commercial value of the coal
lands as of 1909 isunot pertinent to the case insofar as liability is
concerned and yet does becomepertine..t when the question of value is
presented, we would, in effect, be holding the defendant to a trustee
obligation amounting to that of an insurer. Neither t .e facts nor the
law justify any such proposition. See Fulton Tru t Company of New York,
Trustee v. McCor:nack, Supra, and Fletcher Trust Co. V. Hinds, 2ll Ind.
111, t N. 2:. 2d 552, 55595, 108  L. R. 930.

Just as there has been no violation of a fiduciary duty by defendant,

oeen any serious question of a violation of lair and

U

(D
0

0

ts

(‘I

C!

D)
I
"w

honorable dealings under the Indian Claims C0,; .ission Act. Th

of the lands as ordered by Congress and

'5 1

since all o: tne lands wer‘He

not disposed of and some have been returned

‘I J_ "

DOST‘. TCS C0333

(“F

to defendant through forfeiture, they have o the Cheyenne

W
1...}:
O

V r Sioux, along with the mineral rights in certain other lands. The

plaintiffs now own through allotment or as tribal property lO2,96l.22
acres of the land involved in the 1908 act, or almost one-third of the

total area, along with whatever portion of'the lignite discovered.which

lies thereunder.

t seems unnecessaryio explore any other phase of this case. with
the determination that the Secretary of the Interior acted properly in

carrying out the duties of his office and.that his method.of doing so

was reasonable under existing conditions, the plaintiffs are not entitled
to recover. In the presence of that determination the other aspects of

the case become immaterial.

It is the opinion.of'this Commission that the petition herein

should be dismissed and an order o that effect will be entered
accordingly.
1 Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

'%e concur:

Louis J. O‘Marr
____________________________

Associate Commissioner

 .' 2-2. E-Iolt .
Associate Commissioner

