Ind. Cl. Com. l 11

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

CIJDE F. THOMPSOR,‘WILLIAM FULLER,
HERBERT A. BELL’-LS, H51-ERY KELLER,
RMNUEL CORDOVA, ARCHIE HcHRINNEY,
':LLDYD BAPRIIJGTON, SATUR;‘E.T.I¥O E.
CALAC,'W. G. WALKER, LAWRERCE
BURCELL, FRANKIE HOOREHEAD and
ARTHUR TREPTA, members, and as the
representatives of, and on the relation of the Indians of California,

Petitioner,
V. Docket No. 31

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

CI
\..J\ua'\—u/‘uu"h-’N../\./\—-J&a'\-/N-/N./\-/Nu;/Nu/‘u-u/Vuf

are

ERNEST RISLING, PETER MASTEN,_
MARY G. DORNBACH, as the representatives of, and on the relation
of the Indians of California,,

Plaintiffs,v. Docket No. 3?

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

x..z-../\..r-..t~..r-..I-.J-..#-../~—-I‘-a'*--.1

Defendant.
Decided: July 31, 1959
Appearances:

Ernest L.‘Wilkinson and Reginald E. Foster, with.whom were Wilkinson,
Cragun, Barker & Hawkins, Thurman Arnold, Francis M. Goodwin,‘Walton
Hamilton, John W. Preston, Sam Clammer, Walter M. Gleason, A. Brooks

Berlin, Hartwell H. Linney, Frederic A. Baker, Paul M. Niebell and
Donald C. Gormley,

Attorneys for Petitioners and Plaintiffs.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was associated Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry W . Morton ,

Attorneys for the Defendant.

amended pursuant to the order of January I9';"'l955é

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 d 13

8 Ind» 018» Como 1. OPINION or THE COMMISSION 6

T-— # Cu-|cII--l'&;..p-1-..:yq.:t1-t':qr-a-I|p

 

0'I~iar_r, Commissioner, rendered the opinion of the Commission.
bO'dl1<38l"lL€S W311‘-—C:I1 were respected ‘oy other '«"'~di:r:::s: M"? 1a':.o'.m by the :~?h:Ztes

-.—¢.4‘. -u-Hv.. .~—A- 085 tribes: bases, rascsasassoeresasiieseaaionncgc Endian groups or tribelets,

 

A I; an 1-:

paapiggle 'si"*ones.=.:, Dr. A9 L. Kroe-her, called the::;., eere_Loped *2-neir systems of.‘

 

' Culéfq‘-1}h1Ey1d29§:Ol.L19i¢8‘, aadgsohpisfemdirgeiglizfndiahe-, n«‘.%!.»‘3e‘.u_1"e.T,1_I‘% sources of the

_ seesitiwd eitthe bn‘dtaesacéaCahi£hrni:ey Siesdithsitspatéiziioposhetkseal as t- e

th§0G6mnn§s£ndiapdte£‘passassdgned Docket No. 31. And on.April 28,

19149, the same petitioners filed an amended petition which was again
9 SPAEEISH MID I«E3C[C£ilV   ._-9?. 

6. During Spanish and Mexican sow;rerei.§c.,'.-'=.-:73 many grants of large
And on March 214, 19119, another group of California Indians filed
areas of land were made by those govorn.r1ents in -he territory ceded by
their amended petition as representatives of the Indians,of California.
the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (l8h8) c... '.:2:;$-.cZ‘: several hundred grants
This was again amended by order of January 19, 1955c were for lands within the present boundaries of Ca3_ii‘ornia.
The two amended petitions are substantially the same and for that

By Article VIII of the treaty of Gae.da.'.i::-ope Hidalgo, the United States
reason, on November 19, 1953, it was ordered that those amended peagreed that property of every kind belonging to}-Eec;:ica.ns established ‘within
titions be “consolidated in their entirety and tried as a single action.”

the territory ceded‘ by said treaty and the property of every kind belonging

and by stipulation; of the attorneys for the respective petitioners filed

to Mexicans not established in the ceded terrziterar shall be retaned by

“L

gherein on December 13,. 1952;, it was agreed that said cases (Dockets Nos.

them and respected by the United States and ‘z:-3* the 2d Article of the Preto3l and 37) "be consolidated in their entirety and for all purposes and L

col of May 26, 18b8, pwhichlwas inter'ai~eta't:Lx.-  the treaty, the United
shall be prosecuted as one action."

St3te_3 expressly recognized the land grarrtzt .:_:.;d agree.it.h.at the grantees
We shall hereinafter refer to the cases as thoughbao a single

thereof "may cause their legitimate y/"*?':7:E.t'2.c.;:-:c-9 to be acI«:n.o‘=::ledaed before the,
action had been filed, except where it‘ 18 deemed necessary to ‘treat

.america.n. tribunals." By the second paragrasfr; c-2'.‘ "é‘br"-:- article, the titles

6-. I-I--‘F-‘I

' them separately, and for convenience of reference will call them

On

T to‘ the grants in Ce.lifo:-:n.ia were those that-9  .--’.-:_’_';iI=A..'3.'.«T:..‘..}‘:.—'.-‘."tT.-3 'i.1.‘-‘3.5.'£3§." 
.,nc_iians of California.
l«3*.W_,_u.p to May 13, l8h6., . 9 _ e. _ J _ ‘
The Indians of California base their right to main tam this
In order to car:-.3: out the obligations   the U —.‘3-'£:.ed. 3'2:-ate~s
action upon the Act of May 18, 1928, LS Stat. 602, whlca they argue
passed the Act J:*»;" 9‘;-Esra:-.Z.'r1 3, 3.83.1 (9 Stats ‘iE31::f_ -1:--3 "*e»'r_.‘:y c-I-ea.ted a. .2-.‘::=ar*

-.—o v

I

‘T

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

gives them the exclusive right to sue for all lands within the boundaries of California.

The 1928 Act defines the Indians of California as follows:

"That for the purposes of this Act the Indians of
California shall be defined to be all Indians who were
residing in California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants now living in said State." (Sec. 1).

By Section 7 of the Act, it was required that those Indians residing

in California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants living in Cali-—

9£nmde.on May 18, 1928, be enrolled. The enrollment was made and

23,380 Indians were placed on the roll. This section was amended
by the Acts of June 30, 19b8, 62 Stat. 1166, and May 2h, 1950, 6h
Stat. 189, and residence restrictions of the 1928 Act were eliminated and non-resident descendants of those Indians residing in CaliJbrnia on June 1, 1852, were added to the rolls. So there are now
36,095 so-called Indians of California who were enrolled under the
1928 Act and its amendments. Obviously, the purpose of the enrollment was to determine the Indians who are entitled to benefit by

the judgment contemplated by that Act.

.It is the enrolled group, the petitioners in Dockets 31 and 37 f,

contend, that was created a “legal statutory entity" by the 1928 Act H,

“and under the provisions of that.Act it is clearly and definitely
authorized and empowered and has the sole right to assert and have
determined the claims against the United States therein set out.“

Of course there is no basis for such contentions. In the first
place, the time for suing, by express limitation of Section h of the

1928 Act, expired on May 18, 1931, and secondly, when the Indians of

13

in-“Iii-8

_....-V’!

8 Ind. Cl. Com. l 15

California obtained their judgment on December h, l?Lh, (103 Co C18837), they exhausted their rights and remedies under that Act; it had

Moreover, the Indiar Clavms Commissi n has been given no power by the

-4»

served its purpose insofar as presenting claims under it were concerned.
o

1928 Act to receive a claim under it. To be sure, the Indians of Caliibrnia, as defined in the 1928 not -~ _nc it mares no difference whether
they be considered as a “legal statutory entity” or as the group onrolled under that'Act —- could look to that Act for the handling and"

use of the judgment credit set up for their benefit, but there is nothing
in that Act or the Indian Claims Commission Act which makes that a

suing entity or the enrolled members thereof a suing group under the
Indian Claims Commission Act.

The main reason, apparently, the claimants in Dockets Hos. 31 and

had; 37 cling to the notion that the claimants under the 1928 Act are a Suing_

entity is because they believe that by that Act the Indians of California

have the exclusive right to maintain a suit for all the lands in the
present state of California, including those covered by Spanish and
Mexican grants. Since we have previously decided that other clainants
of California lands may maintain actions for Ca"ifornialands (opinion
of January 20, 1958) and since we are hold'ag that the clainants int
Dockets Nos; 31 and 37 have asserted and can maintain their claim under
the Indian Claims Commission Act without regard to the l928 Act and also

hold that they cannot recover for the granted lands, further discussion

Of the effect of the 1928 Act seems unnecessary at this place in this

opinion.

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1   15

The Indian Claims Commission Act provides that an "identifiable
group of American Indians“ may present and have determined claims against
the United States, but the phrase "identifiable group of American Indians“
is not defined in the Act nor does it necessarily include a group of
Indians created by'a special statute for a special purpose which has
been fulfilled, as was the case under the l928 Act.

The Court of Claims has decided that the "Indians of California“
are an identifiable group within the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission Act, but the Indians it referred to were those California Indians
uhose former group or community life was disrupted and the groups disbursed and scattered throughout California by the influx of white people
after we formally acquired California from Mexico by the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo proclaimed on July h, l8h8. Indians of California v.

United States, 122 c. Cls. 3149.

 

But the petitioners in Dockets 31 and 3? take the position e- a
rather uneasy one, it seems to us -- that the Court of Claims held, in
its decision cited above, that the group created by the 1928 Act is
the group, and the only group, entitled to assert the instant claim
under the Indian Claims Commission Act.'We do not so understand the

decision. The Court said:

"We believe this Act of l928 and its history in
connection with the history of the Indian Claims Commission Act has an important bearing upon the question
of what Congress intended by the use of the term
‘identifiable group of American Indians‘ in Secs. 2 and
10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act."

The Court there mentioned the Indians‘ loss of identity as distinct

groups, etc., but at no place in the decision did the Court hold that

. .._:_.__--.-.j..__._.....—...1j..j.__.-.-—:.___._. . .j..

.-u.v.u_,__

 

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 l6

’\

the entity created by the 1325 Act has the only right, or any right,

'\

to assert the instant clain. ?urthermore, the reasoning of, and con'clusions reached by, the Court of Claims in its decision of May 6,

1952, l22 C. Cls. 3&9, makes it plain beyond serious doubt that that
court would have decided as it did if the 1928 Act had never been’
passed. In other words, the Court would have decided that the unorganized remnants of the aboriginal groups of California Indians constituted an "identifiable group? under the Indian Claims Commission
Act; that the l928 Act added nothing to the rights of such a collective
group to maintain a claim or to our jurisdiction to hear and determine
it.

While the petitioners in Dockets 3l and 3? seem to plead that the
claim is presented by a "legal entity" recognised by the 1928 Act, the
allegations of their petitions also state a claim that does not depend
upon the 1928 Act for authority to sue but alleges aclaimon behalf
of all those California Indians who were residents of California at
the time we acquired it, and their descendants. ‘we are not to be
understood as holding that the enrollment of Indians under the 1228
Act and its amendments is to be ignored for it might wellbe that,
should an anard be made, the Congress would order a distribution of
the award on the basis of such enrollment as the only practical way
of distributing an award after the lapse of over a century.
an‘ The Indian Claims Commission Act provides for the assertion of
claims by an "identifiable group of American Indians“ residing'within

the United States. The proof in this case shows begond doubt that at

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 17

-the time we acquired California, as a part of the lands formally ceded
by Mexico on February 2, l8h8, 9 Stat. 922, it was largely occupied
by several hundred small autonomous Indian groups and that the ancestors
of the members of such groups had occupied and used such lands in the
same way for centuries.

The evidence is plain, and in fact not disputed, that after we
acquired California, and as the result of a great influx of white people,
the Indian communities were disrupted and destroyed, many of their members were killed and those remaining were largely scattered throughout
the state and their tribal or band origin generally lost. It was be.cause of this disruption of community life the Court of Claims concluded
that those Indians remaining constituted an "identifiable group" within
the purview of the Indian Claims Commission Act. Indians of California
v. United States, 122 c.. Cls. 319.

These disbanded aboriginal.groups of Indians and their members
became known and have been referred to by the administrative oificers
of defendant and in Ccngressional.Acts by the appellation: "Indians
of California.“ That collective name aptly designatesthe unorganized
California Indian group, but there is nothing in the Indian Claims Com...
‘mission.Act that authorizes a suit in that name or makes it a legal entity for any purpose. A claim for such an unorganized identifiable.
group must be presented by individual members of the group as the representative of all its members. (Sec. 70i, U.S.C.A. Title 25).

Since the Indians of California have no tribal organization authorized

pto present a claim for them and, since the Indian Claims Commission

B Ind. Cl. Com. 1 i 18

i Act does not create a

U}

uing entity for asserting a claim for such
Indians, it was necessary to proceed as was done here; Eamelfy to
assert a claim by named in iridual men are of the group known as the
Indians of California. It was properennilnipful to give the group
for which the claim is asserted a name for convenience of reference
and the name used, as we have said, is appropriate for that purpose.

A reading of the petitions in Dockets Nos. 31 and 3? might well
lead to the conclusion that the instant claim is asserted by an en-tity, the Indians of California, created by'the 1925 act, rather than
the identifiable group authorised to sue by the Indian Claims Commission
Act. The constant and vigorous arguments of the petitioners‘ a torneys

adds support to that conclusion. we believe, though, that in spite of

the allegations of the petition and the arguments giving support to

 

that conclusion, there are also sufficient allegations in the petitioned
,to bring the claim under the Indian Claims Commission Act, and we,
accordingly, take the position that a claim is asserted under the latter
ict for the benefit of the group generally kn an as the “Indians of California.“

Lands Involved

 

The Indians of Californi', in their petitions, claim compensation
for all lands in the State »f California and in their briefs maintain
that they have the exclusive right to assert a claim for such lands.

As the litigation progressed, the petitioner modified its claim
as to the land area. On tone 2?, 1955, the attorneys for the Indians

Q

of California and the attorneys for Klama h, Modoc and -aroo,sin

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 19

Tribes, petitioners in Docket No. lOO, filed a stipulation by which
the Indians of California (petitioners in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37) disclaimed

“any right, title, interest or claim in and to the

lands within the present State of California, ceded

by the Klamath and Modoc Tribes and Yahooskin Band

of Snake Indians under the treaty of October lb, 186b,

II Kappler 865, 16 Stat. 707, and now claimed by the

said Klamath and Hodoc Tribes and Yahooskin in their

petition in Docket No. lOO to the extent shown by the

map prepared by Dr. Albert L. Kroeber as an exhibit
:in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37 . . .“

The map here referred to has been admitted in evidence as Exhibit
ALK-1955 which is in two parts which divide California into the North
and South sections. ;The California lands involved in the claim in
Docket No. 100 are estimated to consist of l,600,000 acres.

Again, and at the request and motion of the Indians of California,
petitioners in Dockets Nos. 31 and 3?, there was eliminated from the
lands claimed in their petitions those California lands included in
the separate claims of the tribes whose lands were separated from the
lands claimed by the Indians of California by our order of October 6,
1958, and which lands are described in said order as Area A lands.

That by virtue of such elimination the lands in California now claimed
by said Indians of California are those referred to in said order as
Area B lands. I

. As a result of the division of the California lands made by the
order of October S, 1958, our inquiry will be confined to the rights
of the Indians of California to the lands included in the Area B
division of lands mentioned above and defined by said order of October 6

3

1958, which includes the lands of the Yokiah, Yana and Shasta ribes in

8 Ind. 81. Com. l 20

California which filed separate claims that were merged with the claim

of the Indians of California b an order also dated October 6 l9S8.
3' 1

SPANISH AND MEXICAN GRANTS

 

The Indians of California contend that the Spanish and Mexican
land grants were made subject to the Indians‘ right of occupancy,
hence their rights were preserved under the Guadalupe Hidalgo treaty.
Passing for the moment the possible effect of the Act of March 3, 1851,
upon the question, we pass to the status of the Indian title on
February 2, 18b8, the date of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo.

It is plain that by the terms of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
there passed to the United States full title to all the lands of the
Republic of Mexico lying northerly of the boundary line between the
United States and Mexico fixed by Article V of said treaty. And, as
will be seen later, the Mexican Republic could not and did not cede
to the United States lands which either it or the Spanish Crown had
E?3nt€d Prior to Hay 13, lBh6 (Art. 2d of the Protocol), so had the
Mexican Republic recognized Indian right of occupancy in Spanish or
Hexican grants it would have been necessary to require the United
States to recognize and respect such Indian rights in the granted lands
as it required our Government to respect and acknowledge the grantees‘
rights and titles in the granted lands. Since no such provision was
made in the treaty, the Indians had no rights of occupancy in the

granted lands that we are required to consider as obligations of the

i United States.

 

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 _ 21

Under the law of nations, which the courts of this country have
adopted, a conquered nation, as the Mexican Republic was, cedes only
the territory which belongs to it, and such a cession is never understood as including the private property of the inhabitants. Pueblo

de Cochiti v. United States, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. h37, h52; Strother v.

Lucas,~9 L. Ed. 1137, 111.8, 12 Peters L10, 1138; United States v.

 

Arredonde, 6 Peters 691, 735-6; Cesna v. United States, 169 U. S. 165,

 

186. Hence, when either Spain or Mexico granted ¢he lands the titles
passed to the grantees and such lands never passed to the United States
under the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo. Furthermore, if by the grants

Spain or Mexico perpetrated a wrong upon the Indians this country was

 

and is under no duty to right such wrong. Cesna v. United States, supra.
But the Indians of California maintain that since Section 15 of

the Act of March 3, 1851, expressly provides that the final decrees

of the Commissioners, or the District and Supreme Courts, or any patent

issued under the act, shall be conclusive only between the United States

and the claimants of lands derived from.the Spanish or Mexican government and “shall not affect the interests of third persons," the Indians‘

rights of occupancy in the grants were not adjudicated but "saved to

them, they being third parties to the transaction by this section.“

.P 1'}

(Section 15)

The answer to the contention is not difficult. The Mexican Claims
Act of March 3, 1851, did not create any rights of Indians in lands
in California or in any other persons, for, as stated by the Supreme

Court in United States v. O?Donnell, 303 U.S. 501, 512, 82 In Ed. 981,

 

98?:

9 T»: r": on» “ 22
~.. .--.L.".- r \..-'—..¢ '°-ix‘.-.. _,.’.,

"5-w ‘\'\“',r-"-‘f'-ry- r~,w~.-;-v-)Oc:-n r-3? -‘.33-.r. v'r:x")¢"; ['7'-u‘-1}»-:1: 

.. L. \ , ,.__ F ,4; g,_._ \:;,.. . .. ..

‘'' Eds rer::7' C *" th" Unitcl &t"ics o are

L

t" 1' oblirti c;?‘to ocir‘ the t_.leL c? to: ClPL.~
' laser 3, *;1oo en: K;,?’;T1 @115 cc"

Nowhere in the Act of Eerch 3, lbfl, is there created or attempted to

Mexico. A reading of the title of the Act as well as the text shows

in

it was enacted to “ascertain and settle the private land claims in

_n
.3.

f Cali ornia,“ the right or title to which was derived from

Carl»

U
(D
U)
(F
(‘H
r_-_'+
(D
O

the Solnish or Mexican government.

Counsel for the Indians of Ce ifornia seem to be of the opinion
that the title of the grantees of Spain or Hexico was derived from
the patents issued by the United States coder Section l3 of the Act
of March 3, 1851. The title of the grantees was clearly conveyed
by the granting sovereigns; it was that title the treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo required us to respect. This is made clear by the 2d Article
of the protocol, in explanation of the treaty provisions, which expressly preserved the legitimate titles of the grantees and authorized
them to be "acknowledged before American tribunals.” The method by
which such titlcswere to be acknowledges vs: left to the United States,
but it was made plain that the titles to be confirmed “are those which

Q

Were legitimate titles under the Hexiccn law in California . . . up to

F  ‘ ‘N P ‘ rah -u- -‘ D 9
t‘ '9 J‘-I L Q C533? OJ. - '_.-.3" 3 ..L\...'  0 I -I t
g‘ " ’s ’: ‘k‘ -1 -"* ‘H r- 1r- I‘ 2- 1-: - ’ . - .
O4 coc.se inc t_u;U3 to ;gu&: g;autcc during Snanish sovcrcisntv

O

'_.' " 4- Jo ‘,"..¢-.-p-a ,_ r.‘-., . .~ _ ,._ _ ‘_‘ ‘ I
RCIC I"€3S§r3’.3..-E’-5 Bf,’ ;';;_'..-.;C=‘: ¢',‘.'._-. L}3.€f 8.1‘:  *._,}1e U‘;j._j_-*_*{_.er‘; f§‘t,';_'§_{_3_5,  \*3_}-";_,';_‘§g,

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1 23

The 1851 Act was designed to identify and quiet the title to all
lands in California which were the subject of grants from either Spain
or Mexico. The issuance of patents for the lands determined by the
land Board or the courts to be valid was more in the nature of a confirmation of the existing titles than the actual conveyance of title.
Moreover, the issuance of patents is our traditional way of showing
individual rights within our borders. We believe the title of the
grantee-claimants passed when the grants were complete under either
Spanish or Mexican law and even though the wording of the patents
(Pet. Ex. 6) might indicate a conveyance by-the United States to the
successful claimants, it amounted to nothing more than the confirmation
of titles, conveyed by either Spain or Mexico prior to May 13, l8h6.

We conclude, therefore, that the Indians of California have no
compensable interest in any of the lands in Area B, fixed by the order
of the Commission made and entered on October 6, 1958, which are included or covered by the grants or parts of grants shown on Petitioners‘
Exhibit ALE-13 (2 parts) and Defendant's Exhibit 160 (2 parts), said
Area B shall be considered to include the lands of the Yokiah, Yana

and Shasta tribes referred to in said order of October 6, 1958.

_/

PRESENTATION OF LAND CLAIMS UNDER
ACT OF MARCH 3, 1851, 9 Stat. 631

 

The defendant contends that because the petitioners failed to present their claim for land under the Act of March 3, 1851, 9 Stat. 631,

they lost whatever rights they had to the California lands here involved.
Section 8 of the l8S1.Act required "every person claiming lands in

California by virtue of any right or title derived from the Spanish or

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 2h

Mexican government“ to prcsentrtheir claims therefor to the commission,
created by that act, for settlement. Section l3 of the Act required
such claimants, that is, claimants having rights derived from either
Spain or Mexico, to present their claims therefor within two years after
the date of the act, that is, by March 3, 1853, and all lands for which
claims were not presented within t;3t time “shall be deemed, held and
considered as part of the public domain of the United States.“ It is
conceded that no claim for the lands here involved was ever presented
under the 1851 Act, so if such presentation was necessary under that Act,
the petitioners abandoned their claim.

It was not every land right that had to be validated under the 1851
Act, but only those rights which were derived from either the Spanish or
Mexican government. The statute was so interpreted by the Supreme Court

in Botiller V. Dominguez, 130 U.S. 238, 2h9, 32 Law. Ed. 926, 929, in

   

which it said:

"It is equally clear that the main purpose of the statute
was to separate and distinguish the lands which the United
States owned as property which could be sold to others,either
absolutely or by permitting them to settle thereon with preemption rights, or which could be reserved from public sale
entirely, from those lands which belonged, either equitable
or legally, to private parties under a claim of right derived from the Spanish or Mexican governments. ‘When this
was done the aim of the statute was attained."

1

The claim here asserted is plainly not 3 "private land claim,"
nor one arisino "by virtue of any right or title derived from the Spanish
or Mexican government" which was required to be presented for confirmation

and patent under the l851 Act. On the contrary, the claim for our deter»

mination is one based upon original Indian title to the California lands

8 Ind. c1. Com. 1 25

referred to later. Original Indian title had its latest definition in

Tee-Hit-Ton Indians against United States, 99 L. Ed. 3lh,.320, 75 S. Ct.

313, 317, wherein it is said by the Supreme Court:

"II. INDIAN TITLE -- (a) The nature of aboriginal
Indian interest in land and the various rights as between the Indians and the United States dependent on
such interest are far from novel as concerns our Indian inhabitants. It is well settled that in all the
States of the Union the tribes who inhabited the lands
of the States held claim to such lands after the coming
of the white man, under what is sometimes termed original
Indian title or permission from the whites to occupy.
That description means mere possession not specifically
recognized as ownership by Congress. After conquest they”
were permitted to occupy portions of territory over which
they had previously exercised ‘sovereignty,’ as we use
that term. This is not a property right but amounts to
a right of occupancy which the sovereign grants and protects against intrusion by third parties but which right
of occupancy may be terminated and such lands fully disposed of by the sovereign itself without any legally_enforceable obligation to compensate the Indians.“

See also Johnson v. McIntosh, 8 Wheat. Sh3;'worcester v. Georgia, 6 Pet:

S15; Holden v. Joy, 8h U.S. 211.

These cases show that original Indian title is a mere right of occupancy not specifically recognized as ownership by Congress; it is a right
that has the sanction of the law of nations. It is a right described in

‘Worcester v. Georgia, 8 L. Ed. h83, SOO,'as follows:

 

“The Indian nations had always been considered as
r _distinct, independent political communities, retaining
’ their original natural rights, as the undisputed possessors of the soil from time immemorial, with the single
exception of that imposed by irresistible power, which
excluded from intercourse with any other European potentate than the first discoverer of the coast of that particular region claimed . . ." I

See also Miami Tribe v. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Com. I99, 212.

   

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 26

Obviously, a claim foe lands based upon original Indian title does
not come within the class of dlaimants covered by the 1851 Act since
their rights are not derived from the Spanish or Mexican government.

In support of its position that the petitioners loo whatever land
rights they may have had in California by neglecting to present them
under the 1851 Act, the defendant relies upon two cases:

Barker V. Hares‘
.____....._é..-;, 181 U.S. h8l, was a case in which Mission Indians

 

iclaimed rights of occupancy to California lands derived from the Mexican

government. They did not present their claims under the 1851 Act and in
affirming the Supreme Court of California, 126 Cal. 262, the Supreme
Court of the United States held the Indians abandoned whatever claims
they'may havetnniby failing to present them to the commission created
by the 1851 Act for confirmation.

The other case the Government relies upon is United States v. Title

   

Ins. &.T. Co. 265 U.S. h?2. In this case certain Mission Indians, repre 

sented by the United States as their guardian, sued to quiet in them a
perpetual right to occupy part of a confirmed Eexican grant in California,
the Indians claiming that under Mexican laws they were entitled to continuous use of that part of the grant they occupied before it was made.
The lower Federal courts held that if the Indians had any rights under
the Mexican laws, they were abandoned and lost by their failure to present them for settlement to the commission created by the 1851 Act.
In each of the cases just referred to, it was alleged and proof

offered indicating that those claims were based on a right of occupancy

'1

derived from the Nexican government. as we have stated aoove, the claim

8 Ind. C14 Com. 1 ‘ 27

here asserted is not based upon any such right and therefore was not

required to be presented for settlement under the 1851 not.

In Cramer v. United States, 261 U.S. 219, 231, the Supreme Court

 

distinguished the land claims requiring confirmation under the 1851 Act

from those claims not requiring confirmation by its reference to Barker

 

V. Harvey, supra :

“It is insisted that any rights these Indians might

otherwise have had are barred by the provisions of the.

Act of harch 3, 1851, 9 Stat. at L. 631, chap. hl. This
sta.ute required every person claiminglandsirtCalifornia

by virtue of any right or title derived from the Spanish

or Eexican governments to present the same for settlement

to a commission created by the act. There was a provision
directing the commission to ascertain and report the tenure

by which the mission lands were held and those held by civi1ized.Indians, and other Indians described. The act plainly
has no application. The Indians here concerned do not belong to any of the classes described therein, and their claims
were in no way derived from the Spanish or Mexican governments.
Horeover, it does not appear that these Indians were occupyingi
the lands in question when the act was passed.

“Barker v. Harvey, 181 U.S. h8l, h5 L. ed. 963, 21 Sup. Ct.
Rep. 590, does not support the defendant's contention. There
"the Indians whose claims were in dispute were Mission Indians,
claiming a right of occupancy derived from the Mexican government. They had failed to present their claims to the commission, and this, it was held, constituted an abandonment. The
Indians here concerned have no such claim, and are not shown
to be within the terms of the Act of 1851 in any respect. It
further appeared in that case that, prior to the cession to
the United States, the Mexican authorities, upon examination,
found.that the Indians had abandoned the lands, and thereupon.nede an absolute grant to the plainti f‘s predecessors,
and, this grant,having been confirmed by the commission, a
patent for the lands had issued."

The same reasoning and conclusion would apply to United States v. Title

Insurance etc., supra.

 

-n

-.2

Accordingly, we are of the opinion the Indians of California were
not required by the 1851 Act to present their present claim for confirmation and that they are not barred by such failure or said Act from

asserting the present claim.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 28

INDIAN RESERVATION IANDS

Subsequent to the cession to the United States by the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo of the California lands, the Government set aside
for exclusive Indian use reservations with an aggregate acreage of 683,359.
A large part of this reservation land is, according to the maps in evidence, located within Area B, but the evidence is insufficient to show
the acreage or the location of such lands within Area B. Further proof
must be made by the parties as to the location and acreage of the lands
within Area B and the amount thereof should be excluded from the part

of Area B for which the defendant is liable.

It appears from the proof and the evidence of which we may take
notice, that 611,226 acres of the reservation lands, valued at $1.25
per acre or $T6h,O32.SO, were charged as offsets against the Indians
of California, petitioners in the case brought under the Act of May 18,
1928. 102 C. Cls. 837, 839. iwhether an adjustment of some kind should
be made because of this offset does not appear necessary to determine
at this time as it presents a problem that can better be submitted and

determined at some future stage of the case.

NUNCOMPENSATED TAKING OF INDIAN LANDS
It is an undisputed fact that the lands in California were taken
from the Indians who occupied them, by the United States without compensating them for their original Indian rights therein, unless the

judgment obtained by the "Indians of California" in l9hh under the Act

of May 18, 1928, can be considered compensation.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 29

Counsel for petitioners point to a number of events and acts on the
part of the Government, such as the military occupation of California,
the negotiation of the eighteen unratified treaties with certain Indian
groups and the survey and granting of pre-emption rights to settlers on
California lands by the Act of March 3, 1853, 10 Stat. Qhh -- this Act
also made large grants to the State of California for its common schools,
a seminary of learning and for public buildings -- as indicating a taking
of Indian lands. None of these acts can be considered a taking of Indian
lands by defendant. The military occupation was obviously a temporary
protective measure and no Indian lands were relinquished by the 18 treaties
because they were rejected by the Senate. And the Act of March 3, 1853,
operated only on those lands which had become public domain by the Act
of March 3, 1851, 9 Stat. 631.

The Act of March 3, 1851, on the other hand, discloses a plain and
definite purpose to terminate Indian titles to all California lands that
were not finally decided by the Land Board created by that Act, or the
Federal Courts on appeal, to be valid grants by either Spain or Mexico
up to May 13, 18h6. The pertinent provisions of the Act (Sec. 13) read:

"That all [Ca1iforni§7 lands, the claims to which have
been finally rejected by the commissioners in manner herein,
or which shall be finally decided to be invalid by the

District or Supreme Court, and all lands the claims to which
shall not have been presented to the said commissioners within two years after the date of this Act /March 3, 18517,
shall be deemed, held, and considered asnpart of the public
domain of the United States; . . ."

The plain effect of the quoted provisions of the 1851 Act, when read
in connection with the other provisions of the Act, is that all lands in
California not included in valid private land grants made by either
Spain or Mexico up to May 13, 18h6 (Art. 2d of Protocol, dated May 26,

l8h8) became vested in the United States free of Indian rights.

8 Ind. Cl. Com, 1 30

The Act of March 3, 1851, was primarily for the purpose of performance by the United States of its treaty obligations to settle the
titles of grantees of private land grants made by Spain and Mexico for
lands in California. United States V. O'Donnell, 303 U.So 501, 512,

But the.Act went beyond that purpose for, as shown by the just quoted
provision of Section 13, it declared, in effect, that all California lands
not included in legitimate Spanish or Mexican grants confirmed ("acknowledged")
by the Commission created for that purpose by the Act, or by the Federal
Courts on appeal from the proceedings and decisions of the Commissioners,
or for which claims were not presented within two years after the date

of the Act, shall become part of the public domain, Since no provisions
were made in the 1851 Act for presenting claims for lands in California
held and occupied by the aboriginal inhabitants thereof, the Indians of
California, the Indian lands became part of the public domain. And, as
stated above, the Indians received no compensation for their aboriginal

rights in said lands.

Mention was previously made of the case, Indians of California v.

 

United States, 98 C. Clso 583 and 102 C0 Cls. 837. The case was brought

in the Court of Claims by a claimant expressly defined in the Act as
"Indians of California" and they obtained a gross judgment of
$l7,058,9hlo98 from which was deducted certain offsets reducing the
judgment to a net recovery of about $5,000,000. The final award (102

C. Cls. 837) made by the Court of Claims cannot perhaps be considered as
compensation for the lands taken by the 1851 Act for the award was made
on the basis of the value of the lands included in the 18 unratified"
treaties; however, since the award was distributed to substantially

the same Indians, or their descendants, who were living in California

8 Ind. 01. Com. 1 31
at the time we acquired the lands, Congress may decide to deduct from any
appropriation that may be made herein the amount of the judgment awarded in
the former case.
LAND USE AND OCCUPANCY

One of the most difficult, if not the most difficult, questions we have
to decide is what California lands the petitioners actually occupied and used
for their subsistence, that is, the lands they exploited for their'day'to dayexistence.

"we can proceed with our inquiry'with the basic fact, which nobody questio

that Indians occupied and used California lands from time imemorial and as
the aboriginal inhabitants thereof. The native population is unknown, but

estimates range from a high of 700,000 to 260,000 by Dr. Merriam and 133,000
by Dr. A. L. Kroeber. (Pet. Ex. RH-125, pp. 68- 71). These Indians were
not an homogenous group, but were made up of many groups or tribelets which
compose many linguistic divisions or nationalities in California. It has
been estimated by Dr. Kroeber that there were 500 or more Indian groups in
California about the time we acquired California from Mexico in l8h8. (Record
pp. 29-30, 129, 153 and h98). These tribelets occupied and used fairly well
defined areas dependent in sizes upon the economic resources of the particular
area and the population requirements of those living in it. Of course the
degree of use of lands varies with conditions, as Dr. Beals, a witness for
the defendant, described it:
"The evidence, it seems to me, shows clearly that

there was a great deal of difference in the intensity of

use. Some areas which had no economic resources were

simply, if visited at all . . . traversed in getting

from.one place to another." (Trans. p. l6h5).

And Dr. Kroeber (Def. Ex. 188), a witness for petitioners, states respecting

land use by the Indians of California:

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 32

"Land ‘actually used and occupied‘ by native groups
is going to be hard to define because it slides off in a
gradient. A site settled with houses is certainly both
occupied and used. But the watershed ridge that bounds
the valley of this group might never even be visited except in pursuit of a wounded deer, or perhaps chiefly at
a gap through which a trail ran to the next valley harboring a distinct but friendly group. In between these extremes were all transitions of utilization; frequent,
limited, occasional, rare; practically none."
The difference in use was caused, as the above statements imply, by
variations in climate, topography, elevation, soil, vegetation, etc.,
all of which determine the quantity of economic resources in the various g
sections of the state. It is not necessary that the Indians prove that
each of the 500 orimore tribelets occupied and used every acre of the
lands they claimed; that was not and cannot be done, as witnesses for
the petitioners have frankly admitted. There is comparatively little
proof of actual occupation and use of specific tribelet areas in California, and if proof of such use is necessary, the petitioners have
failed in their proof, however, there is proof by noted anthropologists,
based upon years of study of Indian culture, habitats and ways of providing their subsistence, that the Indian groups used and occupied the

lands in accordance with the Indianvay of life. It must be borne in mind

that in aboriginal times these Indians obtained their subsistence from the

natural products of the soil and waters of the areas they occupied. Such
an economy did not require an intensive cultivation of the soil for the
Indians of necessity exploited the places which provided the necessaries

of life. The resources the Indians relied upon for subsistence were not

uniformly distributed; they were largely seasonal and in scattered places,,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 33

requiring travel of considerable distances in their gathering, fishing

and hunting activities. Game animals moved from place to place in search
of food and had to be followed. The importance of flora and fauna in all
regions of the state cannot be gainsaid, and the search for such resources

was continuous and covered areas that were unproductive as well as those

, that were, because of the variations in the production of the natural resources from.year to year or even from season to season in many years.
Furthermore, it is plain that because of the uneven and rather sparse

distribution of the available natural resources in the state, large areas

of land were needed to provide subsistence. The Indians‘ permanent and main
habitatrwere, in general, in locations which provided the greatest abundance
of natural resources, but they were required, and generally did, extend
their searches over large areas beyond their places of permanent settlement.
The record is replete with proof of temporary camps occupied by the Indians
in their seasonal gathering, fishing and hunting operations which covered
large areas in the mountains, plains and deserts. It is no doubt true, as
the Government contends, the higher elevations in the mountains and some
large desert areas produced little of economic importance to the Indians,
but such places had limited uses and were a part of the areas claimed and
defended when necessary by the tribelet occupying it.

ECOLDGI'OF CALIFORNIA
The Government has introduced into this case an ecological analysis
of the natural resources of California available to the Indians and the
way those resources affected the extent of the use of the lands by the

Indian inhabitants. The petitioners condemn the ecological approach as

8 Indo Clo COmo 1 

not only novel in Indian litigation but speculative. However, the Government
has presented similar defenses in other cases heard by the Commission, although not labeled ecological analysis. See Coeur d‘Alene Tribe v. United

   

States, b Ind. Cls. Com. 1; Chinook Tribe vt United States, 6 Ind. Cls. Com.

 

177. There are several other cases in which the defendant presented testimony’
concerning "nuclear areas" and "primary subsistence areas” which are similar
to the ecological approach.
The primary value of the ecologic approach to the problem of land use

and occupancy by the Indians of California lies in the paucity of proof of
actual use and occupancy of the lands, as we understand the Government's
position. The proof of actual use is in the main based upon.anthropological
studies and research. Proof of actual use by'Indians of given areas is of

the most general character, and, considering it in the aggregate, the areas
constitute but a relatively small part of the total lands involved in this
case, Area B. We must, as the anthropologists did, reason and assume from

our knowledge of the culture of these aborigines that they lived and had

their permanent abodes in places best suited to their economic life and which
they'exploited as the primary sources of their subsistence and at the same
time, or at least in connection therewith, they exploited the available resources in the less productive territory surrounding or in the vicinity of
their settlements.

An ecologic analysis of the area here under study involved the division

of the territory into a number of zones according to their economic importance:
(1) those of intensive use -- these generally'included the settlements or

Surrounding territory consisting of about one-fifth of a claimed area from

4:.

8 Ind. Cls. Com. 1 35

which as high as 80 per cent of the subsistence was derived; then follows,
(2) zones of less intensive use; (3) seasonal use; (h) infrequent use;
and (5) the least use of any but, nevertheless, used for crossing, trailing
or occasional use of sacred places located therein, and perhaps, on occasion,
to defend the more important areas. Obviously, the analysis above mentioned
concerned the state as a whole in its general application, but it was applied
to specific lands, some of which are in Area B.

we believe the study of the economic resources of the state and their
relationship to the quantity of land required to support the Indians in their
way of life has value in understanding the economic picture. However, we
cannot accept the Government's thesis that the resources of the state or any
part thereof can be determined mathematical1y'by assigning a large percentage
of subsistence derived from a small part of a given territory and reduced
percentages of subsistence in other areas of a territory claimed by a para
ticular tribelet. The testimony and the ethnographic literature, of which
there are volumes in evidence, show that the Indian groups ranged throughout
their respective territories in their gathering, hunting and fishing exertions.
'While these Indians were never considered nomads, their exploitation of the
available resources in a given territory required frequent and extended trava
eling within the territories claimed. ‘We believe it unrealistic and contraryto the Indian.mode of life to restrict Indian territorial rights to the lands
which would simply provide adequate subsistence and disallow their land claims
to the areas which were of secondary'importance or supplemental to the main
sources of supplies. ‘We suspect territorial expanse was as much the desire

of these primitive peoples as it is characteristic of the white man for there

8 Indo Clo  1 

is much ethnographic evidence that the Indi n groups in California moved
about their respective domains gathering wild foods as they ripened or
captured available wild game, and during a normal season would visit and
use the whole territory to which they asserted ownership as their exI"
J.

elusive places 0 abode.

JWe know of no decision by the courts or the adxinistrative officers
of the Government which limited Indian land claims to those lands which
provided them with the common necessities of life. The requirements of
the Indians.were so varied that they'could only he obtained from a large
area for salt, edible seeds and insects, flint and other important supplies
were in most cases not available in the confined areas of valleys but obtainable from desert areas.

THE C£LIFCRhIA MISSION LnHDS

 

Beginning in year lT69, the Spanish authorities began the establishment
of Hissions in California. The purpose of the Missions was for the spiritual
and material betterment of the native Indians. Between that year and 1823,
twenty-one Kissions were established betveen San Diego on the south and San
Francisco on the north. The'Missions;aere generally located at places the
Indians had previously found best suited to their needs. The so-called
“Mission Lands”'were of two types, according to the report of the Com—
missibners appointed under the act of March 3, 1851, 9 Stat. 631, Section lo,
"to ascertain and report to the Secretary of the Interior the tenure by which
the Mission lands are held . . . ”; namely, those “consisting of the churches,
cemeteries, certain gardens, etc.” which was known as church property. 'we are

not here concerned with this type of Mission property because it apparently

8 Ind. Cls. Com. l
37
?
pas considered as belonging to the Catholic Bishops as the representative

of the Church. This property'sas confirmed to the Bishop by decrees of
said Commission and is included in the grants listed and shown on Petitioners‘ EX. ELK-l3 and Defendant's Ex. I60. The confirmed acreage of
Church Property comprised only about h2,h69.73 acres (Defendant's Exs.

179, p. 2, and 230).

-c-'The second type of lands are described in said report as follows:

“The second, more properly designated as the Mission
lands, comprises those larger tracts around, or in near
proximity to, the mission buildings, which were used for
cultivation and grazing by the Neophytes, under the superintendence of the priests in charge of the respective
missions. As to these lands, the Mexican government evidently never recognised any title in the christianized
Indians, who, connected nith_the missionary establishment,
lived upon them. The regulations adopted under the colonization law on the 21st November, l828, withheld them, for
the time being, from grant, but after the secularization law
of I833 was enacted, grants were made of portions of these
lands, from time to time, to individual applicants. The
right of the christianized Indians residing upon them to
preference, in their application to the government for grants,
was repeatedly declared by the public officers, but no title
was recognised as existing in them, without, or independent
of, a specific grant by the competent authorities. Many of
these Indians procured grants from the governor,‘which.usually'
covered only small tracts, and claims founded on these grants
have been presented to the Commission, and confirmed to the
grantees or their legal representatives. "With the exception
of those claiming under such grants, therefore, this Commission is not aware of any title recognised by the Mexican
nation by which any of these lands are held by the Indians, nor
has any proof been presented to us, in the course of our investigations, which could authorize the recognition of title in
them, except under specified grants.”

 

 

As shown by the report and, as appears in other evidence, the area
designated as ”Kission Lands" was large for on these lands extensive farming

and ranching operations by the Indian Neophytes were conducted under the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

direction of the Hission Priests. Indians *ere recruited from those
groups near the established Missions, and even from considerable
distances, for instruction in Christianity and civilization and training
in agricultural pursuits.

There is testimony and documentary evidence to the effect that as
much as one-fourth to one-third of the lands in California were affected
by the Mission activities. This may be true for the twenty-one Missions
extended generally from the south to a distance of over hOO miles to the
vicinity of San Francisco on the north and each Mission drew most of its
converts from the areas surrounding the Mission. The Mission strip, defined by'Dr. Cook (Def. BX. 102, p. 3) as "the region fr0m.uhich.Hissi0ns
drew most of their converts“ no doubt embraced a vast territory and might
well, in the aggregate, cover as much as one-fourth of the state.

The Mission activities brought from surrounding areas to the Mission
many Indians. The Government places the number of recruits at 6h,OCO, a
figure calculated by Dr. Kroeber, petitioners’ uitness, and concludes that

that many Indians left their ancient abodes and settled permanently in the

Mission establishments.

‘We do not stop to question the figure, but it covers

the total number of Indians coming from the Mission strip during the 6b years

T‘}--.-.
J.-'.‘. 0

of the existence of the Missions. According to

the largest Mission population did not exceed 21,100, the l82O figure, and

Cook (Def. Ex. 128, p. 12),

had dropped to 15,000 at the time of secularization in 1833-183h., The extent

of missionization of the Mission strip is conjectural. It was substantial
in the areas where the Missions were established because those places were

Where the Indians lived when the Missions were located. It was less in the

'8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 I ' 39
areas more distant from the Missions. at any rate, we gather from the
evidence that Wibh few exceptions no tribelet voluntarily completely
abandoned its tribal home and upon secularization many, if not a majority,
of the missionized Indians returned to their ancient habitats. It is apparent that the Mission program made extensive inroads in the membership of
the various groups, but by the time we acquired California -- about 25 years
after the clerical establishments had been abolished -- the Indian groups

had generally returned to their status as it existed prior to die Mission

period.

The Commission.therefore concludes that the Indians have proven aboriginal Indian title to all of said lands in Area B, except those Spanish
or Mexican grants located therein. The Commission further concludes that
the United States extinguished said.Indian title to these lands by virtue of
the provisions of Section 13 of the act of March 3, l8§l, and that the Indians
received no compensation therefor. The case will now proceed to a determination
of the acreage of said Area B, less the Spanish and Mexican land grants and the
reservations set aside in Area B, the value thereof as of the date of acquisition by the United Stat s, and the question of‘w2at offsets, if any, the
United States may'be entitled to under the provisions of the Indian Claims

Commission Act.

Louis J. 0‘Harr

“ -.1--1'I——lu1-2-I-cf-It-A-1--w—-n

Associate Commissioner

 

Concurring: '

I Edgar E.'Hitt

 

Chief Commissioner

'Wm. I. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

