S Ind. C1. comm. 537 SS7

BEFORE THE INDIAN CIADIS COI-IMISSION

I‘?-IE CONFEDER.5.TED TRIBE3 OF THE WAE."*"i
SPRINGS R;T*JSEEVATI§)I~I , OF .OREGON ,

Petitioner,
Docket No. 198
‘Va

:r:HE. UN#'T'ED.J.... STATES or AMERICA,

Defendant.
Decided: June'10, 1960
PHEIaIT*'ED‘IARY STA'I'EI-IENT

The issues for consideration at this time  Petitioner‘ s

capacity to sue in its own right as successor in interest of the

 aboriginal units which were confederated into petitioner organization;

whether defendant has recognized petitioner's Indiantitle to the

land described in the treaty of June 25, 1855, 12 Stat. 963; and, in

i r event there has been no recognition of Indian title, then the area to

which petitioner has established original Indian title. It is conceded

by defendant that petitioner is entitled to prosecute this action in a

representative capacity.

FINDINGS OF FACT

3

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:
1. The Ccnfederatad 'l‘:«:ib-as of the 1-farm Springs Reservation of
Oregon is an organization'chs.rrteIsed under the Reorganisation Act of

JW3 18: 193’: (E8 Stat. 931:, 935). Its membership consists oi“

 ‘r«~d. c1. Ccm. SS7 _ V SS8

gg ado‘

G";-gry living person listed on the allotment roll of the Narwn Springs
Peservatien of Oregon, every child of l/h Indian blood born to an I
'ndia.n residing upon the reservation, and every child of 1/8 or more

Indian blood born to a member or former member of the Confederated Tribes

3 of the 'vIarm Springs Reservation and who shall have been adopted as a

tribal member. Included among petitioner's members at present are 207
Indians of whole or mixed Pauite Indian blood, do scendmts of a number

of Pauite Indians who entered the Warm Springs Iicserrrtion during or

about 1878. wasco Indians have also been reported residing upon other
Indian Reservations.

The Commission finds that the petitioner is not entitled to prosecute this actien as a successor in interest to the Indian entities parties

to the treaty of June 25', 1855, but is entitled to do so in its representative capacity. ’
2. The area here involved lies in Ir3I"'3h central Ore gen and extends’ northward between the summit of the Cascade Range on the we st

and Rhea and Willow Greeks and the Blue Iieuntains on the east , from

the hh° ‘or latitude. to the Columbia River. It is designated on Reyce's

Map 1 of Oregon, Vol. 18, B._A.E., as area 359. I-Ih&e petitioner con-e

tends the defendant has recognized its title to the entire tract, the

0

claim of original Ind:I.e.n title is made to only approximately half’ oi‘

4' '. 00 I
I

‘h-’-3 3W3: is?» , the n:»3?t-h1a'es't-e;~.-. po... oI'_C':".'l ther-eo..'.

Follows :

I..'.J

"Ar c.3.~::l::s of arrroomont and co::r:'e°';t'o3.en made and con: uded
at has-sco, near the Dallas of the C-olu;:1'bia Rrivor, in Oregon

8;, Ind. Cl. Comm. S57 ' 559

Territory, by Joel Palmer, Superintendent of Indian Affairs,
on the put oi‘ the United States, and the following-named
chiefs and head-men oi” the confederated tribes and bands of
Indians, residing in Middle Oregon, they being duly authorized
thereto by their respective bands, to wit: Symtustus,
locks»-quisusa, Shick-a-me, and Huck-i-up, chiefs of the Taih or
Upper Dechutes band of 1-Ialla-*..~Ial.l.as; Stpcket-ly and Iso,
chiefs of the Wyam or If..ower Dechutes band of Walla-Wallas;
AIBJCIS and Talkish, chiefs of the Tenino band of Wal_la-Wallas;
‘Kiss, Chief of the'Dock-spus or John Day's River band of
Walla-Wallas; Mark, William Chenook, and Cush--Kella, chiefs
of The Dalles band of the I‘-Iascoes; Toh-simph, chief of the
Ki-gal-twal-la band of Wascoes; and Wal-la-chin‘, chief of the
Dog River band of Wascoes.

"ARTICLE 1. The above-named confederated bands of Indians

‘ cede to the United States all their right, title ,'and claim to

all and every part -of the country claimed by them, included in
the following boundaries, to-wit:

"Comrg1encing' in the middle oi‘ the -C olumbia River, at the
Cascade Falls, and running thence southerly t_o_the summit of
the Cascade Mountains; thence along said summit to the forty-'
fourth parallel of north altitude; thence east on’ that parallel
to the summit oi‘ the Blue Mountains, or the western boundary
of the Sho-sho-ne or Snake country; thence northerly along
that summit to a point due east from the head-waters of Willow

. creek; thence west to ‘the head-waters of said creek; thence dew-In said

stream to its junction with the Columbia River; and thence downthe

r channel‘ of the Columbia River to the place of beginning. Provided,

however, that so much of the country described above as is contained
in the follot-dng boundaries, shall, until otherwise directed by the
President oi“ the United States, be set apart as a residence for

said Indians, which tract for the purposes‘ contemplated shall be .
held and regarded as an Indian reservation, to wit: '

. _ "Commencing in the middle of the channel of the Dechutes
River opposite the eastern termination of a range of high lands
'-151133-13’ known as" the’!-Iutton I«Io':-ntains; thence westerly to the
summit of said range, along the divide to its co:=:-_nec'tion with 
the Cascade Nozzntains; thence ‘to the suramit of said mountains;
thence southerly to Mount Jefferson; thence down the main branch
of Dechutes P‘.it*-er; heading in this peak to its junction with
Dechutes River and thence down the middle of the channel of said
river to the place of beginning. -31- ~==- -I£- P:c*o'c:'.ded, also, that the
exclusrfwe right of taking fish in the streams running through and
bordering said reservation is hereby secured to said Indians; and
at all other usual and accus‘toned stations, in common with citizens

I

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 - ' 550

of the United States, and of erecting suitable houses for curing the
same; also the privilege of hunting, gathering roots and berries, and
pasturing their stock on unclaimed lands, in common. with citizens,
is secured to them. Andprovided, also that if any band or bands

of Indians, residing in and claiming any portion or portions

of the country in this article, shall not accede to. the terms

of this treaty, then the bands becoming parties hereunto agree

to receive such part of the several and other pay=:.::nts herein

named as a consideration for the entire country described as
aforesaid as shall be in the proportion that their aggregate

number may have to the whole number of Indians residing in and
claiming the entire country aforesaid , as consideration and payment in full for the tracts in said country claimed by them. * '1' '19.

"ARTICLE 14. -:‘<' -3-‘ -=-"- The United States also engage to erect
four dwelling-houses, one for the head chief of the confederated
bands, and one each for the Upper and Lower De Chutes bands of
Walla-uallas, and for the Wascopum band of Waseoes, and to fence
and plough for each of the said chiefs ten acres of‘ land; also
to pay the head chief of the confederated bandsa salary of‘
five hundred dollars per annum for twenty years, cc:-nmcncing six
months after the three principal bands named in this treaty shall
have removed to the reservation, or as soon thereafter as a
head chief should be elected: «re -:s- -:9". ° i

14. On November 15, 1865, a supplemental treaty was entered into
between the parties hereto, which was ratified March 2, 1867, 1h Stat. 751,
and which reads in part as follows: ,

"Articles of agreement and convention entered into at the
Warm Springs Agency, Oregon, by J. W. Perit Huntinrton, Sup't
Indian Affairs for Oregon, on behalf of the United. States, and
the undersigned, chiefs and head-men of the Confederated tribes
and bands of Middle Oregon, the same being 2H§£ 
supplemental to the treaty negotiated with the afore said tribes
on the twenty-fifth day of June , eighte en hunsired and fiftyfive, and ratifiedby the Senate of the United States on the
eighteenth day of April, eighteen hundred and fifty-nine.

 

"ARTICLE 1.   -39; Therefore it is hereby s-aipulated and

agreed that all the rights enumerated in the thi cl proviso of
the first section "of the b'efore-mentioned treaty of the twentyfifth of June, eighteen hundred and fifity-five -- that is to
say, the right to take fish, erect houses, hunt gszae, gather

roots and berries, and pasture animals upon lands without the

‘‘ Ind. C1. C01: . 557 551

reservation set apart by the treaty aforesaid -- are hereby

relinquished by the eonfcderatod Indiian tribes and bands of

Middle Oregon, parties to this treaty. (Undorlining supplied)

5'. (a) A small ‘strip inside ".‘:‘...,- northeastern limits of the 1855'
eession was previously ceded to the United States by the Walla--Wa_'Lla,
Cayuse and Umatilla Indians on June 9, 1855 (12 Stat. 9115), and is Pa-‘t"0'
or the area involved in this Commission's Docket Ne. ' 2634. By order of the
Comrrdssion Docket: Nos. 261; and l98 were consolidated for purposes of
trial.

(b) In Docket No. 87, Northern Pauite Ration, et alsz vs. United

States, 7 Ind. Clms. Comm. 322, aboriginal title was asserted to all land

 

in Oregon east of the summit of the Cascade Range ar.d south of approxim--'

ately the 15° of latitude, which area included the southern portion of

see tract here involved. Most of the present Warm Springs Indian Re servatior.

is within the area there claimed. The land to which this Commission found
the petitioner in Docket 87 had established Indian title lies south of the
area here involved, but the Commission also found that an entity known as
the Walpapi Tribe of Snake Indians had occupied a part of central eastern
Oregon and on August 12, 18555‘ (11; Stat. 683) had ceded a tract therein.

It was determined that the petitioner in Docket No, 87 had no authority a
to present claims on behalf_ of said walpapi Tribe of Snake Indians (7

Ind. Clms. Comm. 322, 356). No other claim has been filed}-Ii'i‘.«h_thiS
Commission on behalf of said Walpapi Tribe. The tract ceded by it ‘on

v‘tUE5U5’° 12: 1355, includes the eastern portion of the land here in'vol'ved.

(c) In Docket No. 17, Snake or Pauite Indians of the Former

'  _

 

Halheur Reservation in Oregon v. United States, 11 Ind. Clms. Comm. 571,

an-uj-u-anaur*i.::

   

this Commission found the petitioners, who had claimed a large tract
in southeastern Oregon and whose ancestors had signed the unratified
treaty of December 10, 1868, “had exclusively occupied and used in
Indian fashion from time inmemorial -X~ % -ii- the area of land included within
the boundaries of tho Malheur Reservation in Oregon as it was defined
and described in the Executive Order of January 27, 1876 'X' '1' *9." This
reservation overlaps the extreme southeastern corner of the area claimed
by the present petitioner under recognized title, and lies partly
within that area claimed on behalf of the I-Falpapi Tribe of Snake Indians
by the petitioner in Docket No. 87.

6. The name Ta—ih appearing in the 1855 treaty is commonly
spelled Tygh; the Tenino Indians signatory thereto are also known as
Wayampum; the Dock-Spus Indians are more -cosmonly known as John Day
Fiver Indians; The Tygh, Tenino, Wyam an John Day River Indians, togather with the‘Wishram Indians residing north of the Columbia.River
belong to the Walla-I~Ialla subdivision of the Sahaptin linguistic group .
This division has no relation to the‘walla‘walla Indian tribe of
Washington except that of linguistics. The '.T.ygh_., Tenino, ‘»‘J'ye_'n and
John Day River Indians were commonly referred to as W“ ya:.'1pum Indians,
by which name we shall hereafter coll-ec'ti’»'o2;: refer to them.

The Ki-gal-tx:al-la are ‘also ‘known as ‘:.’atls.l:s». Indians and as Cascade Indians. The Dog River Indians are also KI‘;-’.2=Ir."f1 as Hood River

3 End. Cl. Comm. 557 553

lndians. The Dalles Indians are also known as Calasco Indians and as
-fasco Indians. These three were frequently collectively referred to
as the Wasco, and’ we shall hereafter collectively refer to them as Wasco
Indians. The Wasco and the Skeen who lived north of the Columbia River
at The Dalles, formed one of the Upper Chinook divisions of the Chinookan
linguistic family.

7. South and southeast of the Wayampum in the early nineteenth
century were Shoshonean speaking Northern Pauite who were also known
‘as Shoshone, Snake and Digger Snake Indians. Northeast and eastward
were Umatilla, Nez Perce‘ and Walla Walla Indians using the Walla Walla.
dialect of the Sahaptan language, and the Cayuse Tribe with a similar
but slightly differeint dialect of the Sahaptan language, all possessing A
herds of horses. Directly north of the Wayampum were the related Wishran. North of the Wasco were the related Skeen and to the northwest
were other Chinookan speaking Indians. So‘ ohwest and west of the Wasco
were the Molala, speaing the Cayuso tongue. South of the headwaters of
the Deschutes River were Klamath and Modoc Indians. The Wasco and Wayampum were friendly with all but the Snakes, who-were their ancient

enemies. These Snakes had practically no fireiarms nor horses before

1800.

8. The Columbia River is the common bcmndary between the States
of 1'.’ ashington and Oregon. Along the northern limi'ts of the area involved
that river passes alternately through steep canyon walls and high

barren hills with sovcral islands and many rapids along its course.

8 Ind. Cl.Comm. 557 5611

At the northwest corner of the claimed tract it breaches the Cascade
range by means of a high waterfall called the "Cascade," the "Falls,"
or the "Shoots." Twenty miles upstream the Salmon River from the north
and Hood River from the south flew into the Columbia. Another thirty
miles upstream the Columbia River dips sharply southward, forming a
"U“. A series  rapids along the eastern side of that‘"U" is called
FFive Mile Rapids," “The Dalles," and the “long Narrows." Immediately
above are the "Ten Mile Rapids," also known as the "Short Narrows” or
"Short Dalles." At their eastern end is Cclilo Falls which is also
known as the "Great Falls“ and as "Cclilo." Three miles above Celile

the Deschutes River enters the Columbia from the south. Farther up'stream the John.Day River and'Hillow Creek also enter the Columbia River

from the south.

The Des Chutes River drains the western portion of the claimed

"tract. Its tributary, Crooked River, drains the central and southeastern

section.and‘Willeu-Creek drains the northeast corner. About thirty
air miles above its mouth and just above Tygh Creek is a crossing on the
IDesChutes River known.as Shrear‘s Bridge, formerly called Tilquni.

9. Before 1855 petitioner Indians operated large fisheries at
Shrearfs Bridge and along the Columbia River between the Cascades and
Celilo. This stretch of the Columbia River was a great merchandisius

.0 hu‘

mart to'which the Indians down river contributed shells and beads and

_the plains Indians brought slaves, dried roots, dried elk and deer meat,

buffalo robes, skins, horses and other items. Trade was controlled by

-...

8 ‘End. (31. Comm. 557 » S65

the‘wasco and'Wayampum and the principal medium of exchange was dried
salmon. The visiting Indians paid tribute to use these fisheries. The
salmon runs occurred between.May and October; trout, sturgeon, snelt
and eels were present throughout the year. Great numbers of visiting
Indians of various tribes were present during the salmon runs, all mixing promisouously with the'Wasco and‘Wayampum. T
‘Recognized Title

10. As early as l8h3 the Indians residing east of the Cascades
expressed their cencern.that they might lose "possession of their lands
and country;" Their dissatisfaction had reached a high degree'by 1855
and was due to a number of different factors. IHiners had been gathering
in.eastern Oregon in increasing numbers for several.years; Astoria
 sf‘. been settled in 1811 and a steady flow of traffic passed along the
dolumbia River and over a wagon road running westward just north of
Tygh.Creek and south ofWMt. Hood. Fort Van Couver had been established
in l8?S, a military force was stationed at The Dalles in 1853, and
there were missions at several points along the Columbia River.

The Government's policy was not to recognize land title in any’
of the western coastal Indians, but the Organic.Aot of August lh, 18b8,
the Indian Intercourse.Acttof%June 30, l83h, which was extended to

Oregon on.June S, 1850, and the July 26, l8Sh, Law for the Provisional

iGovernment of Oregon, eaoh preserved to the Indians their rights of

person and property. A number of treaties had recently been negotiated
among the tribes west of the Cascade Range under an l850.Act providing
that the Indians indigenous to that region might be relocated east of
__a Cascades. The Act of September 27, 1850 (9 Stat. h96) also authorized survey of the country west of the Cascades and settlement upon

-instructed to procure maps of Oregon an

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557

“public lands" in Oregon by the whites. This Act was generally interpreted as applying to all of Oregon Territory and the resulting influx
of whites into eastern Oregon, which the military was unable to control,
further disturbed the Indians residing within that region.

114 Superintendent Anson Dart and his successors in office,
the Territorial Governors, and others familiar with the situation in
Oregon in that area immediately east of the Cascades, all urged oxtinguishmont of Indian title there and that the Indians in that section
of our country be made secure in reservation homes before hostilities
broke out between them and the whites. During July, l8§3, the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon, Joel Palmer, suggested that
treaties of cession be made with the'walla‘Halla, Cayuse, Hos Percc,
"Wascopams and DesChutes" Indians. Congress authorised such treaties
with Indians in Oregon on July 31, l8Sh (10 Stat. 330) and.Supcrintendent
Palmer and Isaac Ste'ens, the Territorial Governor of'Hashington Torritory, were appointed as treaty commissioners to negotiate the treaties.

12.t Similar instructibns were issued to the two treaty commissioners.
Since the Commissioner of Indian Affairs believed, as expressed in his
letter er instructions to Superintendent 1>ss.msz~ that "the claim of tribes
in Oregon to title are based on occupancy alone, and that occupancy of a
nature not enuf (sic) fixed and well defined by boundaries," they were

3 ton Territories shoring

d‘Uas:

‘I

the location of the different Indian tribes and- the extent of country
claimed by each of them as well as “the nature of the tenure or claim."
Unification of the various small bands or fragments of tribes into

Confederations and their location upon a limited number of contiguous

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 557

reservations was also recommended. If this could not be accomplished,
the Commissioners were then to treat with only those tribes or hands adjacent to the white settlements.
.13. (a) In response to Superintendent Palmer‘s instructions that
he ascertain the "location, number, conditions and means I of subsistence"
of the Indians within his District, Agent R. R. Thonpson at The Dallas
made a written report on September 28, 18511, enclosing a map of his District
which had been prepared by one Major G. 0. Haller, then with the 
forces at The Dallas.
(b) Agent Thompson who had but recently been placed in charge of

the Utilla District, reported that it embraced all the country betweenthe Cascades and R0 cky Mountains lying north of the hh° or latitude and

S south of the Columbia River, and he divided it into three divisions. He

said the Cayuse , Nez Perce , Flathead and Hountauln Snake Shoshonie were in
the northeastern portion, the Tlamath (Klamath) and Digger Shoshonie in
the south and the Join: Day, DesChutes, Tyich (Tygh) ., weeoo and Dog (Hood)
River or Cascade Indians in the northwest , being "found along the

Columbia Riyer and its branches, from the country of the Cayuse westward to the Cascades, or Great Falls." This last division he said included
"many fragments of tribes, haying no chiefs and acknowledging no authoritryr
beyond the head of a large fw.i3.y; " that the tribes were much divided,
with bitter jealcvnsies exist.ing between bands of the same tribe: that he
had not seen all of the Indians within his District but the map which he
enclosed would help in forming a “correct idea oi‘ the locality" of them,
Ind that Major I-Ialler who had prepared the map had taken pains to secure

accurate information of the topography of the country. Still later

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 568

Thompson recommended that the Indians west of the John Day River

be located upon one reservation and those east of that river be placed
upon another reservation.

(c) when forwarding this map and report to the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs, Superintendent Palmer reported that the country south of
the M4°. of latitude was not attached to any agency 3 that the Klamath owned
the country for about 35 miles east of the Cascade range and the Modoc,
Mo-e-teas and Shoshone, Digger or Snake Indians lived east of them.

’ (d) Four copies of the Haller map are in evidence, each showing
broken lines which divide the country between various Indian entities
whose names are printed within the different divisions. One copy does
not list any Indians wzlthin the area north of Mt. Hood and south of the
Columbia River from the Cascades east to Hood River. Wasco Indians are
located north and west of Fifteen Mile Creek, east of the Hood Riirer

and south of the Columbia River. John Day Indians are located within

a narrow strip encompassing both banks of the John Day River from its
mouth on the Columbia south almost to the 111:0 of latitude. _ "_Scattering
Bands Inds." are listed within ‘the drainage of 1*: illow Creek, .e3:clusi've
of its extreme headwaters. Along a mountainous ridge extending from the
Cascades at about the hhio of latitude to the Grand Ronde in northeast
Oregon is a further division line and yet another such line extends from
the Vicinity of Mt. Jefferson in the Cascade Range northeast to the
DesChutes River just a‘oc'~:e the mouth of Cree";-zed Ei.:'=."»'er, and then runs
southeast along the southern perimeter of Crooked Sliver drainage to the

Cascades-Grand Rondo line. From this co:;1tact point another division

*3 Ind. Cl. Comm. SS7 ' % 569'

line runs southerly between Klamath Indians on the west and Snake Indians
on the east. Both Klamath and Deschutes Indians appear within the
extensive area encompassing the upper drainage of the Destlhutes River.
The Deschutes Indians are located between  John Day and Wasco Indians
but it is not clear whether they are also assigned to the area south of
the Wasco which liesbetween the Cascades and the Deschutes river.

(e) The remaining three copies of the Heller map each reflect
additional data. It is not apparent when and by whom this additional
information was obtained or reflected upon these maps. During l8SS

Major Heller, then stationed at The Dallas, in an official report

expressed his opinion that the Snake country extended west to the Cascades,

ppiiii-zhich is in conflict 1;-:i.th their locations upon the four maps credited

to him.’ _

114. ~ Having concluded a council on the walla Walla River in Washington
Territow and taken cessions from the Umatilla, Walla Walla, Nez Perce,
Cayuse and other Tribes, Superintendent Palmer on June 21, 1855, instructed
Agent R. R. Thompson at The Dallas to assemble “all. the_ Indians inhabiting

the country between Willow Creek and the Cascade Falls , and between

the Columbia River and the hlzth parallel of North Latitude, =i for the purpose '

of Palmer meeting with them in an attempt to extinguish their Indian
title. The described area is theiUtilla District, exclusive of that part

which had been ceded by the tribes treated with during the Walla Walla

council.

15. The council with petitioner Indians, held for the purpose of

negotiating a treaty of cess-ion, opened in the late afternoon of June 22 ,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 I 570

1853, and lasted three days. The treaty had been previously prepared and
the Indians had been told the site proposed for their reservation. All

of the Indians wished to retain their fisheries. The 1-Eyam wanted a roservation between the DesChutos and John Day Rivers extending from the Columbia river to the Blue Mountains; the Tygh wanted a reservation between
the Deschutes Falls and Tygh Creek, running south to a wagon road beyond
Tama-la-we (Metolius)vRiver, and extending from Mt. ‘Jefferson east to the
Muttonhountain.’ During the treaty council Mark, the Wasco Chief, said
of the ‘proposed reservation site:

-I-_ -It -11- the place that you have mentioned I have not seen. There

‘is no Indians nor whites there yet, and that is the reason I

say I know nothing about that county. -2- %~’- % My country lies

from Dog River to the Tigh -e:- as -a:'- we claim the country from two

niles below the Dog River to the Mutton I-1't.* "-'1' '31’

Other chiefs or leaders oi‘ the Wasco bands asked for reservation p
land along Tygh Creek, but in order that the reservation would be removed
from the wagon road that ran we St:-Iard just north of Tygh Creek and south
of Fit. flood, Palmer insisted that it be located i'arther'south.

, Both Tenino and Tygh Indians e;~:.ecu‘ted'the treaty of cession on
Jufle 23, I355, and Paliner thereafter explained that the Tenino sold their
own country but not that of the I-Iasco Indians. ‘.1-The remaining Indian
entities executed the treaty on June 25, 1855.

i (a) No discussion was had and no investigation made by any person
representing the United States to asce-r't-'.=..in the separate or the joint
territorial claims of the several "tribes and bands" I-eferred to in the
preamble of the treaty of June 25, 1855, but who are designated "nations”

and "tribes" within the body of that instrument.

16- In his transmittal letter of July 9, 1855, Superintendent

8 "End. c1. Comm. 55‘? S71

Palmer reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that the treaty
with the Taih.or*Upper Doschutes band, the'Wyan:or Lower Deschutes band,
the Tenino and Doskspus or John Day‘s River band and the sevcral.bands
of‘Wasco or Dallas Indians, "all of whom have been confedcrated," was
signed by all the Indians residing within the purchased.area except for
aife families living on either side of the Colunbia River between the
Cascades and Dog River, who were "a part of the Dog Rivers" and whose
ehief'Has'Wal-la-chin. He recognized and reported that the eastern boundary
of the cession probably conflicted with the boundaries of the cession
obtained by him.from the Cayuse Indians at the'Walla Walla council earlier
that month, but said he thought this should not be objectionable to the
ratification of this treaty since the boundaries of the Indians'were not
sry'well.defined and the government was purchasing the interests of all
Indians in.this area.
(a) Superintendent.Palmer also enclosed in.his transmittal letter
a sketch of the ceded area locating thereon a few topographical features
about the proposed reservation. No territorial boundaries of petitioner
or other Indians are depicted upon this sketch.A
17- Durkzg August, 1855, dissatisfied elements of the Walla Walla,
and other tribes who had.éxecuted treaties of cession at the'Walla Walla
council during June, 1855, began a war against the United States. Unnilling to recommend approval of treaties unsatisfactory to the tribes
signatory thereto, the presentation of those treaties for ratification
by Congress was delayed until July l8S6. The treaty with petitioner Indians

was ratified March 8, 1859. ’

1

8 Ind. Cl. Goes. 557 S72

18, ‘With the exception of part of the'Eyan Indians and a few Tygh
Indians under the Ryan Chief Stock-otc-Ly, petitioner Indians were
friendly during the l855—l856 uprising, and with other friendly Indians
from north of the Columbia River they camped near the Dalles and on Hood
River for protection from the hostiles. The proposed site for the reservation was, however, examined and approved by petitioner Indians during
Rbrch, 1856, and some voluntarily took up residence there. The‘Wasco

<9
were moved to the reservation during March, 1858, but part of the John
Day River Indians from the region about Clarnc, Oregon, did not go upon
the reservation until 1878. During January, I859, those upon the reservation held their first election and se3ccted one Casséhiller as Head

Chief of all the bands and groups upon the Warm Springs Reservation.

‘Subsequently other Head Chiefs were elected, but for man‘ years the'Wyam,

‘II

Tygh, John Day River, Tcnino and'Hascc each ciao had their own chiefs.

19. The several entities named in the preamble to the treaty of
1855 were merged by that treaty into the Coefederated Tribes and Bands
of Middle Oregon. Such confederation did noi increase the area of any

tract of land which said merging entities nay have separately held under
Indian title prior to that date.
20. From a consideration or the entire record, including all

transactions, cven3., official correspondence and circumstances leading

" ‘-" -In -I.-- —‘-¢--v- q-.-no  ,'r-’ l I on -vp to er} so;rcur;;ng the .s;_1v of Jure 2w. 1:55. the Co.rission finds
or " .- "' " .1
ta“ ‘a’ w?» A L . H r . - ~ .2 r * ".<f- L441 9
~xo o.ecne;n, at: or :. T;'¢f§liCQ o:i:;::. ,-;..n b“c_3 to an? area or
.. '--' D
 ‘l 1 "‘." ‘.‘-4|-s “'<-*5 4- an. 1- yrs“ 1 -‘ "‘ If"-no " II. & ‘ -1r - U3 so in ' 1 ’erara:: (.‘lL * ; ltlos b0 that
trC“tY: T3” W t“: e113 1 t-:n zcsulti Q ~ *1’ 1*r:cr of such entities

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 573

Original Indian Title
21. The Commission finds from the numerous conflicting estimates
of the number of Wasco and \«~Eaya_mpum lndians, the several census reports

beginning about l8Sh, and other information concerning Columbia River

Indians originating between 1829 and l8SO, that at the time of the cession

of June 25, 1855, there were approximately 380'Wasco and 950'W3Y3mPum Indian5sof which 150 belonged to the John Day River grouping, 500 Were Tygh 335 thB
balance Tenino and hyam or Lower Deschutes. Prior to a series of epidemics
which occurred between 1829 and 1832, it is estimated these Indians numbered
approximately n,ooo. At the time or the trial herein duringMarch 1958, there
were 1,355 Indians belonging to petitioner organization.22. The four groups of'Wayamnum.Indians lived on the basaltic plateau
L hich ext-ends from northern British Columbia‘ south to the Blue Mountains in
Oregon. Their culture was that of the Plateau, its basic features being
pacifism, democracy; and equality. Dual chioftainship existed, kinship was
bi-lateral, religion was emphasized. The'Wasco had a basic northwest coast
culture but had adopted many of the Plateau traits. They had chiefs and
influential men whe were related to the chiefs and persons appointed to
positions of importance by the chiefs. The Cascade‘Hasco had a few intonations and words in their speech more closely akin.to the speech of the
Coastal Chinook than.that of the.Dog River or*Dalles'Wasco, but were closely
related to the latter groups. By 1800 both the waste and the Wayampum lived
in.extended families in.semi—subterranean houses, were a few items of apparel,
practiced exogamy and polygam , and were non-agriculturaiists; they possessed
horses and were adept in use of canoes. 8Thsir principal food was fish, their

principal villages being located near their main fisheries. Both tnc'Nasco

.8 Ind. 01. Comm. 55? 57b

and the Wayampum supplemented their fish diet with roots, berries, and

Wild game and foul, for which they went inland each spring and fall.

Dried foods ‘are also acquired through trade with the surrounding Indian
tribes and bands who visited the fisheries between Celilo and the Cascades.

23. Private ownership of property was recognized among both the Wasco
and the Wayampum, but it ‘as looked upon as a sort of stewardship of an
economic function, The fishing stations'were privately owned and inherited,
the owner, however, never denying their use to members of the village. Usage
was regulated and allotted first to members of the im.odiato family, then the
Village people, next the ethnic group and, lastly, to other friendly Indians.
2h. The Commission finds from a preponderance of the evidence that
before the acquisition of the horse the'Eayanpum sore restrained north of
the Columbia River through fear of the Snake Indians to the southeast and
south; About l730€l7SD the Snakes drove the Cayuse speaking Molala out from
the vicinity of Shrear*s Bridge on the DesChutes River and from Tygh Valley
along the Tygh Creek, although some of then later returned. The Snake
Indians then.roamed west to the Cascades, hunting gane and gathering berries
about Ollalie Butte and Mt. Jefferson, riitor;;g on Seekseokwa Creek, around
Shaniko, Oregon, and about the warm.and hot springs within the limits of the
present Warm Springs Indian Re servati 2:.
BF l30h.the'Wasco were established south of the Columbia River, their

3'

villages near the Cascades and at the mouth of hood River being observed

by Lswis and Clark*e egg: rater; gaztf in .;u;-D5 and soon thereafter by
Ross Cox. About the same time the'Hayau3'n j;:=y:, saving increased thei:

5tT1kinE power through acquisition of th; horse and some firearms, moved

their villages into the northern part of the ollinod areas. A part of the

Tenino expelled tho Holala and took over their iish :; at Shrear's Bridge

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 S73

and their homes in Tygh Valley. The so people became known as the Tygh
Indians and were occupying this region at the time of the eession in l8SS.
25. The I-Jasco were a sedentary people. The Cascade Wasco maintained
villages on the Columbia River within a few miles -of the Cascades, with one
village slightly inland on Eagle Creek. The Dog River wasco had villages

along the Columbia River, one near the mouth of Dog .(Hood) River, and one

zzfive miles downstream. The Dalles Wasco had viHag_:es at the mouth of Mill

Creek, near Seufort, Oregon, and one near Big Eddyyporegon, within four
miles of the I-zesternmost village of the Tenino '9-Ia§'ampum.i

The Wayampum villages have been described as '-"pairs of villages,"
because each of the four divisions oi‘ I~.’aya:aTpum had. one village of substantial

structures near their main fishery and another of inferior structures located

,  a more sheltered area :7 ra,-'~, few miles removed, efzere they spent the more severe

‘winter period. The Tenino villages were located, -one on the Columbia River
four miles east of Big Eddy, Oregon, and one six miles inland on Eight Mile
Creek. The Wyam villages were located at Ce'.Lilo on the south bank of the
Columbia and on the left bank of the Deschutes River a few miles above its
mouth- The Tygh‘ villages were at Shrear's Bridge on the Deschutes ‘River and
in Tygh Valley on Tygh Creek. The John Day River ‘élayampmn had villages on T
the opposite sides of the John Day River, within  few miles of its mouth
on the Columbia River. These were the principal villages of the Wasco and
Wayampum bietween l8lO and 1855.

26. Complete freedom of trade prove-.iled between the Wasco and the
Wayampum. No de:['inite 'coun_d.am' line be tween them was rig:'z.dl;v' observed.

27. The Wasco and the Wayampum each had a well developed sense of

the right of user of their fishing stations. Perrnissive use of the stations

B Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 §”6

was recognized, bat it was rigidly controlled Ly the individual owners.
Others of their respective ethnic group, as well as visiting Indians
representing other tribes or nations of lndians, respected their authority
over the fishing sites.

28. Such usage as the Wasoo and tho Uayampnm made of the land away
from the immediate vicinity of their villages was seasonal. Even after
they'had the horse in considerable numbers and theninrpossossed land
mobility, the'Wasco and Wayampum continued to depend upon their fisheries
for their principal subsistence. The periods of their absence from the
villages were brief and seldom, if ever, complete. Customarily'individuals

remained in the village during these food gathering trips.

  "J9'er.r\  715+ 7-yryctcgt-ac‘? 4:1 C:a*1"1<:‘.r:; A‘? ‘ix:-H11-1A--5‘?!-or -v-rs I54, +'r'I.nt-I-r«o.4-r-o Hru--.... ...-u... \.  L — - .. 3- _ - _._.. .. V--. -.r‘-an-n-u--.--0-s—-o.’ -up-— hr-In «icy I-— nrrv 1-u---our uh-v

-1

between the three divisions, in their hunting and food-gathering activities.
Non-village areas were open to all who cared to use them. Hunting and foodgathering country was regarded as common territory open to any one of the
‘wasco groups.

30. _The Cascade‘Wasco went west as far as Fort Vancouver for the

'Wappato root and across the Columbia Rite: to the valley of white Salmon
River for camas root. The Dog or Hood Riiet-Uasoo also went north across
the Columbia on occasion. It does not appear, however, that an’ Indians

from.west of the Cascades or from north of the Columbia came within the

claimed area for any purncse other than to sugar permissive use of the

fisheries and to participgfe in the trad . V1: ling and social activities
4.. ...: .3 _ _ __ _ _____- ~ ~ ___\,;_____ - --,‘conducted within the several villages ocri;_ -_: r«-ing and listing seasons.
31. The number of individuals ccnpri;f1_ 1% 1 ice Easco groupings
I-nu-so-3
C.:..|j|_(

J. ‘L "Q". "'-J 0 c IN.‘ ' ‘ - q -u ‘r f'\"I/F L‘: 4- 7 r 1 -'~— ‘r-s‘: 0 -'-"VP . ' -¥--: Ir~.L- '
in-the  U..LDLad.I1C3  I-I-if.’ 39: s. t.;.'. u.-}'~- ‘ ‘-...v }.._.'..L....’_<.i i"“"\'UI' 'h'1'L.;.L1'1 I-'-ii-.3.C.h

1-9:‘:8In_d. c1. Comm. 557 577

their villages and fisheries were located was such that a close bond of
unity existed throughout their entire membership.

32. Individual Wasco Indians and separate families could join or
depart from any village within their ethnic group at will. There was no
‘tribal organization in a political sense uniting all ‘the I-Easco under a
head chief or tribal council. Individual chiefs and sub-chiefs controlled
within the separate village areas. In aboriginal times these were probably
no more than heads of the respective extended i‘ami_'I.ies.

33. The Waseo looked upon themselves as one people, distinguishing
between their three divisions and all other Indians. They were regarded
as a single entity by the Wayampum Indians and reported to be a tribe by
‘fjnerous white persons coming in contact with them prior to the 1855 cession,
each persons including missionaries, government officials and other individuals
such as trappers and traders .

3h. Aboriginally and at the time of the cession on June 25, 18 55, the
Wasco were an identifiable group of American Indians and a tribe within
mthropological terminology _re specting ethnic unity.  that date they were
a land-using entity and as such an identifiable. group or tribe of Indians
entitled to present a claim under the Indian Claims Commission Act in their
own right or by means of a representative action.

35. The Wayampum did not possess a sense of boundary or of trespass
as between the four groupings known as Tenino, W rz:-:21, Tygh or John Day R.".ver
Indians in their food gather-im and hunting activities. Non-village areas
were regarded as common property and open to any one of the Way.-zmpum desiring

use them.
36. The John Day River Indians went north to 1~:t.-‘hon-as in Washington

Territory for berrying purposes. The Tcnino, Tygh and I-Iyam Indians hunted

8 Ind. Cl. com. 557 I 578

berries on the slopes of Mt. Hood. Hunting trips and other food gathering
activities were carried on together by all four groupings within the country
south of their villages without regard to village affiliations.

37. Individual Wayampum Indi ans an... separate families appear to have
possessed complete freedom to affiliate withiany one of the several villages
within the four divisions of the I-Jayampum. Indiridual chiefs and sub-chiefs

controlled within the several villages but there was no overall council or

political organization uniting the four separate divisions of wayampum Indians.

38. The We.yaInpum distinguished between wayampurn Indians and those of

other tribes, nations or divisions. The I.-fagraznpum looked upon themselves as

constituting independent, autonomous dual-village Indian entities. Statements
by Indians present when the 1855 treaty of cession was negotiated refer to

the Wayampum parties signatory thereto as the Tdyam or war Deschut-es, the
Tygh or Upper Deschutes and the _Tenino. There is substantial other evidence
disclosing the participation in that treaty of the John Day River Indians and
establishing their ezdstence as a separate, independent‘ division of Wayampum
Indians.  ‘~ ‘

39. The Wasco and each of the 'i'3*'ya’n1p'-:-Jr: di'=:is:3.ons, together with the

related Skeen and 'v.’ishram Indians from north of the Columbia River, united

in excursions against the Snake Indians, such excursions continuing as late

as l8hh according to reports of white persons then living at The Dalles.
The Wayarrrpum, living nearer to the Snalze Ir;di.-ans, were more frequently in
Contact with them. They acted in concert and also each division acted
independently in defensive action and in assaults against the Snakes, as
the need or opportunity arose.

1.10. Government offieials, early t.radors, trappers and other travelers

S Ind. Cl. Conn. 53? 579

through this region considered the several separate 1*.’ayampu:n divisions to
be separate entities. They were treated with as such during the negotiations
culminating in the treaty of cession on June 25, 1855.

hi. Prior to and at the time of the treaty oai‘ ccssion on June 25, 1855,
the Tygh, Tcnino, Wyam and John Day River Indians ,, comprising together the
Wayampum division of the I-.Ta_L'La W’a_'Lla speaking Sahagptin dialect, were each

separate , independent autonomous dual-village Indians. The separate, independent autonomous dual-villages were the land-using entities in each instance.

1:2. A friendly relationship prevailed between the Wasco and the Tygh,
Tenino, Ryan and John Day River Indians. Their languages were mutually intelligible; their cultures and living patterns were similar. They recognized
no definite physical territorial boundary between the Wasco and the Tygh,
Tenino, Wyam or John Day River Indians. In the region south of Five Mile
Creek, north of the headwaters of Tygh Crock, about Dufur, Oregon, and within

a. region about Mt. Hood they made joint use of the hunting’ and food gathering
terrain.

133. A definite physical boundary between the T.-.r’ayampum divisions and

the friendly neighboring tribes to the ‘cast was not recognized. The Wayarzpurn

divisions upon occasion went up the Columbia River even beyond the present

townsite of Arlington, Oregon, their fishing and hunting or food gathering
camps intermingling with those of the Cayuse, Umatilla and Nez Perce Indians
in that region. Within the region west of Willow Creek and east of the

immediate vicinity of the John Day River the natural. resources of the country

' “GT9 utilized by these ffour related speakers of the Walla Walla dialect of

the Sahaptin tongue.

ML. Several documentary references are made to Lchim Indians as

i
F

:3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 ~ _ >50

residing about the mouth of'Hillow Creek, it being suggested both that
they'were a band of migrating Idaho Indians and an isolated band of Shoshone Indians. The name Lohim is a Umatilla word meaning “stupid, untrustworthy people," and has no reference to band or tribal affiliations.
There are also numerous documentary references to Walla Walla Indians being
within this vicinity as well as Nez Perce, Cayuse, Umatilla andiHayampum.
Since these all speak the‘Nalla'Halla dialect, such references may have
application to any one of them. The'Wayampum differed from the Nez Perce,
Cayuso and Umatilla in that while these three tribes did about the middle

of the nineteenth century have some friendly contact with Shoshonean speaking

Indians such as trading horses with those visiting the Grand Ronde Valley in

. northeastern Oregon and permitting a few Snake families ‘to accompany their

hunting parties, the‘wasco and'Wayampum maintained a state of enmity with
the Snakes of southern Oregon.

1:5.

The first Shoshonoan Indians to obtain firearms and horses were
those in Idaho. These objects were late in spreading among the Snake of
central Oregon since they could not be obtained by deprcdation against

emigrant trains as none of the earlier trails west ran through this section

of the country; Also the Snakes who existed upon roots, grasses, berries,

fish, insects and smaller species of animal life, regarded the horse as

food and made little use of it for locomotion. They were, however, skilled

in use of the bow and arrow, were skilled in a stealthy approach and ability
to fade away into rough terrain upon pursuit and were held in great fear by
the Hasco and‘Hayampum entities.

1:6.

From a preponderance of the evidence it is established that the

P. 7' a -u
tlrot half of the nineteenth century was one of strife between the Snakes

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 5:17 5'5l_

Yuand the Nayampam entities. The wayampun bands gradually extended their
hunting and ga.the:*ing acti*:':.§ies south:-:ard, pressing against the pOOI‘.L}"
equipped and less mobile Snakss until about l5h8 thcy pastured their horses
in the vicinity of Tygh Valley and their hunting and foodgathering expedi-_
tions were penetrating as deep south as Cultus Lake. The John Day River
Indians pushed south up the John Day River and by 1855 appear to have controlled the immediate valley of that river as far up as the vicinity of
Clarno just north of the great bend of the John Bay River. A band of then;
eentinued to reside there until about 1878. Snake I.;.i.ians were in 1855

using the upper reaches of the John Day and C'.=:—oo1-zed River, and still disputed
usage of the area was ward to the Cascades, appearing north of the present

southern boundary of the warm Springs Indian reservation on the east. Cayuse

and Nez Perce Indians were also traveling to the foothills of the Cascades,

_ passing south and west of the Warm Springs re sermtion, and fishing on the

John Day, Crooked River, and as late as 181;}, the I-Ietolius River.

1&7. From its inception the Snake Indians deeply resented the Warm
Springs reservation. For a number of yearsthey regularly and wstematiea.l1y
raided against thewreservation Indians and agency _g:;:.r;s;or;nel. Troops were
required to protect. the t-zorlrmen during constru::tio:1 of the agenw buildings
and to preserve life and property upon the reservation thereafter. 1‘.-'.:I.litary
ofi'icers and government officials con..~*z:=,c";,e-<1 wi oh the supervision and maintenance of the reservation during its early years CC£*1l:1311't-Ed upon those Snake
depredations, -explaining that the re servation ‘as siturted on the edge of
Snake territory, and Superintendent Edward Geary during 3.960 advised Brig.
General Harney that ‘‘‘o" some strange oversight this re ser-'-.' Z1JC.'.:-..C.‘I}. -31- -31- '‘«<- lies

within the limits of the territory not onl* claimed by the Snslcos the.-:'1se_':es,

8 Ind. Cl. Comm. 557 582

but admitted by the Indians, parties to the treaty (of Jun: 25, 1855), to
belong to them."

58. For a number of years after taking up residence upon.tho Warm Springs
reservation, the Wasco and the Tygh, Tcnino,'Wyam and John Day River entities,
together with those John Day River Indians who still resided near Clarno,Oregen,
continued_to hunt and fish and pasture their animals outside the reservation
area, and came in conflict with Snake Indians in the region southwest of the
reservation; The country about the headwaters of Trout creek was considered
"neutral country" in 1867 by some of the reservation Indians, at which time
thqy also said the upper drainage of McKay Creek was "near Snake country."

k9. Sovereignty of the United States was indisputably extended over

Oregon Territory by thc TT€8t3’with Great Britain conclu‘ed June l5, 18b6,

and.proclaimed August 5, l8h6. Thereafter, lands held by original Indian
title were not increased in derogation of the interests of the United States

without its consent.

50. On June 25, l8§5; the'Wasco Indians exclusively used and occupied

and held under original Indian title'a tract of land in 0regon'bounded as

follows: ' .

Commencing at the Cascades of the Columbia River and
running thence up said river to-a point two miles
easterly of the tonnsite of Big Eddy, Oregon; thence
due south to Pi teen Mile Creek; thence along Fifteen
Mile Creek to a point halfway between its mouth and
the mouth of Five Mile Creek; thence southwest by the
shortest route to the drainage divide between Five
Mile and Hill Creeks; thence southwest along said divide to the eastern limits of Hood River drairnse

-~s 3
thence westward to the Range lino batrean hinges 9 and
10 East; thence north along said Range line to the

Township line between Townships l and 2 south; thence
west along the Township line between said iennships l
and 2 south ottended, to the summit of the Cascade Range;
thence northerly along the summit of said Range to the
place of beginning at the Cases es of the Colunbis River.

8 Ind. c1. Com. 55? 553

51. (a) On June 25, 1855, the Tenino Band of Wayampum Indians
exclusively used and occupied and held under original Indian title a tract
in Oregon bounded as follows:

Commencing at a point on the Columbia River two miles
easterly of the to:-rnsite of Big Eddy, Oregon, and
running thence up the Columbia River to a point on

said river halfway between the present townsites of
Dillon, Oregon, and Celilo, Oregon; thence due south

to the watershed of Fifteen I-iile Creek; thence east

and south along the drainage divide betwe en Fifteen Mile
Creek and the Columbia and Deschutes Rivers to a point
due west of Grass Valley, Oregon; thence by direct line
to the western limits of Tygh Creek drainage; thence
west to the Range line between Ranges 9 and 10 east;
thence north along said Range line to a point opposite
the convergence of the drainage divides between Hood
River md Five Mile and Mill Creeks; thence east to
said last named drainage point; thence northeasterly
along the drainage divide between Mill and Five Mile
Creeks to a point due west er‘ the tounsite of Dufur,
Oregon; thence east to the tot-rnsite of Dufur, Oregon;
thence northerly in a direct line to a point on Fifteen
Mile Creek which is midway between its mouth and the
mouth of Five Mile Creek; thence along Fifteen Mile Creek
to a point due south of a point on the Columbia River
which is two miles east of the tot-msite of Big Eddy,

Oregon; thence due north to the place of beginning on the
Columbia River.

(b) On June 25, 1855, the I-Iyam Band of the I-Iayampum Indians exclu-=

sively used and occupied and held original Indian titleto an area in Oregon

described as follows;

Commencing at a point on the Columbia River which is

midway between the present townsites of Dillon and Celilo,
Oregon, and running thence up said river to the present
tow-rnsite of C-rant, Oregon, or if it be south or the Columbia
River, then to a point due north of Grant, Oregon; thence
southerly to the present to‘:-rnsite of Del-fess, Oregon; thence
southwest to the present townsite of Grass Valley, Oregon;
thence west to the drainage divide bet‘.-Ieen the watersheds

of the DesChutcs-River and Fifteen Mile Creek; thence northerly along the watershed between Fifteen Mile Creek and the
DesChutes and Columbia Rivers to a point due south of a point
on the Columbia River which is mid:-say between the townsitcs
of Dillon and Cclilo, Oregon; thence due north to the Columbia
River at the place of beginning.

8 Ind. c1. Comm. 557

5814

(c) On June 25, 1855, the John Day River Band of'Wayampum exclusjvely used, occupied and held under original Indian title a tract in

Oregon described as follows:

Commencing on the Columbia River at the townsite of Grant,
Oregon, or if it be south of the Columbia River, then to

a point due north of Grant, Oregon, and running thence

up said river to the mouth of Blalock Canyon; thence south

up said Canyon to its terminus and then by a straight line
-to the townsite of Rock Creek; thence by a straight line
southerly to the mouth of Cove Creek; thence to the mouth

of Currant Crceh;thence northwest to the headwaters of

Long Hollow Greek; thence west and northerly around Long
Hollow Creek drainage and thence by a straight line northerly
to a point 6 miles due east of Grass Valley, Oregon; thence
northerly'to DeMess, Oregon; thence northwest to Grant,.Oregon,
or if that tounsite be south of the Columbia River then to a

point on said river due north of Grant, Oregon, which is the
place of beginning; l

(d) On June 25, 1855, the Tygh Band ef'wayampum Indians exclusively

used, occupied and held under Indian title a tract in Oregon described as

follows:

Commencing at the point of intersection of Buck Creek
and the lst Standard Parallel south; thence to the

.headwaters of Bakeoven Creek; thence to the DesChutes

River at North Junction, Oregon; thence up said river

50 hhe m0uth Of Warm Springs River; thence up said‘warm
Springs River and the Mill Creek branch thereof,tQ Trout
Lake; thence by directeline to Ollalie Butte; thence along
the summit of the Cascade Range to Mt.'Wilson; thence by
direct line to the'western limits of Tygh Creek drainage;
thence along a straight line to a point where a line drawn
due west from Grass Valley, Oregon, will intersect the
drainage divide between Fifteen Mile Creek and the DesChutes
River; thence to the present tonnsite of Oakbrook, Oregon;
and thence southerly to the place of beginning.

1-: W-1 ‘re _:
ndgar e.'%1tc

1-‘bu our-I Q3-n an-nu-is

Chief Commissioner

‘Q-non-in-T-n-—c-..---——-..uu.
 .
M C

Associate Commissioner

Arthur V . Watkin :3
Associate Commissioner

 

