7 Ind. Cl. Com. 64 79

BEFORE THE INDIAN CIAIES COKMISSION

THE CHICKASAE NATION OF INDIAHS,
Petitioner,

vs. Docket No; 269

THE UNITED STATES or AI-ERICA,

\....oI\-...../\._./\....t'\-.../‘~.../\...d'\../‘~._./

Defendant.

Decided: Jan. 23, 1959
Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell, Attorney for Claimant
Ralph A. Barney and Frederick G; Ward, Jr. with

whom was Mr. Assistant Attorney General Perry
W. Horton, Attorneys for Defendant.
T

N. F. Semple, Attorney for Intervenor

OP I1‘EIOI~I OF TF3 C013-{[38 ION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Petitioner, the Chickasaw Nation of Indians, present this claim

for the value of one-fourth interest in so much of the common domain

of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations as was allotted to the Choctaw

freednen after their adoption by the Choctaw Nation.

By order of this Commission dated March l2, 1956, the Choctaw
Nation was permitted to intervene and file its answer in response to
the petition of the Chickasaw Nation. ~

The recovery sought herein has been previously presented in the

Court of Claims, and was decided December 1, l9hl, in the case

7 Ind. Cl. Com. Ed 80

The Chick“saw Nation vs. The United States and The Choctaw Nation,

     

Cause No. K-336, 95 C.Cls. I92. Judge Madden delivered the unanimous opinion of the Court of Claims holding that the plaintiff
(The Chickasaw Nation) is entitled to recover the claim filed as
against the Choctaw Nation. Since the relief sought and granted
therein to plaintiff was held to be the primary obligation due
from the Choctaw Nation, the Court of Claims stated it would not
determine the liability, if any,of the defendant, the United States.
The Supreme Court of the United States reviewed this judgment
of the Court of Claims upon a writ of certiorari and in a unanimous
"opinion by hr. Justice hurphy, dated March 8, l9h3, reversed and remanded said judgment with instructions to dismiss petition Choctaw
Nation of lndians vs. United States and the Chic‘.<asa*.- Ifation of
Indians, (318 U.S. 423-£33).
Petitioner filed its petition with the Indian Claims Commission on August 9, 1951, alleging that under Clauses 3 and 5,
Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, approved August I3,
l9A6 (60 Stat. IOAQ; 25 U.S.C. 70), grounds for relief upon facts
stated in its petition were provided in said Act. Defendant, the
United States, filed an Answer to the Petition and also a Motion

for Summary Judgment on the g

H

ounds that the claim had been judicially determined by the 3uprene Court of the United States in its
above-mentioned opinion, and therefore this claim should be barred
from consideration by this Commission, because it was res judicata.

The Government's Motion to Dismiss the Petition as res judicata was

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6h 81

granted by this Commission (Chief Commissioner Witt dissenting) on
November 1T, 1954. (3 1nd. Cl. Com. A02) The Summary Judgment
of this Commission.was then taken on appeal to the Court of Claims.

The Court of Claims in Appeals Docket No. 1-55 on June 7, 1955,
(132 C. C1. 359), Judge Madden speaking for the Court, held that at
least two matters were not presented to the Supreme Court of the
United States in the decision which defendant urged as a bar to this
petition, namely, whether there was a mistake in the interpretation
and understanding, on the part of the Chickasaw Nation, of the effect
of the Supplement Agreement of 1902; and whether the transactions as
to which complaint is made were a departure from “fair and honorable
dealings.” The Court of Claims held that both of these contentions
were alleged in the petit1n1,:nd if either was proven,'would constitute valid grounds for recovery under the Indian Claims Commission
Act (60 Stat. lOL9); and consequently the Court set aside the Come
missions's Order of Dismissal of this suit and reversed and remanded
the cause to the lndian.Claims Commission for trial on the merits.
we now consider this claim upon its merits.

The Intervenor, the Choctaw Nation, has devoted a considerable
part of its brief in this case to the proposition that the Chickasaw
Nation.did not, at any time, claim or demand compensation "for their
share of the value of lands to be allotted to Choctaw Freedmen.”
(1ntervenor‘s Requested Finding Ko. 5, et seq.) lntervenor sought
to support this position with depositions of some length by custodians of the records of the Chickasaw tation at the Oklahoae~3tate Hisunh

ical Society to the effect that no tribal records existed to show the

7 Ind.Cl.Co::1. 61+ 82

Chickasaws had ever sought recovery for the claim they now present in
this suit. History of the controversy is to the contrary; but if contention of intervenor is correct, this would not affect the right of
petitioner to assert this claim. Furthermore, we do not consider the
question of liability of inter-venor to petitioner, because this is
not within the jurisdiction of this Commission.

The questions of Liability in this case are stated by defendant
at pages 49, et seq., of its brief as being whether or not defendant
"assunced anyliability” to compensate petitoner, the Chickasaw
Nation, for one-fourth of theland allotted to adopted freedxaen of the
Choctaw Nation or whether defendant acted other than in a fair and
honorable manner toward petitioner in the matters alleged.

The defendant further contends that neither pleadings nor evidence of petitioner raise any question (ofmutual or unilateral mistake) under Clause (3), Section 2 of the Indi an Claims Commission
Act as to petitioner’s right of compensation for its one-fourth
interest in lands allotted Choctaw freedmen. (Dft‘s Br., pp.

50-57)

The question of whether defendant "assumed liability" by the
express terms of the Sipplenental Agreezaent of 1902, was answered
negati vely by the Supreme Court in 1916.

We quote from Paragraph 2l of the petition, in part, as follows:

Petitioners allege -31‘ -ii- *that the Indian Claims Commission Act, above referred to, gives them a cause of action

upon the facts stated in this petition under clauses three

and five, section two of the Act ‘$1’  '3'~"the treaties of l898

and l902 were executed without any consideration whatsoever;

and that the facts were entirely’ misrepresented to petitioner
herein by reason of the lanzzrmge ezzzployed in the drafting 0,:

-.4‘
1

the treaty; the clear -‘:33’.-standing both of then (ChicI~<asa'.-IS)
and the Choctaw Eéation, was that the Chickasa:-rs woulci be

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6b 83

adequately compensated for their interests in the Choctaw

Indian lands. That there is also a unilateral mistake of

fact and law, as to the meaning of the provisions of the

Supplemental Agreement which the Court said in the Choc‘taw,case, supra forclosed them from legal relief~? * *.

The sufficiency of this petition to state causes of action under
Clauses (3) and (5) of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission
Act seems obvious, and was upheld in the denial of defendant‘s
lotion for Summary Judgment. (l32 C. Cls. 359)

Mistakes are generally classified as unilateral or mutual, and
as mistakes of fact or of law. (l2Am. Jr., Contracts, l25) The patitioner has pleaded a unilateral.mistake of fact in that petitioner
was mistaken in its understanding of that portion of the Supplemental
agreement of l902, as is quoted in Paragraph 17 of its petition.

In support of this contention petitioner traces a long legal
history of consistently'claiming this right in land, or compensa- .
tion therefor, in all of its related negotiations with the Government prior to its alienation of such land by the terms of the Supplemental Agreement of 1902 (Findings 2 to l3, inclusive), and thereafter, that petitioner has always insisted upon compensation for its
one-fourth interest in such allotments to Choctaw freedmen. (Findings l5 to 20, inclusive)

The petitioner strongly contends that_Sections 36 to A0, inclusive, of the the Supplemental Agreement of l902 (32 Stat. Sal),
which was captioned with a sub-heading "Chickasaw Freedman“, also

applied to Choctaw freednen. Petitioner bases this contention

upon the insertion of the proviso at the end of Section #0, whichzeads:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6A 8A

That nothing in this paragraph shall be construed to
affect or change the existing status or rights of the two
tribes as between themselves respecting the lands taken
for allotment to freednen, or the money, if any, recovered
as compensation therefor, as aforesaid.

The Supreme Court in its opinion reversing the Court of Claims (3l8
U.S. A23, A32, (l9L3)) held that the 1902 agreement must be conconstrued according to its unambiguous language and that said language did not provide the protection of petitioner as petitioner
alleged was the understanding of the parties as to same.

This Commission must consider the transactions involved under
the statutory grounds as urged by petitoner under Clauses (3) and
(5) of the lndian Claims Commission Act. (60 Stat. lOh9)

We observe that counsel for the Choctaw Nation construed the
igreenent as providing that allotments in question were to be
charged to the Choctaws; and the Chickasaws construed the agreement
likewise. (Finding 16) The Court of Claims also interpreted the 1902
agreement to grant jetitioner the relief here prayed for. ( 95 C. Cls.
192)

we have found that petitioner thought the proviso added to Section AO of the 1902 “Supplemental” agreement preserved its substantive rights under the l897 Atoka Agreement wherein the Choctaw freeq»
men allotments were to be deducted solely from Choctaw’s interests it
the undivided common.domain. (Finding 20)

The conduct of the Choctaws in their “Application for Additionw
al Decree” (Finding l5), the conduct of the Chickasaws in their request for separate counsel, (Finding lo) and the findings and opinion
of the Court of Claims (l9&l), 95 C. Cls. l92, all uniformly Sm§,m'

the petitioner's contentions of unilateral mistake (if not mutpgg

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6A 85

in interpreting the 1902 agreement. Eeither the Atoka Agreement.

nor the Curtis Act in any'way purported to charge the Chickasaws

with any obligation to furnish Choctaw freedmen with allotments.
Nowhere in the l902 agreement can it be said that it was expressly
provided such allotments were to be charged one-fourth to the
Chickasaws, but only that the 1902 agreement omitted to carry over

the principle of aliquot allotments in favor of fixed acreage allotments to tribal members and therefore the Atoka Agreement became inconsistent with the l902 agreement. The Atoka provision of “deduction” from Cnoctaws for Choctaw freednen allotments was thus declared
nullified. Such construction, however necessary to contract law,
overlooks t*e fact that petitioner‘s property rights were alienated
without any co sideration passing to them. The sections 36 to A0, inclusive, in the l902 agreenent clearly and expressly laid down a means
of adjustment for allotments granted to Chickasaw freedmen. The Government having therein enunciated a policy as to the Chickasaw freedmen, we conclude petitioner was thereby nisled into believing the

Same principle applhad as to the Choctaw freednen. -an

Defendant urges that even if such nistake of construction were

adnitted, it would not grant petitioner anything but a chose-in- action and furnishes no basis upon which this Commission can grant to

the petitioner the relief sought as against the United States.(Dft’s
/ 9Br' f-‘;—'- 50"D7) v

The Court of Claims tried this claim of petitioner under the

(x)

enaoling act of Convress passed on June ?, l9.h (43 Stat. 537). T;e

7 In:'‘.. C . Com. 61*. 86

It would have been strange for plaintiff to have, for

no reason which has been suggested, yielded its position

on the question of the Choctaw Freedmen’s allotments in I902,
after having maintained it consistently for so long. If it
had so yielded in 1902, it is impossible that the “hoctaws
would have, in l909, and before the litigation.nentioned in
this paragraph had been completed, sought to present to the
Chickasaws a large sum of money in compensation for the claim,
at a time when the Chickasaus were not even represented by an
attorney. we have no doubt the Choctaws understood the proviso (added to section #0 of the 1902 agreement) as we have
interpreted it.

we, conclude, therefore, that the arrangement of the
Atoka agreement whereby the Choctaw Freedman were to furnish
their allotments at the expense of the Choctaws and not of L
the plaintiff (Chickasaws) was incorporated into the supplemental agreezent of 1902, as an obligation of the Choctaw
Nation.

OAlthough the 3uprene Court in its review of this decision reversedi

the case, the difference of opinion as to the proper construction of

the 1902 a reenent conclusively establishes the two different inter3
pretations of the respective courts and therefore the reasonableness
of petitioner's mistaken interpretation, and we find that petitioner
did misapprehend and misinterpret the l902 agreement. (Finding 20)
The defendant admits its responsibility for “the plan involved

in the Atoka and Supplemental Agreements was for the Government to
distribute the tribal estate of the two Indian tribes to those persons entitled thereto.” (Df1‘s Br., pp. 65-69) According to the decision of Hitchcock vs. Cherokee hation, 187 L.S. 29A, 306:

 

* * * the United States practically assumed the full
control over the Cheroiees as well as the other nations
constituting the five civilized tribes, and took upon

° A
53-‘

itself the determination o; nenbership in the tribes for
the purpose of adjusting their rights in tribal property * * *

$-—..

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 6A 87

This reference is ma‘e to the Curtis Act of which the Atoka Agreement formed a part. (30 Stat. #95) Thus, the United States had sole
responsibility for failing to provide just compensation to petitioner
for the loss of its property rights. we therefore conclude the United
States is liable for the wrongful taking of petitioner's property, and
allotting such interest to another without providing for compensation

to petitioner.

In Sioux Tribe of Indians vs. United States, Ct. Cls. 1&6 ?.

a
Supp. 229, at page 237, (I956) involving uestion of relationship of

   

&

the Government to the Sioux Tribe, where the Government had required

a cession of certain reservation lands, Judge Iaranore noted that the

J. ‘ ' 1

absence of an express guardianship-ward legal relativnsnip oetween

the parties did not leave a general presumption of "arn‘s length”

negotiation,, but expressed the jural principle, as follows:

* * *E‘wever, we do not find that the legal relationship of gu rdian = d ward did exist between the United

States and the Sioux. While it has often been said by this
court and the Supreme Fdurt the the relaticnship of the
Governuent to the lndians of the United States is sinilar to
that of a guardian and 'ard, it has never been held that

such a general relationship amounts to a legal guardianr

ward relationship in the absence of some specific language

to that effect in a treaty, agreement, or act of Congress. In
the absence of such specific language, the general relationship of the United States to the Indians has been that of a
strong and powerful sovereign to a comparatively weak and
defenseless people, and because of that fact, the courts have
likened the relationship to,that of guardian and ward and held
that dou ts in treaties and agreements should be resolved in

L
L;

he weak and defenseless party to such agreements and

0!

isvor of
treaties.

In the familiar case o;

   

7 Ind. Cl.Com. 6A

the Omala Tribe

88

Hhether or notthe legal relationship of guardian and ward

existed between a particular Indian tribe and the United States
depends, we think, upon the express provisions of the particular
treaty, agreement, executive order, or statute under which the

claim presented arises. t is true that the word “fiduciary” and
the expression "guardian-ward relationship" have been used by the
courts to describe generally the nature of the relationship existing
between the *ndians and the Government. However, in the absence

of some language in a treaty, agreement or statute spelling out such
a relationship, the courts seem to have meant merely that the
relationship between the indians and the Government.is “similar to”
or "resembles" such a legal relationship and that the doubtful language in the treaty or statute under consideration should be interpreted in favor of the weak and dependent Indians. (Citing Creek
Nation v. United States, 318, U.S. 629, 6&2)

This Conmission commented upon the above—mentioned Gila River case in

, et al,

v. United States (6 lnd. Cl. Com. 68, 73—7h, as

follows:

While the court recognized that a claim for breach of such
fiduciary relationsh ; may be brought under the provisions of
the Indian Claire Commission Act, it in no way intimated that
the act itself created or acknowledged the existence of such
fiduciary relationship as a matter of law. An examination of
the legislative history of the act shows that the United States
is not to be considered in the role of an ordinary fiduciary
whenever a legal claim is filed before the Commission, but
whether the United States is or is not actina as a fiduciary

must be determined under the facts in each particular case.

 

In an earlier case, similar in a number of respects to the case at

bar, involving an l867 treaty where the Government supervised the

sale of certain surplus lanls o
conscionable consideration to a railroad, this Conmi
that the Government had in allzre

tive control and custody of the

ponsation for such lndian lands ;:

4'! 7"!

“"3 :0

L'L...\.o

an.

ttaxatonies for

-.r
I
an.

641

U1

lndian property for purpose:

honorably deal

futy to fairly and

_L 1

and

1,1? .., ---3..-Z,-_ ‘
‘ = ‘ff--'.O\.»_1.;:--__-1"i_

6

I-ef:_5  ;_    "

‘I

'nw3£ to the railroads.

-51
F4
P
C )
F4
C J
O

Cax

in-»-.

P)

V)

guestion of fiduciary iuty arising from such relatinnship established by
treaty, this Commission Stated, as follows:

The claimants seem to rake no distinction between the
fiduciary duties the Government owed the Pottawatomie Tribe
and its failure to deal fairly and honorably with it as a
ground for recovery. Whether there is a legalistic distinction between theiro duties, or whether one is included
in the other as a ground of recovery, we shall not stop
.to discuss because, we believe, that under the circumstances
of this case, the Government did not fulfill its fiduciary
duties to the Pottawatomie Tribe and did not deal fairly in
inducing said tribe to sell its surplus lands to the Santa

Fe Railroad at a price of one—half its value.

Defendant under the terms of the Atoka and Supplemental Agreement of l902, took over complete zanageuent, control and custody of
petitioner's property interest and awarded allotments in same to
Choctaw freedaen without providing compensation therefor to petitioner tribe - (Finding ll and l7).

The Governtent thereby assumed direct control over the property
of the Indians, not for its own direct benefit, but for the benefit

of the owners, to liquidate and otherwise distribute same. Defendant

hereby assuned such pouers and functions, and we think, duties

.3

and obligations over petitioner and its jroperty as to becoze in the

"5

' "L‘ o ' an 7 ."c1.'.."\'-'. " “"z\‘-q -.4-sw " "'1 ".T.i"|. '0'?‘ J‘
nature oi a trustee ior liguiuation purposes. ouch iallare to

F5!--g 4H---.,.-., 1'‘

$4 —=.e and provide conrensaticn to petitimrr, on the oar» of

.-.. E‘ ‘L

, was not an instance merely of "unconscionable

consideration”, it was a taking of property without any

compensation to petitioner. Hhether the Government took’ petitionerts interest in the counon land and awarded it to freedmen of

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6# 90

another tribe from neglect or oversight, or mistake, or for whatever
the reason, or how worthy the purpose, the salient fact is that the
Government did not provide for any compensation to be paid petitioner for its interest in same. (Finding No. l7) Petitioner has repeatedly complained about this since 1908.

We conclude that defendant, having undertaken such allotments
of petitioner‘s one—fourth ihterest in lands owned in common with
the Choctaw Nation and awarded them to Choctaw freedmen, has the
moral obligation, as a matter of fair and honorable dealing, and
the legal obligation, under the terms of clause 5 of Section 2 of
the Indian Claims Commission Act, to provide for compensation to
petitioner for such loss. This the Government refused to provide
by deductions of same from the Choctaw Tribe’s funds in its custody. The failure of the defendant to enforce the true intent and
understanding of the parties to the proviso of Section #0 of the
Supplemental Agreement (Finding 20) at a time when it had full control over the lands and funds of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Eations
and when.it could have adjusted the rights of the Chickasaws in these
lands was unquestionably unfair and resulted in an injustice to the
Chickasaw Nation.

Of course, if defendant had expressly "assumed liability" there
would be nothing to decide here. The petitioner was a dependent
Indian community under the protection of the United States (Finding 2)
and its property and affairs were subject to the control and management of the Government. The United States gave it to others witho;,

arranging any obligation to pay compensation for it.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 64 R

It follows from the foregoing opinion and findings of fact made
by this Commission that the defendant became liable to petitioner for
the value of petitioner's interest in the land allotted to the Choctaw freedmen.- It is undisputed that the value of same was
$l90,93h.78. (Finding l8) The facts constituting such liability
therein are not such as to create liability for interest. ( ll9 Ct.
Cls. 592, 671).

The matter of credits and offsets will be considered at a subsequent hearing of this Commission.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner
I concur:

inn. K. Holt
Associate Commissioner

I dissent:
D

louis J. O‘Karr
Associate Commissioner

 

91

