BEFORE ‘IT’-"'2": INDIAN CLAZEIS CQQESSEOEXT

THE CHINOOK TRIBE AND BA  )
OF I1~E'DIAI*£S , )
Petitioner, g
‘V. 3 Docket No. 231:,
TEEE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, g
Defendant. %
Decided: April 16, l9S8
Appearances :

James E. Sareaizlt, with whom
were Malcolm S. McLeod,
Frederick W. Post, '

E. L. Crawford and J. 14., Creggh,

A.L:.c:.L-L;O.."I‘I1€yS for Petitioner.
Donald R. Marshall, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION CE THE CCE~E«EISSIO.!€

0‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case was filed by ”the petitioner, the Chinook
Tribe of Indians and the subordinate I-Iaukilcun, Willopah and the Clatsop
bands of said Tribe of Indians, on relation of John Grant Elliott, 
man of the Ceneral Council of.‘ said Tribe of Indians, and presents, th%‘._:#r'

their claim, against, the United States of America, ‘£16 208

1;» -31-.“ (Pet.,  

ine petition alleges that the Chinook Tribe of Indians, together with the said subordinate bands, have resided from time immemorial west of
the summit of the Cascade Range of I~1ou_ntains in what is not’
the State of I-fashington, and formerly exclusively o"-.-med,
occupied and possessed the lands and country described as
follows, composed of approximately two million acres:
CC?i~3~1E;'.‘LECII'»EG at the I-Eid-channel line of South Bay in Gray’s
Harbor, State of lfashington, thence eastx-rardly to the Summit
of the Coast Range of Mountains, thence in a Southerly
direction along the Summit of the said Coast Range of Mountains, crossing the Columbia River at a p0in'b" where the
mid-channel line crosses the mid-point of the mouth of
Abernathy Creek, thence South into the State of Oregon, to
a point due east of Tillaxnookhead on the Coast of Oregon,
thence West to Tillamook Head, and from thence I-Eorthward
along the Western Coast o;f'Oregon'to tie point of beginning
in the State of Washington. (Pet. Par. III). 

Petitioner further alleges that in the year l85O the “Chinook Tribe and

the various bands thereof was composed of between 1,000 and 1,500 men,

women and children;_ that the said Tribe is composed today of approximately
‘C0 men, women and children, known to be descendants of said ancient tribe
and that the said tribe lived separate and apart from all other tribes -in '
said. area, occupying their said lands exclusively to all other tribes,
and had a separate Indian dialect. " (Pet. Par. V). Petitioner further
alleges that the defendant negotiated treaties with said tribe and its
subordinate. bands in 1851, but said treaties were never ratified by the
United States nor the terms thereof performed by the United States but
that petitionerfbelieves the Government did pay said tribe and bands
certain payments "the arrzountof which, and for what purpose, is best known
to the defendant, "1' '3' *3‘ The payments so made were allegedly so small,
according to petitioner, as to make "the sum grossly inadequate and un«conscionable consideration for such lands and rights and the defendant, in

treating the petitioner in such a manner as it did, acted unfairly and

l'_\_.')
L)

dishonorably and against the standards of eqaity and good conscience.”
(Pet. Par. VII). Petitioner further alleges that the fair and reasonable value of‘ said lands, formerly occupied by petitioner, together with
the timber, game, fish, minerals, d'e:e}J.j_I1gs and cultivated areas "in
l8§O.at the tinathey were taken by the defendant," was $30,003,000.
(Pet. Par. VIII).

Defendant in its answer states as its first defense that the petition fails to state a claim against defendant upon which relief can be
granted; that the claim is barred by theideciision of the Court of Qlaims
in the case entitled, Du:-zamish, et al. V. United States, 79 C. Cls. 530
(cert. den. 295 U. S. 755)'5 and that none of the petitioner Indians constitute a "tribe, band or other identifiable group of American Indians"
‘::ith::..n.t'ni: 3'.1.‘-.'.-E'..I;i1'.g oi‘_'t1';e Italian Claims Commis sion Act, do Stat, ].&)E1.3 ,
2S_.U.S.C., sec. 70(a). Defendant further denies that petitioner, or
John Grant Elliott (see Pet. Par. II), “is authorized to represent, or
present the claim of, the so-called waukikuzn, Willopah and Clatsop Bands
of Indians." (Answer, pages 1 and 2). Defendant admits that treaties
were negotiated with petitioner Indians which were never ratified and that
the United States paid petitioner Indians certain sums of money as set
forth” in, and pursuant to, the Act of August 2t, 1912 (37 Stat. 1418, 535)
and states that pursuant to said Act, petitioner Indians accepted payment.
in full satisfactionpof the claim now asserted by petitioner. (Answer,
paragraphs 9 and 12).

_ 11 stipulation agreed to by the parties and approved by the COZTIDEISEST.r._='.‘-hi"

(Tr. 2 A-c, 2;, June 17, 1952, Seattle, ‘L-.’ashington') limits the questions

now to be dcter.rr.ined to the issues of whether petitioner had, at the time
f the alleged wrongful acts by the defendant, aboriginal or Indian title
to the lands described in the petition and as to the capaoity'of'petitioner to sue.

In petitioner's "Findings of Fact and Brief," filed with this Commission following trial on the issues hereinabove:mentioned, petitioner
lists as "Petitioners" in the caption of said brief "The Chinook Tribe,
The'Waukiakum Band and the Nillipa or Shoalwater Bay Bands of Chinook,
The Kathlamet Tribe of Chinook, The Clatsop Tribe of Chinook, and the '

Nucqueclahnemuck Band of Chinook." Petitioner requests a finding (Pet.

Req. Fdg. l): (see also Pet. Req. Fdg. 23)
That claimant constitutes the Confederated Tribes of the
“Chinook Nation," a duly confederated and organized group of
' being a tribal organization recognized by
the Secretary of the Interior of the United States. That such
Confederation of Tribes of the Chinook Nation is composed of
the aboriginal.Lower Chinook peoples, including the Clatsop,
inoluding the Nucqueclahwemuok band, Kathlamet Tribe and the
Chinook (proper) Tribe, the latter including the'Wahkiakum
and Willipa or Shoalwater Bay bands, and as such recognized
Confederation, duly represents all members by blood of such

Tribes and bands and all descendants thereof. (Tr. l9, 18,
19 .

J":-.'n.u"~..rJ....l.\-If.-A-L1» .4 ;'u...i..£-a.i‘.‘;:,

6 211

The record contains no evidence that there existed aboriginally or histori-'

cally'a duly organized and confederated group known as the so-called Confederated Tribes of the “Chinook Nation.“ There is no evidence to prove

that the newly organized group has a tribal organization recognized by the

Secretary of the Interior. The citation to the transcript of hearings

does not support the requested finding of fact.
According to the testimony of John Grant Elliott, the Chinook Tribe

was organized in August, 1951, and attorneys were chosen following said

c.:r_.::ani.::ation (Tr. 2’, 78). hr. Elliott further testified that there were
present at the meeting representatives of the Eiillapa, Chinook, Wahkiaku.;,
Kathlamet and Clatsop "bands or groups, ’* (Tr. 78) and that he is chair(Tr. 3 and 77). He further testified that

man of the Chinook Council.
there was ”sor1e sort of a division" within the tribe  iay l9S3 with
reference to managing the affairs of the tribe but that this other "group"

(Tr. 78‘79)c

supports the petition in this case. ?'§I'- 3013115 Ch?-T19?

also testified (Tr. 3) that he had been elected chairman of the Chinook
group and that he did not know Mr. Elliott (Tr. 147). H

For reasons that hereinafter will be mentioned, it is important to
attempt to ascertain whether this co-called tribe, organized ostensibly
for the sole purpose of presenting this claim, is the successor in interest
to the claims of the Chinook, ‘.-Jaukiakum, Shcaliezater Bay xwillipa-Chinook) ,
Iiathlamet, Clatsop and Nucqueclawemuck Indians or is entitled to bring
this action for and on behalf of said Indians. The record in this
respect is far from satisfactory; The chaiman and the secretary-treasurer
of the Elliott Chinook group and the chairman of its Portland Council of
Chinooks all testified that they were of Chinook descent. Mr. Charley of
the other group testified he was a ‘full blood belonging to the "iéillipa
and Chinook" tribe. The secretary-treasurer of the Elliott group testified that there are no Kathlarzets designated as such living today, that

there are wil_'Lipa descendants living and that there are no full blood

C1atS0PS 011 the group enrollment ( Tr. 1L9-SO). The group’s chairman of 

Portland Council testified that there are over 900 persons in the present

organization (Tr. 66); that ‘she did not know: any Kathlamet or Willipa

Indians but that there are people "rho are descendants free the Clatsops
probably living? (Tr. 87). Hr. Charley testified that he knew of no
Eillipa Indians who nere living and that he did not know whether there
were any Clatsop (Tr. 57) or Shoal'Rater Bay Indians living (Tro 55) but
be guessed there were quite a few Kathlamet Indians left (Tr. 58)- He
further testified (Tr. 72) that he had never heard of the Nuc-que-clsh'weenuck Indians. Mr. Elliott testified that there are at least two hundred
descendants of the Clatsop (Tr. 79) and that at the Organizatién-meeting
there were people present from the Willips, Chinook,'Wahkiakum, Kathlamet
and Clatsop “bands or groups" (Tr. 78). .Also testifying for Petitioner
was the “councilman [Elliott groug7 for the Clatsop County District of
the original Clatsop-Chinook Nation group," who testified she was of

--._...-..~..... ......,.,..,._,“., ........_,, .,,,._., thsgg‘-a her-e approx.in1atel‘y’ (D U.La‘l‘»S'OpS 111 Del‘
district (Tr. 86).

Originally, petitioner's claim seems to have been based on the exist;ence of Indian title in an entity allegedly known as the Chinook Tribe and.
its subordinate bands of'?aukikum,'Willopah.and Clatsop Indians. The
testtnony of most of its Indian witnesses was pointed to the existence of
such an all—inclusive entity. The testimony of petitioner‘s expert witness,
Dr. Herbert G. Taylor; anthropologist, and the documentary evidence precludes detennining the existence aboriginally of such an all-inclusive
entity.

Petitionerds expert testified that the word "Chinook" has a number
of meanings. It was used, according to Taylor, to indicate a village site

at the mouth of the Columbia; to refer to a particular tribe located just

I

Q

i
aj

zorth of the mouth of the Columbia; to indicate all ‘of the Chinookan

:peak1ng peoples up and down the length of the Columbia; as a purely

‘.3

guistic term; and in the sense of.‘ the Lower Chinoofa, i.e._. the

~hi_n.ook proper, the Clatsop and the Kathlamet, (Tr, 12) which he stated

as in the sense in which he used the word.

The Lower Chinook was a socio-cultural entity and not an identiiable tribe, Taylor testified (Tr. 15). He later deSCI‘i“D9C'i the LOWS!‘
hinook as "a rather amorphous cultural entity" (Tr. 51;). By this he
xplained that although the Lower Chinook were sometimes. spoken of as
me group having the same cultural pattern, the Kathlamets spoke a diferent language than the Chinook proper and the Clatsop, and that the
area fought eachbther at timesland did not regard themselves as menbers
E‘ the same tribe. (See also Tr. 137-138).

Dr. Taylor testified that the Clatsop “in common with most other

idian tribes on the Northwest Coast, were not by many of our standards

tribe at all but were a group of autonomous villages. These autonomous

Lllages, however, had these things in common; they spoke a common dialect

.‘ the same language and were capable of uniting in warfare. Thus, for
nstance, the Tillamook made a distinction between themselves and the

.atsop.in time of war, not between one Clatsop tillage and one Tillamook

llage. "

This was also true, according to Taylor, of the Chinook propeim

2 believed it would be true as far as he could tell of the Kathlamet, also ,

though "the records on the Kathlamet are so scanty, so vem poor, that

far as I am able to determine it is not very far." Although village

tonomy prevailed, he called these groups tribes by adopting the definition.

- 6 215 ‘

 .r.- ,,

.; a tribe used by the Royal anthropological Institute, i.e., a sedentaiy or nomadic group of people, a confederation Of banés Capable Of

uniting in emergency such as warfare and speaking a common dialect (Tr.
l6~l8, 58, 80, 103).

Petitioner‘s witness further testified as follows (Tr. 20-23, Hearing,'washington, D. C., November l7,,l9S3):

Q. Now, in the period from 1800 to 18b0, Doctor, what
conclusion did you arrive at as to the Clatsop, Kathlamet
and Chinook proper as being a recognizable, politically
organized tribe of units?

A. Fbllowing the smallpox epidemic in the late l700‘s,
the Chinook, Clatsop and Kathlamet seemed to have made a
mild come-back; at least, they were holding their own; but
in 1829 and l832 occurred the so~called intermittent fever
epidemic. The figures of death at that time among the
Chinook, that is to say, the Chinook proper, Clatsop and
Kathlamet, are almost unbeli eva‘n.‘le- Th‘! 7m*’-’-":'=+.- 93?-5-T591’-9
is seven-eighths of the total population dead in those’
three years; the highest is nine-tenths, and that by Dr.
JohnIMcLoughlin, chief factor of the Hudsonls Bay Companies
at'Vancouver. Duflot de Hofras says between.ten and twelve
thousand Chinook died in those three years. d - ‘

In any case, the Chinook ceased to exist as tribes;
virtually all villages were deapopulated and what you

effectively had after 1 32 were a few hangers-on at the

trading post and at strategic planning spots but there'was
 

no such thing as a tribe.

 

 

 

Commissioner OFMarr: These figures indicate a population
of over 12,000 that died?

The Witness: These figures indicate a total of 10 to 12
thousand died, nine—tenths of the population, so that would
mean a total population of less than 1 000 all told about

 
thirteen and a half all told.

   

 

4% fé #Q. (By Mr. Crewford:) Now, Doctor, before they were so
stricken with these diseases, what was the si+“=+*on with

w~.n.'-- \J..a.'U'

respect to these three units, the Clatsop, Kathlamet and the
Chinooklprcper?

A. I take it you are asking here, sir, for a resume
of what has gone before.

Q. That is correct.

11. In my j'ud.g1nent, there was no such thing as a tribal
organization among; the Lower Chinook, ‘ that is, bet:-seen the
Clatsop, Chinoo'i={ proper and Kathlanzet, ‘ ut each of these
three groups were a tribe x-zithfm the terazs of the Royal
Anthropological Institute definition of tribe, and they
were a group of autonomous villages as far as private
control was concerned, except when one chief ‘oecas:.e very
powerful; but they spoke a common dialect and were capable
of uniting in time of war. Thus, it is proper to speak of
three tribes at the mouth of the Columbia, -» the Clatsop,
the Chinook proper and the Kathlametg but it is not proper,
however, to speak of a Lower Chinook tribe.»

Q. Now, with respect to these three units, Doctor,
they had, however, some factors in common, did they not?

A. Yes, they did, a great many factors in common.

Q: Will you state what these factors were?

A. Well, to a far greater eartent than any of the other
‘peoples in the areadiithiy were a riverine people, depending
by and large upon fishing and upon clans and mussels for
their subsistence. They did some root, nut and berry gatheru
ing and they did some hunting. hunting however does not
seem to have been as important to them as it was to the
Chehalis to the north or the Tillamook to the south. Hunting

was something of a supplement to the diet rather than a major
means of subsistence.

 

 

 

       

 

In their political organization and in their social
organization, in the very way they handled their slaves and
the payment of blood money and the way they built thei
canoes the Chinook proper and the Clatsop and Kathlamet were
identical, even to the way they buried their dead. '

Their language is somewhat different, howeverr. The
Kathlamet spoke a variety of Upper Chinookan; the Chinook
proper and the Clatsop spoke Lower Chinook, but it is stated

that the Clatsop was a trifle different, probably a difference
on the order of a sub--dialectical variation. C

‘.5217-—_

Dr. Taylor further testified (Tr. h5~h9. Nov. -7, 1953)?

Q. ‘with particular respect to these Lower Chinooks,
Doctor, weren't they struck by several epidemics which
had an effect on their political and social organization?

-A. Yes. sir. they were. As previously recounted, the
Chinook were largely destroyed by smallpo '.
and 90‘s. But in the period 1 29 to 1132 beta
eighths and ninewtenths of all the retaining C.inooThis. of course, destroyed them completely as a going
cultural concern.

 

     

 

 

 

 

Q. 'Ehat effect did that have upon their political
organizations?

 

 

A. Any political organization would cease to exist.
Let us assume, for instance, that a plague destroyed ninetenths of the population of the United States. I dare say
you would.immediately in those areas which did survive, go
back to a village type economy and to a village type political authority, and it would be a long time before you
would reestablish national political controls. (Underscoring supplied).

 

‘$1-’.I-4.‘

As to the Wahkiakum, Taylor testified that they were located to the
east of Chinook proper on the Columbia River and actually seemed to have
been a few "semi-autonomous, or autonomous villages which were Chinook
in character." 'Petitioner‘s expert witness states that'washington Irving
wrote that the'Wahkiakum were once a part of the Chinook proper but that
they broke off during Hudson Bay trading tines. For this reason, Taylor
considers the‘Bahkiakum.part of the Chinook proper. (Tr. 26).

Dr. Taylor prepared a map on which he has delineated the boundaries
of the Chinook proper, the Clatsop, and the Kathlamet respectively,

(Pet. Ex. ll). The areas for each are described in the testimony of Doctor

Taylor: for the Clatsop, see Tr. 63,.for the Chinook proper, Tr. 6b; and

for the Kathlanzet, Tr. 65. The base year he selected was 1800 because
he felt that year “seemed a much better year to use than 1853, b<‘3f0I"€
the white man began to work his will on the Indian. Secondly, because

the tribal groups themselves maintained the tradition of those belonging

Defeniant points out (Def. Br... pages

to the previous owners." (Tr. 70).

2 and 3) that Dr. _Taylor*s testimony, nap and report (Pet, Ex. 7) "relate

to l800 and not to the dates involved herein, namely 1850 or 1855: n- -::- e:-,9

Defendant stresses that the date selected by petitioner‘s expert refers

to use and occupancy prior to the 1829 to 1832 intermittent fever epidemic which Taylor states took nine-tenths of the population of these

Indians and as a result of which the Chinook ceased to exist as ‘tribes

(Tr. 21). Defendant‘ s point is ‘well ‘taken for the Chinook (the term is
used in the sense Taylor uses it to mean the C'.La.tsop, Kat-hlavnet and Chinook
proper), according to petitioner‘s expert, were "to a far greater extent
than any of the other peoples in the area ré fr 5‘ a rivering people, depending by and large upon fishing andupon clams and mussels for their
subsistence.‘ They did some root, nut and berry gathering, and they did
some hunting. Hunting, however, does not seem to have been as important
to them as it was to the Chehalis to the north or the Tillemook to the
south.

Hunting was something of a supplement to the diet rather than a

major means of subsistence." (Tr. 22-23).

The Chinook, he testified,

did not hunt a great deal. (Tr. 60). The terrain around Shoalwater Bay,

with its clams, fish and mussels, was of the type according to the witness
to support a heavy concentration of population, which it did in his 

ment. .

Being a riverine and marine people, known as “fish eating" Indians

their subsistence v:as'almost wholly _fro::: the sea. If in 1800 the area

R)

'...l

CO

now claimed wan supporting a population of something in the neighborhood of l3,SOO Indians, it is inconceivable that the remnants which
survived the epidemics of l829 and 1832 and later losses due to fever
and disease could.be using and occupying the same area in 1850, the date
of the alleged takings. In l8Sl,.Anson Dart, Superintendent of Indian
affairs for the Territory, reported the Clatscp Indians numbered 71 souls
and the Chinook (5 bands) to total lh2 (Def. Ex. lhl). As stated by the

Court of Claims in The Quaoaw Tribe of Indians. et al., V. The United

 

States, 128 o. Cls. us, 19, affirming 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. h69:

Indian tribes, in the absence of a treaty reservation, have
only an occupancy and use title, or right, the fee being in the
United States, and when an Indian tribe ceases for any reason,
by reduction of population or otherwise, to actually and exclusively occupy and use an area of‘land clearly established
by clear and adequate proof, such land becomes the exclusive

property of the United States as public lands, and the Indians

lose their right to claim and assert full beneficial interest
and ownership to such land; and the United States cannot be
required to pay therefor on the same basis as if it were a
recognized treaty reservation. (citing cases).

Dr. Taylor-evidently recognized that the difference in dates as to

use and occupancy as far as boundaries are concerned would have an effect

on the area to be assigned to a group, band or tribe. In being questioned _

on cross-examination about a map (Def. Ex. ll2) that he had also prepared
apparently prior to his employment in this case, petitioner‘s expert

witness testified as follows:

(Tr. 378-379)

Q. Letime ask you this on the Chinook question:

On your mimeographed map you have the Chinook as delineated-what color is that?

A. It is red.

c a e-% de"ineated in red. You have it the same as on
De:£‘endant‘s E:>:hi'oit 3 as delineated in red?

Q. You have it the same on your mineographed map? I

A. Yes.

Q. You have changed your mind about that, haven‘ t you?

A. Yes, I have.

Q. So that your mimeographed map shows a comparatively
small acreage, I think about three townships. Isn't that
correct?

A. Yes, sir.

Q. whereas your present-day map includes maybe seven
tirnes more area for the Chinook proper?

A. If you please, sir, and may it please the Commis sion,
if I drew that map on the base year’l8SO rather than 1800
I would use my own mimeographed map, It  only because I
am using the base year 1800 rather than 1850.
Q, I see. Your mimeographed map is 1850?

,A. As well as I'could make it.
not a very good map.

The mimeographed map is
By 1850, the Chinook were not in exclusive possession of all the

lands delineated as Chinook territory by petitioner’s expert on his map
(tat. Ex. 11). Following the epidemics already mentioned, Chehalis speaking people began to move into the Shoalwater Bay area and into the willipa
Hills region. Taylor testified (Tr. 70) that a map using the base year
1850 would show the area around Shoalwater Bay as Chehalis and the Williroa
rea occupied in the north by Chehalis and in the east by Cowlitz Indians.
The Willipa area, according to Taylor, although included in the petition

is not, and never was, Chinook territ-ory.

Chinook“ according to this ethnologist refers to Chis-ook ethnographic

informants who claim the'Willipa territory on the grounds that they are
rlipa Chinook but they are not the'Nillipa of the Willipa territory.

Taylor stated “The Chinook never did occupy the willipa Hills area;
but the Chinook living in the-Shoalnater Bay area cone to be knawn as
Shoalwater Bay Chinook” and when the name of the bay was changed to
'Villipa Bay, then they were called'willipa-Chinook. In this bay area,
he testified, from l83Q or 1820 on, "there was a great deal of sharing
of economic resources a-a %, simply because that area is becoming an
amalgamated Chinook-Chehalis area." (Tr. 82). Although the Kathlamet
Indians are not included in the petition as a "subordinate band" of the
"Chinook Tribe," petitioner, based upon the testimony of Doctor Taylor,
new claims the area assigned to the Kathlamet (Pet. Ex. ll) by their
expert witness. (See also Tr. 355)»

with the foregoing background relating to the allegations of the
parties and petitioner‘s position now, based.up0n the testimony of
record, it is next necessary to consider the issues and propositions,
as petitioner views them to be as set forth in petitioner‘s brief at
P3888 27 and 28. They are stated to be as follows:

l. In aboriginal times, were the Chinook (broper),
including the'Wauhkiakum and Hillipa or Shoalnater Bay
iBands of Chinook, the Kathlamet Tribe of Chinook, and the
Clatsop Tribe including the Nucqueclahwemuck Band of

Chinook, identifiable groups of'American Indians within

the meaning of section 70a of the Indian Claims Commission
Act?

2. what were the boundaries of the lands owned and
occunied by such tribes and bands of Indians?

3. Did these tribes and bands become identifiable groups
of.£m rican Indians under section 70a of the Indian Clahns
Commission.Act following their consolidation as Chinook Nation

after the coming of the white man?

b. Is this action properly prosecuted through the confederated “Chinook Nation“ in the names of the Chinook Tribes
and Bands as follows: Chinook (Proper) Tribe including the
Hanhkiakum and Willapa or Shoe eater Bay Band, Kathlanet
Chinook, and the Clatsop Tribe including the Nucqueclahwemuck
Band?

5; ‘Were the sums appropriated, by the act oi‘august 2h,
l9l2, 3h Stat. 518 adequate consideration for the tribal lands
ceded by claimarts and did Congress thereby recognize and

identify the said Tribes and.Bands and their title to said
lands?

6. what is the legal effect of any of the members and
descendants of these tribes and bands having accepted, if they
have accepted any sum, the proceeds of the Act ofkkugust Zh,

1912, in full settlement of all claims and demands against
y the United States?

7. Is the taking of claimant‘s tribal lands contrary to
the Fifth Amendment to the Constitution of the United States,
so that claimants are entitled to interest on the value thereof from the time of taking to the time-of payment?

The defendant, on the other hand, (Def. Brc, pp. 1&0-lhl} Considers
the questions presented in this action to be as follows:

1. ‘Whether one or more of the plaintiff tribes or the
Confederated Tribes has established by a preponderance of the
evidence that a particular historical tribe, band or group of
Indians aboriginally and exclusively held and.occupied any
specific and definable area of land in western washington?

2. “Whether one or more of plaintiff tribes or the Confederated Tribes has established by a preponderance of the
evidence that any of then was aboriginally a tribe, band or
identifiable group of‘American Indians?

3. ‘Whether one or more of plaintiff tribes or the Confederated Tribes is a real party in interest, entitled, by
legal succession or continued existence as an entity of some

recognizable sort, to maintain the claim of aboriginal
occupancy?

h. Whether ore or more of plaintiff tribes or the Confederated Tribes of Indians is a presently existing tribe,
band, or identifiable group of American Indians.

5. ‘Whether plaintiff‘s , ion states a claim or claims
upon which relief can be gra*'ed?

f\.')
h)
l\)

Whether this suit is barred by the judgments in
Duwanish v. United States, 79 C. Cls. 530, and Alcea V.
‘ states, lO3 C. Cls. h9h?

   

 

The questions as presented by petitioner will'be considered briefly.
In aboriginal times there were separate and.distinct identifiable groups
of imerican Indians residing along the Columbia River on both sides of
that stream near its mouth (Findings 1, 2 and 3)» Historical Sources

identify them as the Chinook (proper), the Kathlamet, the Clatsop, the

'Eaukiakum and the Nucqueclahwemuck Indians. There is no substantial

evidence to support petitioner‘s contention that at any time pertinent

to the issues involved herein that the'Wauhkiakum were included within
the Chinook proper. Documentary sources throughout the historical period

U4

&-L}

identified them as 2 se=n.3_r?*.'-9 ""'“‘“"‘

..— L’...-..o-A‘:-q". -3‘-I’

ii--- iolorsnces are scarce
with respect to the so-called Nucqueclahwemuck Tribe,of Indians whomaere
eated with separately by the United States in 1851. There is no substantial evidence to support petitioner‘s.oontention that at any time
pertinent to the issues of this action the Nucqueclahnemuck Indians were
part of the Clatsop "tribe."

‘What the boundaries of the lands exclusively used and occupied by

these various "groups," "tribes" or “villages” were at the date of the

alleged taking in l8S0 is the crux of the case. .As previously pointed

out petitioner seeks to prove what lands were exclusively used and
occupied by these Indians in 1800 before they were practically wiped out

by epidemics. Petitioner offered no substantial proof as to what lands

were exclusively used and occupied as of the date of the alleged taking

i3 1550 but to the contrary offered the testimony of petitioner's exp

I
5"‘.
LI

witness, Doctor Taylor, who testified: "In any case, the Chinook
ceased to exist’ as tribes; virtually all villages I-zere depopulated,
and what you effectively had after 1832 were a few hangers-on at the
trading post and at strategic planning Zclam.-nin_§ spots, but there was
no such thing as a tribe.“ (Tr. 2l, Hearing, 'vEas}'*ington, D. C.,

November 17, 1953). These Indians in the vicinity of the mouth of the

Columbia have been classified as ’;fish-eating" Indians who were mostly
dependent upon marine life for their food supplemented by roots and
berries (Findings l, 2, 3, IS). Hunting was not important to them
(Tr. 22-23). Edward S. Curtis in his work, "The North American Indian"
(Volume 9) in writing of the Shoalwater Bay Indians (Chinook and Lower
Chehalis) stated they were ‘”salt-water Indians,‘ dwelling for the

t.itI‘<=‘éi'3-:81‘ part: in places adjacent to the extensive mud flats of the bay,

with their inexhaustible beds of clams and oysters. Salmon were

obtained near the mouth of the streams, and berries in abundance were

found near the settlements, so that inland journeys were unnecessary. Few of the men hunted. Most of them, in fact, would easily have lost

their way in the woods."

(Def. Ex. Sh, page 7). In a region of such

abundance on willapa Bay and along the Columbia lives the Chinookan
speaking peoples. It was a region that had aboriginally supported an

eS’°3'-Flated 13,500 such Indians. It may safely be said that only a very

small portion of the areas claimed was exclusively used and occupied an

the date of the alleged taking by any of these groups. Much of ‘t}.".s:i':

claimed area in the Er.-‘illipa Bay (Shoalwater) region was also being usr.;=:d

by that time by the Lower Chehalis.

There is no substantial evidence to support the 'COI1'I-81'3‘i‘»i0n Of

“itioncr that -these autonomous villages of Chinook, Clatsop, Kathlanet,
lfauhkialzuzn, Willipa and Nucqueclahwemuck Indians consolidated to form
the so-called Chinook Ration after the coming of the white man. Some
of these co-called tribes are extinct today such as the Nucqueclahwemuck
whose chief, wallowska, was the sole male survivor at the tine of the
signing of the unratified treaty on (August 7, 1851» The Nucqueclahwemuck
have been extinct for over 100 years according to petitioner-‘s enfpert,
Doctor Taylor (Findings 7 and 8). according to Frederick I-3. Hodge,
"Handbook of American Indians“ (B.A.E. 30, Part I, page 216), the Kathlamet Indians’ in 18119 numbered but 58 people and are now extinct. Of the

wahkiakum, Hodge wrote that they have been "lost sight of since about

1850, when Gibbs referred to their ..hie:§‘ es elmost the last survivor of

us «can... -«the tribe." Hodge, in writing of the Chinook (proper), stated that "Swan

|'\)

gt _ ,ed their number at 112 in 1855, at which time they were much mixed with i the‘-Chehalis, with whom they have since completely fused, 4% -%i- 4=-." The
1-fillipa Indians, who are not to be confused with the ’\r3i]_'Lipa-Chinook .
Indians, are also extinct, according to all ethnologists. (Findings 2,
l8 and l9).
The evidence, therefore, does not support petitioner's contention

that there was a consolidation of these various groups into the "Chinook
Nation“ after the coming of the white man. By the date of the -unratified

treaties some of these so-called tribes were on the verge of extinction,

which did occur later

., while the remaining Indians for the most part seem

{in bcnrm ‘P
was -o\-.nbV-P 4.

5
U)
(0
CL
*1
cf‘
3‘
O
c 1*
.3’
(D
H
{L
f.Jo
..J
E.)
(D
(3
Ci‘
H
(J
U‘!
*3
O
F
5

* s  that section of the count:-'3'.

(See Finding 16).

l\)

U1

Petitioner next raises the issue as to whether "this action_£is7
properly prosecuted through the confederated ‘Chinook Nation’ in the nangs
of the Chinook Tribes and Bands as follows: Chinook (Proper) Tribe including the Wauh}-tiakurn and willapa or Shoalwater Bay Band, Kathlamet
Chinook, and the Clatsop Tribe including the Iéucqueclahwenuck Band?"

It has already been pointed out that there is no evidence of the consolig
dation of these aboriginal groups into the so-called."Chinook Nation"
after thecoming oi'the white man. There is substantial evidence that
the Kathlamet,'Willipa and.Nucqueclahwemuck Indians are no extinct and
the wauhkiakum may be extinct (Findings 2, 8, 16, 18). There is no substantial evidence that petitioner is the successor in interest to the
claims of the Kathlamet,'willipa and Nucqueclahwemuck Indians or that
petitioner had the capacity to bring this action for and on.behalf of such
Indians. In any event; the record with respect to the Kathlamet, Wauh1»:i1kun,'Willapa (Chinook) and Nucqueclahwemuck, fails to shonrthat lands,_
.5 any, these groups were exclusively using and occupying at the date of
;he alleged taking by defendant.
‘As previously pointed out the record is far from satisfactory'with

respect to the right of petitioner herein to maintain a cause of action

or the various bands, tribes or groups it claims to represent. Iln this
onnection, attention is directed to House Report No. 2680, 83d Congress;
i Session (Investigation of the Bureau of Indian.Affairs, 195k, at pages
75 and h76), wherein the composition of petitioner organization is disxssedr The report, in part, states:

In I-Eay of this year, the group adopted a written constitution (not approved) and elected a’ council for their s 7”g.OV~3rIrr1ent. The president, or chairman is Er. Roland Charley
of Tokeland, washington, '

This furnishes a good example-=of the confusion that exists:
Mr. Charley is listed in the Quinalt census as a full blooded
Quinalt Indian. He has an allotment on the Quinalt Reservation,
has a home on the Shoralnater Bay Reservation, and is the chair»ms.n of the newly organized Chinook Tribal Organization.

The Newly Organized Chinook Tribal Council

 

Tribal affili--': Allotted Position

 
 

ation as per On on
Name Address Quinault Quinault, Chinook
census Reserva- Council
it tion
swashington _

Land Charley" tTokeland C Full Quinault ' iY§5_ ‘Chairman’:

3’ Hawk ‘Bay Center 3/D Quinault ' ‘Yes’ ‘Vice chairman

‘Raymond Full--Quinault-‘ Yes ‘Secretary! Chinook ' Treasurer

1

s
r Woodcock *
' :
‘Raymond 1 S/8 Quinault Yes ‘Ember
:
1
u
:
2

Lucie Wain
Lrles Larson ‘Tacoma 1/34 Quinault Yes ' Do.

3
I
3
1/16 Chinook ‘ Yes
:
,1
t

therine Herrold Troeh'Ilwaco ' D0.
ll Petit ‘Bay Center l/h Quinault-7 Yes ’ Do.

' ' Chinook ‘ .
=12 Petit ‘Ilwaco l/16 Quinault Yes ' Do.

All of these people claim to be Chinook. 23" 6’: #*1?-lir-B?

VI

In  of the above and the previously mentioned testimony concerning the composition of membership in petitioner organization there
exists grave doubts as to the capacity of petitioner to present the
claimsof all of the tribes or bands petitioner contends it represents
herein. Because of the necessity of liberally’ analyzing the pleadings

and the record with respect to capacity (of. Upper Chehalisz et al. V.

United States, Court of Claims, Appeal No. 1-56, decided October 9, 1957,

reversing L; Ind. Cl. Co ....'30l), the right 01‘ petitioner to present the
claims of the Chinook (proper) and Clatsop Tribes onibehalf of the
descendants of such tribes is recognized. The testimony and evidence of
record does not supprt the right of petitioner to represent the other
tribes or bands nor does theevidence, in any event, show what lands
these tri es or hands were exclusively using and occupying at the time
of the alleged taking in 185C.

The Commission therefore concludes that petitioner has the capacity
to prosecute this action for and on behalf of the Clatsop and Chinook '
(proper) Indians. The evidence of record supports the Commission*s
holding that as of the date of the unratified treaty, August 5, 1851, the
Clatsop Indians had Indian title to the area of land described in
Finding 29- The Commission further determines that, based upon the evidence of record, the Chinook (proper) Indians had Indian title to the
area of land described in Finding 30 as of the date of the unratified
treaty of August 9, 1851. If the payments made in 1912 for said lancis
were unconscionable (this is to be determined in a later hearing) they
of course, the" releases secured thereby do not estop petitioner from

prosecuting this case. There is nothing in the Act of August 21;, 1912,

.\'_'
CC‘...

-:’i.‘:‘.‘.£h

Fitatc S18, S35, providing for said payments, which would indicate
‘v.c:.S the intent of Congress to recognize that the Indians, parties to
2 unratified treaties mentioned therein, had "title" to any lands.

The Commission concludes, based on the find%S 05 fa-Ct herein made

9G‘i the record as whole, that the Clatsop Indians had Indian title to

:- lands as described in Finding 29 and the Chinook (proper) Indians
E Indian title to the lands as described in Finding 30.
Since the limited issues above referred to, namely, the issue of
capacity of the petitioner to assert the claims and the areas of land
which each of the petitioner groups had Indian title has been determdin favor of the Indians, the case will now proceed for the determiion of the compensation, if any, such groups received for their
oeetive lands, the value of the Clatsop lands as of August 5, l8Sl,
value of the Chinook lands as of August 9, 1551, the Payments;
any, the defendant may have made to either oi‘ such Indian groups, and
offsets, including money or property given to or funds expended
tuitously for the groups, allowable under the Indian Claims Commission

Louis J . O'I~1arr

 

Associate Commissioner

‘.'OIlC'L1l":

;r E. Witt

af Commissioner

BE . iolt
re late Commis sioner

