8 Ind. Cl. Com. n75 V h92

BEFORE THE INDIAN CZEEHS COEMISSIOE

THE UPPER SKAGIT TRIBE or INDIANS, )
Petitioner, A

v. i ; Docket No. 92
THE'UNITED STATES or AMERICA, i
Defendant. 3

Decided: March 25, 1960

Appearances:

Donald C. Gormley and
Charles A. Hobbs, of
‘Wilkinson, Cragun and Barker,
Attorneys for Petitioner.

Donald R4 Marshall, Witt whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney General,
Perry W. Morton,

“so ' Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINIOEJ

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition, as amended, presents the claim of the Upper Skagit
Tribe of Indians which includes the Suiattle Sank, an allied village
band. Petitioner is an identifiable group of American Indians within
the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission Act (do Stat. lOh9). Said
Indians were in aboriginal times ten separate allied villages. Petitioner
has the legal capacity to maintain this action (Finding 1).

‘Petitioner contends that the Dnited States in the Treaty of Point
Elliott of January 22, l8SS.(l2 Stat. 927, II Kapp. 659} secured a ccssion

1‘

ol the aboriginal Indian lands which belonged to said oetitio er and for

an unconscionable consideraoion for which relief is here prayed rnder the

£2 Izod. cl. Cm. 2.35 39;»

O

provisions of Section 5 of the Indian Claims Coxmisnion Act. The land
ceded to the government in the Point Elliott Treaty by some twcntgxtso,
or more, tribes and bands of Indians consisted of a large area of land
without including any description of interior boundaries between the
tribes and bands within the ceded tract. This cession lay generally
northeast of the Puget Sound in what is new the northwestern pert of the
State of Washington (Royce,'Eash. I, ho. 3&7). Petitioner's claim, as
amended, is force specified portion of the lands so ceded to the United
States, which is the drainage system of the Upper Skagit River from about
Mt. Vernon, Washington, to the Canadian'bonndar; (?inding 7).

The petitioner originally filed its claim herein as "The kagit Tribe
of Indians." By leave of this Commission, and over objections of the
8°V9Tnm€nt: this Commission all sod an amensnent of petitioner's name to

read "The Upper Skagit Tribe of Indians" to avoid confusion with that tribe

 

of Coast Salish Indians of'Whidbey'Island, sometimes called Loser Skagits

or'Whidbey Island Skagits, or the Skagit Tribe (Finding 6).

The basic issues to be determined at this time are (1) whether petitioner has the legal capacity to maintain this action, and (2) whether
petitioner held Indian title to the lands described in its petition, as
amended (Findings 8 and 9).

From first white contact with the native inhabitants of the Pnget
Sound area unti1.treaty times no specific mention is made by the historical
records of the "Upper Shagits." fhe term "Gppsr Skagit" is of modern Ofl7lF.
The early references to petiticner’s antecelents rare 3; their village L:“e»,

0 F1 0.

often with the comment “a division of the Sk3*1t rrioe." The irsatv o

v...’

8 Ind. Cl. Com. M75 h9b

Faint Elliott of January 22, 1855, lists four of petitioner's aboriginal
‘villages: ,Sah~ku—mehu, Nook-wa«chab—mish, Mae-see—qual-guilch, Cho—bah-abubish,
“and other allied and subordinate tribes and bands" (Finding 3). O. C. Upchurch, Indian Supervisor, in an article in the Pacific Northwest Quarterly
(1936) under a sub-title "Upper Skagits," stated there were as many as nine
independent Upper Skagit villages in aboriginal times. Upchurch mentioned

only four of these, one of which is not enumerated in our Finding 3, Spa-mee-hwu,
because it is not shown in Dr. Collins‘ complete village list (Pet. Ex. IR),
'which.was based upon specific studies of petitioneris antecedents, nor is
"Spa-mee-hwu" mentioned by this name in the Point Elliott Treaty; Both

George Gibbs and Governor Isaac I. Stevens mentioned by name four villages

situated on the upper reaches of the Skagit River (Finding 10).

‘with the growing pressure of white settlements in the country west of

~2gthe Cascades in the early 1850's the United States sought to extinguish

.‘»='.a:

la‘!

‘la

--we-"I"

ilndian title in that region. Governor Isaac I. Stevens of'Hashington Territory, also ex-officio Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the territory,

‘was instructed to contact the various tribes, bands, and fragments of tribes
in preparation of extinguishment of their Indian title to this territory and

% their removal upon reservations.. Dr. Collins stated Colonel Simmons, a treaty
agent of Stevens, did not travel up the Skagit River to contact or take a
census of these Indians in preparation for the Treaty of Point Elliott,
possibly because the log jam above Mount'Vernon made canoe travel more
difficult. However, there are four villages separately named in the treaty
preamble situated on the Upper Skagit River and three signatory parties to

the treaty, namely, "Dahtl—de¥men, Sub—chief of Sah—ku~meh—hu3 Sd'zek~du-num,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h75 , h95

Me-sekewi-guilse, Sub-chief; Ch-lah4ben, Noo~qua—cha-mish.band." It
is not established whether or not any of the treaty~signers‘who represented bands on the Upper Skagit River may'have been among the several
Sub-chiefs who signed the treaty for ”Skagit Tribe.” However, the
villages on the Upper Skagit River are often referred to as "Skagits"

(Findings 2-5), or as a "division of Skagit Indians" (see Hodge Handbook

lof American Indians, l9Q6, Part I, p. 870, Miseekwigweelis). The Point

. Elliott Treaty cession included all of the land for which this petitioner

now seeks compensation. (Royce,‘wash. No. I, Tract 3h7; Finding 7)Defendant contends that petitioner is an improper party'to'bring
this action (Dft‘s. Br., p. 208), because each village in the area claimed
was an independent, economic, dialectal, social, political, land—using
unit, the only unit that could be designated as a "tribe" (Dft‘s. Br.,
pp. 5-6).

Petitioner seeks to prove its ancestry was identifiable as a tribal
entity because of the activities of its first overall self-appointed leader,
a Catholic Prophet Cultist named "Slaybebtkud." Dr. Collins related a

great many details about this religious leader of the Upper Skagits, Slay;

'bebtkud. In her testimony and reports she stated that this religionist

developed a sort of police force to administer corporal punishment to
"sinners" and otherwise exercised poners'beyond the scope of the usual
religious leader. She concludes Slaybebtkud, a follower of the Catholic
missionary, Father Eugene Casimer Chirouse, developed into a strong
chieftan over all Upper Skagits (Pet. Reg. Fdgs. 3?—LO; Pet. Ex. 2, pp. 5567). Dr. Collins, in her dissertation for Master's Degree (l9h6), stated

that Chirouse came through the Sauk Pass to the Snohomish in 1857 and that

8 Ind. Cl. Com. H73 595

”°athis contact with Chirouse “provides the only means by which the arrival

iof Sk3ubebt'kud (Slaybebtkud) among the Skagit may approxinatel _be dated."
While the facts related by Dr. Collins seem to establish that Slay»

bebtkud became something of a central political authority among the independent villages on the Upper Skagit River, such authority appears not to
have been acquired until after the date pf the Treaty of Point Elliott, at
least not in the scope or status of an overall Chieftan, and cannot be '
considered as evidence of a tribal unity antedating the Point Elliott Treaty;
It appears that his powers as a political leader were attained after the
Treaty'of January 22, 1855 (Pet. Ex. 2, pp. 55-67) and th€r€f0T8'W3S n0t
evidence of a political merger of the ten extended village bands (Finding 3)
than inhabiting the Upper Skagit River and its tributaries, the Sauk and ’
Suiattle Rivers.‘ Slaybebtkud did not sign the Treaty of Point Elliott.

"“§ The premise upon which the parties predicate their respective conNA

-5
imtentions of tribal entity, or not, are both supported by some credible

evidence. At least, the villages were originally separate and independent
and they were soon after treaty times in a process of submitting to the
ipowers of the‘prophet.Slaybebtkud, said to be a brother of the famous Chief i
noses of the Columbia River Basin. However, the issue er tribal entity, or
not, is not the controlling issue, nor in Puget Sound claims is evidence of
political unity necessarily an essential element of the proof of their
capacity to sue or even to the proof of Indian title. Rather the issue,

a statutory requirement, is proof of their aboriginal existence as an
identifiable tribe, band or group of American Indians. In several previous

decisions the issue has been extensively discussed and it has been uniformly

8 Ind. Cl. Com. E75 H97

held that existence of village autonomy did not deprive an otherwise

identifiable group of Indians of their capacity to sue. (The Nooksack

     

Tribe v; The United States, jlnd. Cl. Com. L379, 1,83; The Iiuckleshoot

-1- It--1-s-1-1-1-in-j--a-—._, .. Till-—'—-D-e— 1.1:Tribe V, The United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Com. 658, 662; The Snohomish Tribe

q—- -....-.._.n..-___,.. .1...-_ 1-—-—--— cn_.—-ur-u-u.--n-----—-nq.—-—-.- 4-I-u-u--.--C-In-Iuj

V. The United States, 5&9, Sol.

 

I

T The language, social, ceremonial, and economic relations of these
villages were all homogeneous in nature. Dr. June McCormick Collins,
anthropologist, testified there were slight dialectical differences between
villages as one proceeded up-river.to the mountains from the saltwater
marshes at its mouth. These villages extracted their principal sustenance
from the same areas, fish from the Skagit River, berries and roots fromcommon gathering areas, and game from the mountains around the Upper Skagit
River; The mere fact their political structure was a quite simple village g
autonou , and did not apparently comprehend a central council or aboriginal
chieftan, does not negate the fact that such villages were one people,
speaking one language, and living in like fashion together in one river
ualley;' Therefore, we have concluded that said villages are “an identifiable group of American Indians"(Finding l) whose successors in interest,
the UPPer Skagit Tribe (Finding 18) have legal=capacity to bring this suit.

Dr. June.McCormick Collins has made several studies of the_Indians whose
villages were located on the Upper Skagit River. Collins has written "A
Study of Religious Change Among Skagit Indians of'Nestern'Washington" (Dissertation for Masters Degree, University of Chicago, l9h6, Pet. Ex. 2),

"The Influence of'Ehite Contact on Class Distination and Political Authority
Among the Indians of Northern Puget Sound" (Dissertation for Ph. D. Degree,

19h9: Peto Exo 3), "Differences Between Upper Skegit and Lower Skagit"

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h75 . H98

' ‘ture" (Pet. Ex. 5); and "Growth of Class Distinctions and Political
Authority Among the Skagit Indians During the Contact Period" (Pet. Ex.

h). Her research and field work among members of petitioner tribe was
prior in time to her employment as an anthropological expert for petitioner
and were primarily based on the aboriginal period l792-1800, except as
otherwise indicated. Apparently her conclusions as to boundaries and popu—
lation of villages on the Upper Skagit River were incidental to broader
studies of religion, culture, and political change. The limited source of
materials necessarily required a greater reliance on native informants by
this writer than would perhaps be necessary with Indians more widely known
and reported in treaty times.

The necessity for a determination oigwhat villages comprised the

aboriginal group is necessary before a determination of the lands exclu'””bly'used and occupied by such Indians can be made. The names and lo2.3
' . ,3.

cations of the ten extended villages of petitioner's antecedents, as
reported by Dr. Collins (Pet. Exs. I, IR), are set out in Finding 3.
The total population of these villages at treaty times and whether
or not their numbers, between 1792 and l8SS, were substantially reduced
by'epidemics of smallpox and other diseases bear upon the amount of land
occupied and used by such Indians (Pet. Br. pp. 23-2h; Dft. Br. pp. lS7~l?h).
Dr. George Gibbs in a description of the fourth division of the “Niskwalli
Nation,“ namely, the Skagits, including Kikiallu, Ndkwatsamish, Tow—ah-ha,

Smali-hu, Sakumehu, Miskaiwhu, Miseekweeglis, Swinamish and Skwonamish, stated

this division occupied the remaining counti* between the Snohomish and Belling»

ham Bay and thought the Skagit Division (apparently meaning the linguistic

group) altogether numbered lh?S (Dft. Ex. 6, p. 180). Thus, Gibbs concluded

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h7S »   h99

that a much larger group, including five or six other bands, numbered less
than double Dr. Collins’ estimate of 880'Uppor Skagits. Gibbs estimated
the total population of the bands on the Upper Skagit River at 300 (Finding
10). However, ibbs stated only the islands and‘shore had been explored
and further cautioned that Indian population estimates were often highly
speculative, apparently because Indian concept of nunbers was poor at best
and also because the Coast Salish were almost always "in locomotion."

Defendant's expert anthropologist, Dr. Carroll Riley, differed with
Dr. Collins’ population estimate because he thought the severe decimation
of the Indian population of from 70 to 90 percent in this region included
the aboriginal villages on the Upper Skagit River CR. 362). Since Riley‘s
opinion is supported by a number of writers as to the epidemics of smallpox
among the neighboring'bands to the Upper Skagit River,'ue have considered
the general references of Dr. George Gibbs compiled in 1853 (Dft's. Ex. 6),
together with Dr. Collins‘ estimated figure, and Dru Riley's opinion of
decimation, and conclude petitioner's antecedents were about 300 in total
numbers at treaty times (Findings 15). are

Population is, of course, only one of several matters relevant to

the determination of the extent of aboriginal land used and occupied.by'

’ petitioner's antecedents. In the Quapaw case, the Court of Claims quoted

with approval our Finding 3 in that case on the proposition that where an L
identifiable group of American.Indians, in the absence of a treaty'reservation,
have only a use and occupancy title, or "Indian title," the fee'being in the
United States and when an Indian tribe ceases for any reason,'by reduction of
population or othereise, to actually occupy and use an area of land, such
Indians lose their right or claim of a full beneficial interest in same (The

Quapav Tribe v. U. 3., 128 Ct. Cls. us, a9).

1-In--I-—n-9

8 Ind. Cl. Com. H75 500

A strongly controverted fact issue is the extent upon which subject
Indians réiied upon hunting as a means of subsistence. Petitioner contends
that a scarcity of fish and other foodstuff along the Skagit River stimulated
hunting activities as an essential means of survival. Defendant insists that
food along the river was so abundant that only the indigent went hungry and
that plentiful game came dean to the pra'ries from the mountains to escape
the cold of winter and rendered their capture easily made, with the exception of mountain goat. Defendant contends hunting was limited to areas
in near proximity to the river (Pet. Br. pp. uo—uL; Dft. Br., pp. 176-18h).

The villages of petitioner's ancestors were all situated near to the
banks of the Skagit River and its tributaries (Map, Pet. Ex. I; Village List,
Pet. Ex. IR; Finding 3). Their life was oriented about the river. It furnished the mainstay of food supply, the salmon. It held séle prominence as

”?%the highway of travel because the thick underbrush made land movement dif-L-.
- Z."-'
-d-'. 1' "'

ficult. East and.west, the direction of river.floe, were the important
compass points, while north and south were relatively'insignificant (Findings
l0, 13, 16).

Dr. Gibbs described food'west of the Cascades as primarily salmon, roots,
and berries, with hunting to a certain ertent chiefly'by bands nearest the
mountains. In discussing Indian population west of the Cascades, Gibbs cautioned
to regard "not merely'actual facts of increase or mortality known to us but the
capacity of the country‘ to furnish subsistence" (Dft. Fat. 6, pp. 193, 182;
Finding 10). The relative scarcity of food in the claimed area would suggest
a similar condition as to Indian population. However, subject aboriginal
villages were situated "nearest the mountains” with hunting to a certain

extent, according to Gibbs, but that mountain goat, the only'game that

8 Ind. Cl. Com. b7? 3_ SO]

I

remained the vear round on the higher ground, never constituted an
important item of food, but a sourse of wool for blank€t3Among the neighboring riverine Indians, also Coast Salish tribes,

as are Upper Skagits, this Commission has found a rather consistent subsistence use pattern centered on the river, limited to surrounding prairies,

(and with only sporadic use of the mountains for hunting (The };ek.eshoot

o-X¢u-I-“-b¢$- j

Tribe .of Indians v. The “United States, 3 Ind. (:1. Com. 658, 663-666; 

jun Q-v-n.--u-_---——u.--_-o--.—.

   

nu:

 

 

Nooksack Tribe v; The United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Com. h79, H97: h98)The same use pattern was found even more emphatically concentrated among

"saltwater" Coast Salish (The Lummi Tribe v. The United States, 5 Ind. Cl.

on S “T     

Com. 525; The S'}C.1allam Tr_:3_._'_§_<=_3_ v._The United Statgg, 5 Ind. .c1. Com. 680;

The Skogonish Tribe v. The United States, 6 Ind. C1. Com. 135).

 

On the lower South.Fork of the Skagit River below Mt. Vernon this Commission found that deer were corralled by'a fence leading to the water

driven into the river and shot by Kikiallus hunters from their canoes (The

.Kikiallus Tribe v. The United States, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. hS6, h66, Fdg. 9A).

 

-"'33-T 3-:2-In

an--u1nu-III—-an 0 - j---—u--I-I-v

No such evidence of this hunting method appears in the instant record
involving the contiguous claim farther up the same river.
Dr. Leslie Spier reported that "it_is probable that all of the high

ground eastward of Mount Baker was common hunting territory of Nooksack,

(interior Skagit, Northern Okanagon,IMethow and Chelan" (Finding 16; Dft.

I. 23, p. 39; The Nooksaok Tribe v. U;_§., 3 Ind. Cl. Com. H79: 398). '
This Commission found in the Kikiallus case that Hcmurray Lake area

was roamed over'by Kikiallus and various villagers of the Upper Skagit and
was often used by young Indians of that tribe to capture their "guardian

spirits” (7 Ind. Cl. Com. hS6, h7h). The boundaries defined in Finding l7

8 Ind. Cl. Com. L75 502

‘exclude the territory around Nchurray Lake and the high ground of those
claimed areas remotely _ocated from the river. The omission of such areas
is made not only because of their above mentioned free~use'by*other Indians,
but also because the petitioners did not regularly use the high mountain
areas to supplement salmon, the mainstay of their diet (Finding 16). Another
free use area was the root digging and berry grounds of Sauk Prairie used by’
Stillaguamish, Skykomish, and others (1926, Nels Bruseth, Indian Stories and
Legends of the Stillaguamish and Allied Tribes, Dft. Ex. 11, pp. 6-8).
Petitioner's identification of the drainage system of the Upper Skagit
River, from the crest of the Cascade Mountains on the east, the Canadian
boundary on the north, to the foot of Mount Baker on the west and extending

down around Mt. Vernon, McMurray Lake, continuing around the headwaters of

the Stillaguamish River to, but not including, the areas drained by the

_ §kykomish River on the south, encompasses a large expanse of land aggregating approximately'l,769,80h acres (Pet. Ex. I, Map; Finding 6).

In sumary, petitioner's ancestors undoubtedly'occupied definite areas"
within the claimed tract. They depended upon salmon as the mainstay of their
food supply,'were sometimes straitened for food, and did some seasonal hunting
on the high ground abote the river. Such hunting was done in the fall after
the salmon had ceased to run and the larger game came down to the 1ower'areas
for winter. In attempting to establish.boundaries and occupancy from this
record it is quite apparent that the historical data is all of a fragmentary’
and general nature. Also a long period of time has passed since the treaty‘

cession. ‘With careful consideration and evaluation of all of §4€ evidence

9-. .

Presented, including subsistoac. sources, methods, culture, habits. and

(U

needs of the aboriginal inhabitants of the Upper Sk _‘

8 Ind. Cl. Com. H75 ‘ 503

by the testimony of the expert witnesses, and the exhibits of record, we
have detcrnined such boundaries, based upon the record as a whole of exclusive use and occupancy, and have described same in Finding 17. The
record does not justify finding the exclusive use and occupancy by petitioner's ancestors of the entire segment of the Skagit River drainage

system as claimed, aggregating about l,759,80h acresDefendant alleges (Answer, par. 3, as amended Feb. 3, 1959) that this

 

c1aim.is barred by the decision of the Court of Claims in Duwamish, et al

v. The United States, 79 C. Cls. 530 (cert. don. 295‘U. S. 755). This Comr

go

   

mission has denied this plea in bar in the Nooksack case, the Lummi case,
the S‘klallam case, the Samish case, and others, for the reason that such
decision was rendered under a particular Jurisdictional Act (M3 Stat- 835)
and is not here applicable. The plea is denied.

In conclusion, the Commission is of the opinion that as of the date
of the ratification of the Point Elliott Treaty of January 22, 1855, toawit,
March 8, 1859, the ancestors of petitioner held Indian title to the land
described in Finding 17. Such questions as the consideration paid to petitioner, the acreage and value of said lands, and the rights of said_
ancestors retained or acquired in such or other lands shall be the subject

of further hearing and additional evidence.

sag-er  '*;Iitt

Q-ma-q.y..-c -..---.. -—-u—q_g.-an-n-1-5

Chief Commissioner

I concur:

Ehn H. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

Commissioner'Hat%ins didrnot
participate in this Opinion.

