7 Ind. c1. Corn 1:22
BEFORE THE nmnu: CLADES CCMMISSION

PUEBLO DE COCH ITTL ,
Petitioner,
Va

Docket No . 136

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

-.../N.../\_.#~....»*\.../‘-../‘N-..-v'\~../‘N-..-r‘

Defendant.

Decided: March 27, 1959

F]l~ED11\TGS Q FACT

The Commission makes the follo1—:ing findings of fact:
Finding l
The Pueblo de Chochiti, the petitioner herein, is a tribe of Pueblo
Indians recognized by the Secretary of the Interior, having a regularly
elected Governor and council to represent it and authorized under the
laws of New Mexico to sue and be sued as a corpomtion. Petitioner now
is and for centuries has been an autonomous Indian community and is an
identifiable group of American Indians entitled to sue under the Indian
Claims Commission Act of August l3, 191.16.
Finding 2
This claim, timely filed by the petitioner pursuant to said Indian
Claims Commission Act, involves a tract containing l3,hb.O acres in the
present county of Sandoval, State of ‘flew Mexico. The land lies im*r1ediately east of and adjoins the eastern boundary of another tract known as

the Pueblo de Cochiti Grant constituting 2h,2S6.SO acres, upon which the

7 Ind Cl. Com. I422

petitioner has maintained its pueblo since about the year l700. This
tract, hereafter referred to as the Cochiti Grant, was patented to the
petitioner by the United States on November l, l86b,, and no -claim is herein made for said grant. The l3,l;}_;O acre tract will hereafter be referred
to as the "claimed area.”
Finding 3

For almost 300 years prior to l82l, Spain exercised sovereignty
over-Mexico, one of its colonies in the New world. New Mexico was then
one of the internal provinces of Mexico, often referred to as New Spain.
Mexico revolted against Spain and became independent in 1821.

Finding L;

The Spanish Goverment a1J.o:~red the Indians of New Spain to occupy
and use so much of the Crown lands as they could use and protected the
occupants against trespasses until the Crown night desire to terminate
the same. This policy of the Spanish Government was shown by the Recopilacion de las Indies (Def. E31. 31). The possession and use of the
Crown lands by the Indians was at the vri‘1.l of that govern:-zent. Spain
apparently made grants of Crown lands to Indians and non-Indians without regard to the rights of Indians occupying the same. '

Finding 5'

land grants were made by Spaiiish authorities in the New  %  *1 
Indian pueblos as well as to non-lndians. As early as May    
ordinance by the Viceroy of the Province of I~'Ee'=.: Spain ordered 
of the Indian pueblos as might need land upon which to live and sow,

should have given to them 500 varas, and more should it be nec.essa:*y_.

7 Ind. 01. com, L.,22

and that from that time forward there should not be granted to any one
lands or grounds unless they should be located l,000 varas away from the
pueblos and houses of the Indians. A vara was equivrJ.ent to about 33
inches. Numerous revisions were thereafter made in provisions for the
extent of pueblos, sometimes measuring from the church in four directions
and sometimes from the farthest house of the place, until the accepted
size of the Indian pueblos .of New Mexico became four square leagues, or
approxilnately 17,000 acres. A l92h House of Representatives Committee

on Indian Affairs Report states that there were 20 Indian pueblos of

New Mexico with a total population of between 6,500 and 8 ,000, each pueblo
consisting of about 17,000 acres of land or a total of 3h0,000 acres in
all.

In  the Spanish Crown authorized Governor Cruzate to make pueblo

grants whenever needed. Eleven New Mexico pueblos, including the Cochiti,

possess documents dated l689 and signed by Governor Cruzate purporting to
be grants of title to their lands. These grants have been recognized and
confirmed by the United States and patents issued for them.

The document setting forth the grant to the Cochiti is as follows:

Year 1689.-In the town of Our Lady of Guadalupe del Paso

sel Rio del Norte, on the twenty-fiith day of the month of
September, in the year one thousand six hundred and eighty-nine,
his excellency Don Domingo J ironza Petroz de Cruzate, govemor
and captain general, stated that, whereas, in overtaking, in the
kingdom of New Mexico, the Queres Indians and the Apostates and
the Therruas, and those of the Thanos nation, and after having _
fought with all the other Indians of all the pueblos, an Indian

of the pueblo of Zia, called Bartolome de Ojeda, who distinguished
himself the most in the battle, lending his aid everywhere, and
surrendered, being wounded with a bullet and an arrow, who as afore-=~
stated, I ordered to declare under oath, the condition of the
pueblo of Cochiti, that apostatized and took part in the wars in

i that kingdom of New Mexico, as they were very rebellious Indians,

h2h

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 11,22 I425

Questioned. If the pueblo would rebel again at any inture
time, as it was customary with them. The deponent answered no;
that they were very much intimidated. That although they were
very arrogant Indians, and was a very rebellious pueblo, but
that with what had happened to than at Zia in the year previous,
he judged that it was impossible for th-cm to fail in yielding
obedience. '

Questioned. If he has anything further to state in regard
to these Indians, concerning their rebelling and associating with
the Apostates, and the deponent answered, no; and that it is tme
that it was a very rebellious pueblo, it with what had happened
to them in the previous year, in the pueblo of.’ Zia, he judged 'that it was impossible for then to fail in yielding their obedience. Therefore, his excellency, Don Domingo Jironza Petroz
de Cruzate, governor and captain general, granted them the boundaries I herein set forth: On the north one league, on the east
one league, on the west one league, on the south, to the point
of a barren hill, near a stream of water, running in the direction oi‘ the rising sun, and which empties into the Bravo river.
This they owe for being rebels.

And this, his confiession, having been read and explained to
him, and the deponent answered that what he had stated was the
truth, under the oath which he had taken, which he affirmed and
ratified several times, and such being the case, he signed with
said governor and captain general, before me the present secretary of the government and war. To which I certify.

BART OLQEE DE OJEID2}. ,

DCHIEIGO J IROIIZA PETROZ DE CRUZATE.
Before me ,

DON PEDRO IADRON DE GUITAREL,
Secretary of Government and War.
This grant was confirmed and patent issued to Pueblo of Ccchiti on
November 1, men. (Def. Ex. 12).
Finding 6

Two subsequent Spanish land grants to non-Indians invoffa   I

both the Cochiti Grant and the "claimed area. " The La Haw‘aide,,,c‘j5,:g=jf-  

Captain Jacinto Pelaez on February l0, 1695, overlaps the  t. ‘I

area. " The Caja del Rio Grant, made to Nicolas _tiz Nino Ladrone de. i;‘:*uF.ei-:?;li~-:3;rs::

0“ M33’ 30, 17142 overlaps part of the lie iada Grant and cover:

7 Ind. Cl. Com, L22

the north one-fourth of the "claimed area. " In all subsequent litigation and transactions, the Cochiti Grant has been held elder and superior
to both of these private grants as to conflicting areas.

The map, petitioner's Exhibit No. 16, shows boundaries of the grants

referred to above and the boundary of the Cochiti lands, outside the

Cochiti Grant, which are claimed here.

 

Finding 7 vi

On February Zh, 1821 the revolutionary government of Mexico adopted
the "Plan of Iguala, which declared that "all the inhabitants of New Spain
without distinction, whether Europeans, Africans, or Indians , are citizens of this monarchy, with the right to be employed in any post according to their merit and virtues and that the person and property of every
citizen will be respected by the government." These principles were
recognized in the Treaty of Cordova between Spain and Mexico, August 274,
1821, and in the Mexican Declaration of Independence, September 28, l82l.

Thereafter, New Mexico was under I~Eexican sovereignty. It was a Territory of Mexico until December 30, 1836, when it became a Deparhnent. It
was at that time that all of Mexico was divided into Departments.

The Government of Mexico assumed ownership of  lands formerly held
by the Spanish Crown. Grants of land made by Spain were moored by
Mexico. No change in private property rights occurred as a result of the
change in sovereignty from Spain to Mexico. L we and decrees promulgated
by the Spanish Government were regarded by Mexico as continuing in force,

except where specifically changed by the new goverment.

During their sovereignty, the Mexican Government took no action which

7 Ind. C1. Com. 1122

would alter the rights of the Cochiti Indians or of recipients of the
two private land grants named above and their successors in interest.
No Mexican land grants were made involving any part of the "claimed area"
or of the Cochiti Grant.
Finding 8

On May 13, 18146 war was declared between the United States and Mexico.
On August 18 , 18146 General Stephen W. Kearny entered Santa Fe and took
possession of all of New Mexico in the name of the United States. On
February 2, 18148 the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo was signed, ratifications exchanged May 30 _, 181.18, and the treaty proclaimed July 1;, 18148.

The United States acquired sovereignty over New Mexico by virtue of
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 18118. Under the provisions of Articles VIII and DC of that treaty the United States agreed to respect and
protect all property rights within the ceded area (9 Stat. 929-930).
Thus, it became the duty of Congress to recognize and establish every
title and right to property which before the cession Mexico recognized
as good and valid. In other words _, in harmony with the rules of interI

national law, as well as with the tends of the treaty of cession, the
change of sovereignty should work no change in respect to rights and title;
that which was good before should be good after the cession; and that wit; gel
the law would enforce before should be enforcible after the cession.
Finding 9
In order to carry out its obligations under the provisions of Articles VIII and .D{ of the Treaty oi‘ Guadalupe Hidalgo, and to ascertain

what lands in New Mexico were private property, the title to which should

-"1

7 Ind. 01. Com, 1122

be respected and protected, the Congress of the United States passed

the Act of July 22, l8Sh (10 Stat. 308), entitled, "An Act to Establish

V

the Office of Surveyor General of New Mexico, -31‘ -n- -2»? and for other purposes.
By the act, Congress provided for the appointment of a Surveyor General
for New Mexico Territory, who should ascertain the origin, nature, character, and extent of all claims to lands within such Territory which
might have existed under the laws, usages and customs of Spam and Mexico.
A mu report of his findings was to be submitted to the Congress on all
such claims as originated before the cession of the Territory to the
United States with his decision as to the validity or invalidity of the
same under the laws, usages and customs of the country before such cession;
and also a report in regard to all existing pueblos in the Territory,
showing the extent and locality of each, the number of inhabitants in
each pueblo.,.and the nature of their titles to the land. Under the provisions of Section 8 of the Act, this report was to be submitted to Conaess for such action as might be deemed just and ‘proper with a View to
confirm all bona fide grants and thus give full effect to the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo.
Finding l0

In accordance with the provisions of the Act of July 22, 1851;, this

petitioner presented its claim to land to the Surveyor Gener 7 .

The claim.

presented, however, was not for the land here in issue but for the Cochiti

Grant. Petitioner‘s claim was investigated by the Surveyor General and

 

recommended to Congress for confirmation. Congress approved the reconmendation of the Surveyor General by the Act of December 22, l8S8

1128

H

.4v'*-c-...

7 Ind. C1. Can. L222

(11 Stat. 371;), and on November 1, 1863.: a patent was duly issued to petitioner i‘or'such lands, the acreage being 2h,2S<5 acres. (Def. Ex. 12).
Finding 11

It was not until the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 8511), establishing the Court of Private Land Claims, that Congress provided a judicial tribunal for the adjustment and confimation of claims under grants
from the governnents of Spain and Mexico of land in New Mexico and certain
other territories included within the Mexican cessions of 18148 and 1853.
Prior to that act, Congress reserved to itself the determination of such
claims.

The Court of Private Land Claims began work in Denver, Colorado,
July 1, 1891, but soon transferred to Santa Fe, New Iiexico. Its work
was completed in 19011.

Finding 12

On February 11;, 1893, a petition was filed in the Court of Private
Land: Claims seeking confirmation of the La I-Eajada C-rant, made by Spain
February 10, 1695. On September 29, 18911, the court entered a final
decree confirming the claim of the petitioners in that case. In its decree, the court found that on February 10, 1695', the Governor and Captain.

General of the Province of New Mexico, under authority of ti‘: I?°57..1“  

Spain, granted the La Majada tract to Captain Jacinto Pelaez  
grant was revali ted by the Spanish Government in favor of  

grantee December 13, 1698; was again revalidated and made de nova:

—  . -21-5!

J8.l'D.laI'_}" 10, 1710, in favor of Maria Pelaez, daughter and sole heir of

Jacinto Pelaezg and was again revalidated August 2?, 1728, in  hf

7 Ind. Cl. Can... {:22

Maria Fernandez de la. Pedrera, daughter and sole heir of Ma:-j_a Pelaez,

Pursuant to the above decree and in accordance with the provisions
of Section 10 of the Act establishing the Court of Private Land Claims,
a survey was made of the La Majada Grant in the surmner of 1895'. The area
surveyed was ‘found to contain Sh,hOh acres. Notice of the survey, with
a description of _the boundaries, was published October 22, 1895. The
notice required by Section lO was a notice of publication in Spanish and
English, once a week fcr_:£‘our consecutive weeks in two newspapers, one
published in the capital of the Territory and the other published near
the land sosurveyed; ninety days from the date of the first publication
was allowed for obj ectiors to be filed to such survey with the Surveyor
General. No objections having been filed, the survey was approved by the
Court of Private Land Claims March 25, 1896, and a patent issued October 26, 1908. (Def. Ex. No. 8).

Finding 13

Claimants to the Caja del Rio Grant, made by Spain to Nicolas Oritz
Nino Ladrone de Guebara May 30, 17112, filed their petition in the Court
of Private Land Claims October 124, 1892 seeking confilnnation of the grant.
On August 23, 189.3 a decree was entered confizming the title to that
grant, whereupon a patent was issued in accordance with such decree,
February 20, l89'2’_. The acreage included with the Caja del Rio Grant and
patented to the "heirs, successors, assigns and legal representatives" of
the original grantee from Spain was 66,8l:8 acres. (De.f'._ Etc. No. 10).,
Finding ll;

On or about harch 3, l9OLL an action in partition and to quiet title

7 Ind. Cl. Com. h22

to the La.Majada Grant was filed by Trinidad Baca, et al., against the
unknown heirs of Jacinto Pelaez, deceased, et al., in the Sandoval County
District Court, which was designated Case No. 26. On or about December ll,
1909, the Pueblo de Cochiti, having first obtained leave of court, filed
an anended petition as intervenor in the case. This petition was filed byF. C. Wilson, Special.Attorney for the Pueblo Indians of New Mexico, a
position first created by Congress in 1898 and continued from year to year
thereafter with compensation annually appropriated by Congress for that
specific office.

In its amended petition as intervenor the Pueblo de Cochiti alleged

in part as follows:

lst. That on the 10th day of January, of the year l7lO, the
La.Majada Grant, was revalidated.and.made de novo in favor of
jHa:da.Palaez, daughter and sole heir of the original grantee,
Captain Jacinto Palaez. '

2nd. That the said.Haria Palaez married Juan Fernandez de la
IPedrera, the date of'said.marriage being unknown to your petitioner.

3rd. That said Juan Fernandez de la Pedrera and his son Bartolome
Fernandez on the llth day of August, l7hh, executed jointly a good
and sufficient deed to the Indians of the said Pueblo de Cochiti
in fee simple, all their right, title and interest in consideration of the sum of fifteen hundred dollars ($1500) to a place
called "Ojo de Santa Cruz”, bounded and described in said deed,

as follows, to-nit:

North, they reach to the hills of Santa Cruz, and on

the east to the house of the little spring, on the south
by the boundaries of the Pueblo of Santa Domingo and on
the west by said Pueblo de San Buena Ventura, (Pueblo de
Cochiti),

a translation of which deed is attached hereto and.made a part hereof. (Ex, A) '

%* -7:6.‘

h3l

7 Ind. Cl. Ccm. h22

th. That the Indians of said Pueblo of Cochiti have claimed
and occupied said tract of land in fee simple by virtue of said
deed and have exercised ever since the year l7hh, in which year
they obtained title, ownership over said tract as aforesaid,
under said deed.

‘WHEREFORE, Intervenor prays that the heirs, or theirzassignees
or grantees, of the said Bartolome Fernandez be decreed to have
no right, title or interest in that portion of the La.Majada
grant conveyed to the Pueblo de Cochiti by deed under date of

August 11, l7hh, and for such other and further relief as to
this court shall seem just and equitable.

Although the translation attached to the petition does not correspond
in every detail with the translation of the same deed identified as Exhibit C in the petition now before this Commission, both of which vary‘
to some extent frdn the translation of petitioner’s expert witness Dr.
Miguel Jorrin (whose translation, for instance, gives the consideration
as 1,500 pesos), the variations are minor and inconsequential.

The area

described in the deed is the same as the present claimed area.

The case was heard by'a referee, whose report, filed July 1, 1910,
Shows that the record included "intervenor Cochiti Indian Pueblo exhibits
numbered E-l to E-l0 inclusive."

Based upon similar findings in the

Referee‘s Report, the court in its Judgment of Partition, filed July l7,

G 1913, made findings as to the Cochiti as follows:

'V. The court further finds that there is a conflict between
the Hajada Grant and the Grant to the Pueblo of Cochiti Grant,
as more fully shown by the pleadings; and upon the question of
a conflict the court finds that as between the said grants the
grant to the Pueblo of Cochiti is the elder and superior, and
that the said plaintiffs and their co-tenants are not entitled
to have a partition of any of the lands within said Pueblo of
Cochiti Grant, the boundaries of said grant of the said Pueblo
of Cochiti being more fully set forth in the patent from the
United States therefor filed in this cause, and t5 which reference is hereby made.

7 Ind. Cl. Cone L22

VI. The court further finds that the clatn of the Pueblo

of Cochiti for lands within the Majada Grant and beyond the
boundaries of the lands described in the patent to the Pueblo
of Cochiti is not well founded, and that said Pueblo of Cochiti

has no right, title or interest in or to any portion of the

Hajada Grant outside of the boundary lines of the lands den

scribed in the patent of the Pueblo of Cochiti.
Based upon its findings, the court ordered, adjudged and decreed that,
subject to certain exceptions, the Majada Grant was owned in fee simple
by certain designated parties and ordered.a partition of the real.estate.

A subsequent intervention by Benjamin F. Pankey, filed June 9, l9l7,
resulted in a Judgment and Decree filed January 13, l920. This judgment
did not alter the original findings of the court as to the rights of the
Cochitia

The July 7, l9l3 judgment, not having been appealed, became a final
judgment by a court of competent jurisdiction adjudging that the Cochiti

had no right, title or interest in the present "claimed area" by virtue

of the l7hh.deedo
Finding 15

In an effort to provide for the final adjudication and settlement of
a very complicated and difficult series of conflicting titles affecting
lands claimed.by the Pueblo Indians of'Nen Mexico, Congress provided for
the creation.of a Pueblo Lands Board under the act of June 7, 39?h.{h3
Stat. 636). This Board consisted of three:menbers, one representin¢ thw
Secretary of the Interior, another the.attorney General, and a third ape
pointed by the President of the United States. _

'Under the provisions of the Act, the Pueblo Lands Board and

to investigate, detennine and report upon.all lands within the exterior

directedi

h33

7 Ind. 01. Can. n22 u3h

boundaries of any land granted or confirmed to the Pueblo Indiam of New

Mexico under authority of the United States or of any prior sovereignty,
or acquired by said Indians as a cozmriunity by purchase, or otherwise,
title to which the "board shall find not to have been extinguished in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.”

Under the provisions of Section 6, the Board was also required to investigate and determine what lands or water rights of the Pueblo had been
lost, If such loss occurred as a result of the failure of the United
States seasonably to prosecute the rights of the Pueblo, the United States
was to be held liable therefor and an award made to the Pueblo to compensate it for such loss. Any award of ccrupensation was subject to judicial
review by the United States District Court and the Circuit Court of Appeals.

Section 2 provided that one copy of the reports of the Pueblo Lands
Board had to be filed with the United States District Court for the District
of New Hezgico. Section 3 required the United States Attorney General, upon the filing of each report, to forthwith cause to be filed in the District

Court a suit to quiet title to the lands described in said report as" Indian

I lauds the Indian title to which had been determined by said report not to

have been extinguished.

— Section 1:, protected the right of Pueblo Indians of New Mexico to assert
their title to any land in any court of competent jurisdiction at any time
prior to the “filing of field notes and plats by the Secretary of the Interior
as provided in Section l3. '

Finding 16

The Pueblo Lands Board investigated conflicting claims  the

7 Ind. Cl. C n. 1422

Cochiti Grant. The Board took notice of the conflict existing between

the Cochiti Grant and the La Majada and Caja del Rio Grants and found
in favor of the Cochiti as to all of the areas in these grants that over-f
lapped the Cochiti Grant. The Board made findings as to claims extinguished within the Cochiti Grant and made an a'=.-.-ard of $7_,3ll.,62 to the
Cochiti. In the final paragraph of its Report #1, dated April 30, 19309
the Board says:
Said Board has investigated and has determined that there
are no lands other than the (Cochiti) Pueblo Grant herein referred to, acquired by said Indians as a community, by purchase

or otherwise, or held by them.

Shortly thereafter, in case No. 2l33 in the United States District

Court of New Mexico entitled United States of America: as Guardian of the

Indians of the Pueblo of Cochitiz in the State of New Mexico v. Manuel

Aragonz et al., the court was asked to quiet title to '79 claims which the
Pueblo Lands Board had found unextinguished. In the decree therein, filed
April 114, 1933., title was quieted in the Cochiti with certain exceptions
that altered the findings of the Board.

The Pueblo Lands Board, in its 1931 mnencirnents to its Report, made an
additional eeerd of $13,130.56 to the Cochiti based upon the decision of
the District Court. In 1932 the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs recommended that the Cochiti be paid an additional sum of 3363882.L.«:; '%ii:
the Board‘-’s awards were too low. BY-ACT» Of M83’ 31, 1933 (133  T’  .
Congress authorized the aP13roPriation of $37,826o37. This  :7.-, 
award to the Cochiti of $58,268.55 for losses within the  "

accordance with the original Act which created the Pueblo Lands 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. h22

Finding 17'
On February‘ 10 , 1695 the "claimed area" became private property
by reason of the La Majada Grant. Thereafter, the use of the "claimed
area" by the Cochiti did not and could not give the Cochiti a compensable interest in such land.
Edgar E. Witt

Chief Canmiss ioner

Louis J. O‘Marr

Associate Commissioner

Mn. M. Holt

Associate Commissioner

1136

