g.

‘-5

THE EaSTER£ (EMIGRARE) CHEROKEE IRDIAK3
on the relation of Jesse B: Milan,
James Pickop, John Na Adair, Henry C° Walhiey,
Daniel Coody, Charles H. iarnage, Amanda Horgann

Bell, and Eldee Starr,
Plaintiffs,
Docket No. 42

V.»

THE UNZTED STAIES OF AMERICA,

~...r~../x../\../-./'~..z~../~..I~»./~..z\../~>..#~./

Defendant.

Appearances: Woodson E. Eorvell with whom was
George E. Norvell and Uilfxed A, Hearn,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs

Ralph A. Barney and Jules H. Sigel,
with whom was Ufa Assistant Attorney
General, A. Devitt Vanech,

Attorneys for Defendant

:e:r.1:»:1o;~: 033' TI-.73 com-21:53:93;

In-In-o.4uu-u tutu-—— u-nu;-n—--no cu-u-u-‘.-..q._.-..

   

PER CURIAM: The claim; here presenica, is by “The Eastern (Emigrant)

7

Cherokee Indians, on the relation of Jesse B. Milan,“ and seven other
individual parties, to recover a sum alleged to be due the plaintiffs

because of wrongful acts of the defendant wlioh made it necessary for

C

plaintiffs to expend large sums of money 10? attoineys fees in order to

R

enforce their rights against the United Statese

177d

The allegations of the petition show that the named individual
plaintiffs are suing as representatives of a group known as the Eastern
Cherokee Indians.

To the petition the defendant interposed a motion to dismiss on
the ground that the Eastern Cherokees is not an identifiable group as is
contemplated by Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act. (25 U.S.
C. A. 70).

This case and the Western Cherokee cases, Dockets 24, 41 and 43,
were argued together because the same questions as to the right to bring
a representative suit, the character of the claim and the construction of
said Section 10 are involved in those cases as in this.

we believe the plaintiffs are here asserting a common claim of the
Eastern Cherokees, which is a partsof the Cherokee Nation of Indians described or referred to in the following treaties:

In the treaty of July 8, 1817 (7 Stat. 156) they are referred to
as the "Cherokee Nation, East of the Mississippi River;”

In the treaty ct Yohruary 27, 1?L? (7 Stat. 195), they are

likewise referred to in Art. 7 as “the Cherokees east of the Mississippi;”

And in the treaty of August 6, 1846 (9 Stat. 871) there is a clear

recognition of the Eastern Cherokees, as wrii as the Western Cherokees,

I

each being considered a “different portion‘ or the Cherokee Nation of

Indians.

1779

".1
$°Jt'IAt the oral axgumcnt iv was tacitly undcxstnod by the nartins

that a ruling upon the questions submikted would apply to this and the
Western Cherokee cases mentioaed aboves so on the authority of the

opinion this day filed in Pocket N00 2& we must overrule the motionc

