3 515

BEFORE THE INDIAE CLAIMS C MMISSION

THE YUCHI (sucsas) Texas; or nmnms, )
and s. W. BROIYN, LEGUS snozm, JACOB )
HOLLAND, WILLIE TIGER, seen sicssrss, )
JOHN JAIES and JESSE JALQZS, all )
members of said Tribe. band or group )
of Indians, for themselves and for )
the use and benefit of all other )
members of said YUCHI (suosss) TRIBE.)
band or group of Indians, )
)
)
)
3
)
)
)
)

Claimants,
V. Docket No. 172

THE UNITED sures or AJJQERICA.

Defendant.

Decided: May 16, 1955
Appearances:

Herbert S. French, with whom
were Lewis M. Dabney, Jr.,
and J. T. Smith,

Attorneys for Claimants.
Ralph A. Barney, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General, Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

WITT,_Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This claim is asserted by the Yuchi (Enchee) Tribe of Indians, by
its officials; and by the said officials as members of said tribe, band
or group, for themselves and all other menbers of said tribe, band or
group.

Said claimants assert that their predecessors in interest were

the owners of more than 11,200,000 acres of land which were ceded to

3 516

the United States by the Treaty of August 9, l8lU-(usually referred to as

the Treaty of Fort Jackson); that said cession was without their:vo1untary

consent. and that said tribe received no consideration then or afterwards
for said lands. Claimants pray for judgment against the defendant for
the sum of $22,h0o,o00 as the value of said 11,200,000 acres, with interest, from August 9, 181M.

Among other defenses urged by defendant are (1) that the claimant
tribe was at all times referred to in the petition, a.part of what was
known as the Creek Confederacy -- that is. the Creek Nation; (2) that
the lands for which compensation is sought are a part of and are included in the claim of the Creek Nation. Docket No. 21, now pending
before this Commission.

It is unnecessary to state or discuss other defenses by reason of
our decision as herein made as to the defenses stated.

The Findings of Fact upon which this decision is based clearly show
that the Yuchi Tribe was incorporated and became a.part of the Creek
Nation at an early historic period {between 1733 and 1751); that after
its incorporation into the Creek Nation, the said tribe became subject
to the authority of said Nation and was bound by its laws; that the tribe
lost whatever status it ever had as an independent tribe, and never regained it; that the Yunhi Indians are now a constituent part of the Creek
Nation. are enrolled on official Creek rolls as Creek Indians; that they
received allotments of Greek lands as Creek Indians. and are represented
in the Creek Tribal Council and are under the authority of the principal

chief of the Creek Nation.

.--t --—p_«-rug-u-u-vs-... j4QlIdIQ'§.H .- While the record shows that the Creek Confederacy or Nation was
composed of Creek towns, each of which had control of purely local_
matters —+ the paramount governmental authority of the Creek Nation was
the National Council which alone had authority as to national affairs.
The National Council of the Creek Nation was composed of the head men of
the several tribal towns which constituted the creek Nation. These
Councils met when occasion demanded. and at least once a year, wherein
all matters were deliberated with freedom and when decisions were_made,
they were promulgated as the will of the Nation. The Creek National
Council had exclusive control over all the lands of the Creek Nation,
and alone had the power of the disposition of them.

The Yuchi admit that they were incorporated into the Creek
Confederacy but contend that they were thereafter an entirely separate
and distinct tribe not subject to the Creek government and laws. The

record does not support this contention; same shows that from the time

of their incorporation in the Creek Nation, the Yuchi were subject to

the Creek government and its laws.
The Treaty of June 29, 1796 (7 Stat. 56) was a treaty executed by

the United States with the Creek Nation. It was executed_on behalf of

the Creek Nation by its "Kings, Chiefs and Warriors." Yuchi town chiefs
signed this treaty as_a constituent part of the Creek Nation as a whole,

along with the other chiefs of the Creek Nation. The treaty was signed
at the meeting of the National Council of the Creek Nation. and.Yuchi
town chiefs must have attended said treaty council for their names appear

on the treaty.

3 51}

The Treaty of June 16. 1802 (7 Stat. 68) was a treaty between the

Creek Nation and the United States. Timothy Barnard, who was closely
connected with the Yuchi. signed this treaty as one of the interpreters.

The Treaty of August 9, 181%, the Fort Jackson Treaty. which ceded
part of the lands involved herein, was signed by'Yuchi chiefs, as members
of the National Council of the Creek Nation; said Yuchi chiefs signed the
protest as to said treaty which was made by Greek officials to accompany
the same.

From the above matters of record and others, the Commission is of
the opinion that the Yuchi are not an independent Indian Tribe. band or
other identifiable group within the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission Act, entitled to prosecute a claim independent of the Creek
Nation, for lands ceded the United States under the Fort Jackson treaty
of August 9, 181%.

Regardless of the correctness of the conclusion we have reached
as to the aforesaid issue, we think that the evidence fails to show that
the Yuchi, if they were a tribe, band or other identifiable group entitled

to prosecute a claim before the Indian Claims Commission, had as a tribal

e entity Indian title to any lands of which they were deprived by the treaty

of Fort Jackson, or Indian title to any lands whatsoever.

The treaties to which we have already referred. which were joined in
by soecalled Yuchi chiefs, evidenced a recognition by said.Ynchi that the
land involved belonged to the Creek Nation as a Nation and that it was

controlled by the Council of said Nation and could only be ceded by said

National Council. we will refer to one other treaty, to-wit: the treaty

.- . -- .—. , -..— -.._-.._...-....:..—-...-._...— -—\-\- . 4- .-.-—..-_--—-;--ar-. 7-. .-2.-qu-an-u-_wu-gp_—--_-pg-....  ,- -,_

of Indian Springs. dated February 12, 1825 (7 Stat. 237) which was
executed between the United States and only a few of the Creek towns

purporting to represent the Creek Nation. This treaty was executed after

the National Council of the Creek Nation in 182M had declared that "on
no account whatever will we consent to sell one foot of our land, neither
by exchange or otherwise. 5 * * that the land is to remain as it is, in

common, and as it always has been.“ Because the Treaty of 1825 had been

executed without the approval of the Creek National Council. Chief McIntosh,
who had joined in the execution, was put to death and by treaty dated
January 2M, 1826 (7 Stat. 286) by the Creek National Council, the previous
treaty of l825 was declared null and void. It is significant that one of
the Creek chiefs who signed this treaty of 1826 was Timpoochy Barnard.
Chief of Xuchi town of the Creek Ration.

Therefore, it is clearly demonstrated that the title to all Creek

lands was in the Creek Nation as a whole, and not in any individual Creek

town or specific group which was a part of the Creek Nation.

By the Treaty of August 7, 1790 (7_Stat. 35) the Creek Nation as an
entity relinquished land and agreed to come under the protection of the
United States and the United States solemnly guaranteed to it as an entity
certain lands. Thereafter the Treaty of June 29. 1796 (7 Stat. 56) called
the Colerain Treaty was executed by the United States and the Creek Nation.
under the terms of which provisions of the Treaty of August 7. l790 were
confirmed. Nothing in this 1796 treaty, in the opinion of the writer,

can.be construed as confirming lands in any entity except to the Creek

Nation as a whole.

3 520

The ownership by claimants of land in their tribe, separate and
apart from any common ownership that they might have as a.part of the
Creek Nation, is based on their contention that such ownership was
guaranteed to them by the so-called Treaty of Colerain of June 29. 1796
(7 Stat. 56). This treaty was made with the Cree}: Nation. represented by
the "Kings. Chiefs_and Warriors of the Creek Nation of Indians." In their
brief at page 29, claimants say that this treaty was signed by representatives of 35 tribes "including the Yuchi“ and that by said treaty.
the United States "solemnly guarantee to the Creek Nation all the lands
within the limits of the United States," as described in said treaty.

The Yuchi contend that although the grant in said treaty was to the
Creek “Nation” that because the Nation was a Confederacy that such grant
was “to the particular tribe in that Nation or Confederacy, to—wit, the
Yuchi, which, at the time of the Treaty of Colerain, occupied the lands
for which the Yuchi new claim compensation," This Commission cannot
agree with said construction of said treaty.

It is contended by the Yuchi that the holding of this Commission
in the Ottawa cases (Dkts. hO~B to H0-F. inclusive, and Dkt. 133) wherein
we say that "there was no recognized single entity as the Ottawa Nation,
but that the so-called Nation consisted of separate entities in the nature
of bands or groups of Ottawas" justifies a similar conclusion as to the_
Creek Nation. It is our opinion that the situation of the Ottawas is not
analogous to that of the Creek Nation. Our holding as to the Ottawas was

based on the conduct of the parties to the various treaties involved
before and.after their execution; likewise in the instant case, our

holding that the ownership of the lands involved was in the Creek

Nation and not in any separate entity in the nature of a band or group
of Creeks, is based on the conduct of the parties before and after the
execution of the treaties, as well as the language of the treaties.

Moreover, the Yuchi have not established exclusive use or occupation
of any described tract or tracts of land. As a matter of fact. they do
not describe any such exclusively owned and.occupied tract or tracts in
their petition nor have they asked for any findings of fact describing
definitely lands as being exclusively occupied and owned by them.

The requested findings Nos. 6 and 7 as to their lands read as
follows:

6. From about 1750 up to and including the Creek War
(1813-lh) the Yuchi were settled in Southeastern Alabama
(where their principal town was located) and throughout
South and East Georgia. Specific places of residence were
as follows: i

(a) The principal town lay on the west bank of the
Chattachoochee at the junction of Yuchi Creek in what is
new Russell County, Alabama.

(b) The following subsidiary tonne or villages were
situated upon the Flint-River and its tributaries. east of
and within 30 to 50 miles of the principal town: In-tuch—
cul-gau; Pad—gee-li-gau; Toc—co«gul-egau; and the settlement
of Timothy Bernard. his Yuchi wife and children. lying on
the right bank of the Flint River, together with the nearby
farm settlements of some of his children.

(9) The following settlements upon the following
rivers in Georgia flowing.into the Atlantic: The head of
Cannouchee, the head of the Satilla, the fork of the St.
Mary's and the head of the St. John's. _H

7. The Uichi hunting grounds lay south of the Altanaha
River, and centered around the Okefinokee Swamp. They guarded
their hunting grounds with four permanent outpost settlements.
or guard villages, which were connected with the four Yuchi
tribal towns. ey excluded other Indians.

Their requested Finding No; 16 is as follows:

16. The Yuchi did not claim or occupy any of the
Oconee lands surrendered to the United States by the treaty
of New'York, which surrender was ratified by the treaty of

Oolerain. They did claim. and exclusively occupied. Royce

uh and that portion of Royce 75 which is East of the Flint
River. which was granted to “the Creek Nation" by the treaty
of Colerain. 6

Attention is called to the fact that no part of the territory
in (a) or (b),(Req. Fdg. 6) was included in the cession made by the
Jackson Treaty; and that in (c) only the portion of the territory
described as the head of the "satilla" (which is not defined) was included in the territory ceded by the Jackson Treaty.

Requested Finding 7 does not define the grounds mentioned.
Requested Finding 16 describes the lands claimed as Royce NM
(which land was not included in the Jackson Treaty) and "that portion

of Royce 75 which is East of the Flint River."

No finding is requested giving the boundaries of lands alleged to

belong to the Yunhi unless it be the description requested by Finding 16

of “that portion of Royce 75 which is East of the Flint River.“
Elsewhere in the requested findings and in the brief the portion

of Area 75 which is claimed as "hunting grounds" are described as being

“centered around the Okefinokee Swamp.“

Claimants later state the basis upon which they are entitled to an

award in Requested Findings 32 and.33, which read as follows:

32. The'Yuchi tribe is entitled to an award. based
on their separate and exclusive possession and ownership,
of that portsen of Royce 75 which lies'east of the Flint
Ikixah and that portion of Rqyce HM which adjoins it on the
e8.St 0

3 522

33. The Yuchi tribe is entitled to an additional
award based on their occupancy of a part of that portion

of Royce 75 which lies in Georgia and Southeastern Alabama,

between the Flint River and the division line between the

Upper and the Lower Creeks as recognized by Commissioner .

Luke Lea in 185M. The evidence indicates that at the time

of the Treaty of Fort Jackson the Yuchi constituted about

25% of the Lower Creeks.

The nearest to any definite description of lands which they claim
they owned as a separate tribe is "that portion of Royce 75 which is
East of the Flint River“ by Requested Finding No. 16; however, no evidence
is cited to support said finding of occupancy of the land described in
Requested Finding No. 16. nor is any evidence cited to support any of
the findings'with reference to the lands claimed.

There is no proof of continued occupancy of any defined territory.
Proof shows that the Yuchi wandered in small groups all over the south?
eastern area. They seem to have moved down into Georgia, Florida and
Alabama in successive waves of migration from 1600 to 1750. They say
that between 1733 and 1751 they abandoned their lands on the Savannah
and Ogeechee and part of the Yuchi moved southwest to the Chattachoochee
and established what later became the principal Yuchi town and a.part
of them movedmore directly south, parallel with the Atlantic Coast. and
established settlements on the various rivers flowing into the Atlantic,
and around the Okefinokee Swamp. About that time (1733-1751) they
voluntarily affiliated themselves with the Creek Confederacy.

Claimants say that from about 1750 up to and including the Creek
War they were settled in southeastern Alabama (where their principal

town nas.located) and throughout south and east Georgia and northern

Florida.

3 524

They say in_their brief (p. 27) as follows:
The ruchi had exclusive possession of, and Indian title

to. their hunting grounds which centered around the Okefinokee

Swamp and lay south of the Fort Jackson Treaty line, east of
the Flint River, and west of the line established by the treaty

of New York and ratified by the Treaty of Colerain. They had
exclusive possession of, and Indian title to, about one quarter
of the land lying south of the Fort Jackson Treaty line, west
of the Flint River and east of the division line between the .

upper and lower Creeks. Such Indian title was recognized and
ratified by the_Treaty of Colerain.

No definite description is given -— the description given could
not enable a surveyor to locate the land intended to be included -4 and
that outside the Jackson Treaty in no event could be the basis of a
recovery. The claimants sue only for lands embraced in the cession
made by the Fort Jackson Treaty of August 9, 181k, and even if proof
of Indian title to lands which are outside said cession is made (which,
however, this Commission does not think has been done), claimants would

not be entitled to compensation therefor.

Nowhere in_the record is there evidence of exclusive occupancy by
the Yuchi of any definite territory.

.Assuming that they are an identifiable group, entitled to prosecute
a separate claim, failure to establish exclusive occupancy of definable
land within the cession of the Fort Jackson Treaty precludes a recovery. It is undisputed that the Yuchi Indians are a part of the Creek
Nation and that any award made to the claimants in Dkt. 21 will inure
to the benefit of all descendants of the Creek Nation of 181k; and

therefore the Yuchi Indians, who are descendants of ancestors who were

members of the Creek Nation of 1814, will be protected by and be

.1.--s --~..._ ..‘—-qu-,v-:--—

beneficiaries of the litigation being prosecuted by the claimants

in Dkt. 21.

For the reasons herein given, Dkt. 172 must be dismissed.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring:

Louis J. O‘Harr

C1‘? TIC-TC

 

.1.-rt-an-an-1

Associate Commissioner

     

Q-on-.1-.—-1:-In-I

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

35?

