572a

BEFORE THE IRDIAN CLA_?" COHEISSIOE

Docket No. 17
UNITED STATES or .n~1E._rn‘c.a.,

THE SHAKE OR PIUTE INDIANS OF )
THE FOREER MALHEUR RESERVATION, )
IN OREGON, )
) .
Petitioners, )
}
vs. )
2’

Defendant.

SECOND INTERIOCUTORY ORDER

The Commission having by its amended order heretofore made erein
on February h, l957, determined that petitioners‘ ancestors, the bands
or Tribe of Snake or Piute Indians, who were parties to the unratified
treaty of December l0, 1868, were deprived of their original Indian
title to the lands described in Finding 3 hereof in January, 1879, by
the defendant without paymentcn?any compensation therefor and petitioners
are entitled to an award for the value of said lands in January, 1879,
the Commission has since heard the evidence offered by the parties on
the questions of the acreage of said tract of land and the value thereof,
which questions were submitted by the parties hereto and taken under advisement, and the Commission now being fully advised in the premises
finds that said tract contained l,bh9,30h.77 acres of land and in
January, 1879, when the defendant deprived petitioners‘ ancestors of
said lands, they were worth the sum.of $579,722.00; and the Commission
concludes as a matter of law that the petitioners are entitled to judgment herein in the sum of $579,722.00, less offsets, if any, hereafter
to be determined. That in view of such recovery under Count I in the
petition, they are not entitled to recover on Count II and the alternative claim.in Count II of the petition is hereby dismissed.

IT'IS THEREFORE ORDERED, ADJUDGED ADD DECREED that the petitioners
for and.on behalf of the members and descendants of members of the bands
or Tribe of Snake or Piute Indians who were parties to the unratified
treaty of December 10, 1868, as said bands or tribe existed in l879,
shall have and recover from the defendant the sum of $579,722.00, less
such offsets as may hereafter be determined.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that defendant, within sixty days from the
date of this order, shall amend its answer herein by setting forth the

 

-2amount of any offsets, counterolaims, or other demands it may have
against petitioners authorized by the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Dated at Washington, D. C., this 15th day of April, 1959.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
_ Associate Commissioner

572b

