.L‘.“—4""C

BEFOnE THE INDIAN CLAIRE COMMISSION

CLYDE F. THOMPSON, UILLIAH FULLER,
HERBERT A. BELLAS, RENEE MILLER,
MANUEL CORDOVA, ARCHIE McHHINEEY,
LLOYD BARRINGTON, SATURNZEO E.
CALAC, W. G. WALKER, LAURENCE
BURCELL, FRANKIE MOOREHEAD and
ARTHUR TREPPA, members, and as the
representatives of, and on the relation of the Indians of California,

Petitioners,

V, Docket No. 31

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

and

9:ERNEST RISLING, PETER MASTEN,

MARY G. DORNBACH, as the representatives of, and on the relation
of the Indians of California,

Plaintiffs,

-T

v. Docket No. 37

)
)
3
)
)
)
3
)
)
)
3
)
)
)
)
-- 3
Defendant. )
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
3
)
§
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)

)

Defendant.

ORDER CLARIFYING AND SUPPLEMENTING
FINDINGS OF FACT AND AEENDING INTERr
LOCUTORX ORDER OF JULY 31: 1959

On September 1, 1959, the petitioners in Docket Nos. 31 and 37 filed
their request for the modification and clarification of certain findings
of fact made by the Commission and filed as a part of the Interlocutory
Order entered on July 31, 1959, and on September 17, 1959, the defendant
filed its objections thereto, By agreement of all parties the matter was
submitted to the Commission for determination without oral argument.

And now the Commission, after considering the request of petitioners,
and the defendant‘s objections thereto, ORDERS that the findings of fact
filed herein on July 31, 1959, be amended and supplemented as follows:

- ::.‘.“'

br'adeing thereto the following:

'71” " ___r“'l__-‘v ' I‘. r ‘I ‘I. n ‘r 0 I g

ine lUui1iCU0l n-titloners named in the petitions filed
in Doetet 31 and in Socket 37 are members of this identifiable
group known as the ”Endians of California.”

(2) That Finding 8 is amended by deleting all that part thereof
following the subtitle ”r"eoa;sa3arso EAKING 0? INDIAN LANDS" and there

Finding 9 and Finding ll as follows:

(3

UNCGHPEESATED TAKIHG OF I§DIAN i£EoS:

   

9. The entire area here involved lies within the

territory acquired of H-xico in the Treoé of Guadalupe

Hidalgo during l848. The State of Cal'fornia was admitted

to the Union on September 9, l850 (9 S at. 452). On March 3,
1851, Congress passed the Private Land Claims Act (9 Stat.

531) requiring registration of all land claims within a twoyear period thereafter. On Hatch 3, 1853, Congress passed

an ‘Act to Provide for the survey of the Public Lands of
California and the Granting of Preemption Rights to Settlers‘
(10 Stat- 244). It has been previously held that by this
latter Act the defendant took such action toward the vesting

in others of the fee title to Indian land within California

as was possible only by it becoming a part of the public domain
and by extinguisheent of Indian title. That date is, therefore,
the date upon.nhich lndian title to the land here involved may
be said to have been taken by defendant. Pitt River Indians V.
_ynited States, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 815, 848. '?ohave Tribe v.
pnited States, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219, Dht. 295, and Masha Indians
v. United States, 7 Ind. c1. com. zss, 280, Dist. "§s'"s'.""'"'""'”'""’

4-H 
 

 

 

The act of March 3, 1851, supra, contains the following
provisions:

‘That for the purpose of ascertaining and

_ private land claims in the State of
California, a commission . . . is hereby constituted . . .’ (Sec. 1).

I_ "—I’ . . TI_
' .'...l"l=..'3 }..3.:..SLr.tC'... C4. '3.‘-mi-_3lC.-Z718

to which shall not
tsioners within two years

Court, and all lands the
be presented to said ccnni

after the date of this Act, shall be deemed, held
and,considered as part of the public domain of the
United States . . .' (Sec. 13).

s that nothing in said Act required
the Indian inhabitants of California to present their claims
for their original Indian title to California lands; that no
such claims were presented, or presented by the California ,
Indians and rejected by the Commissioners, or finally decided
to be invalid by the District or Supreme Court of the United
States. “

The Commission find

ancestors of the

11. The Commission finds that the

members of the group known as the Indians of California held

original Indian title to the lands in Area B, except the
Spanish and Mexican grants made therein prior to May 13, 1846,
and never voluntarily abandoned any lands therein prior to the
taking thereof by the United States; that such Indian title

was extinguished by the United States under the provisions of

Section 13 of the Act of March 3, 1851, and by the Act of

March 3, 1853, the latter being the date of the taking by the

United States; and no compensation was paid to the Indians of
California for their original rights therein. As mentioned

in Finding No. 8, the acreages of reservations found to be in
Area B are to be excluded from the lands for which the Indians
are to be compensated. A

(3) That Finding l0 be added, as follows:

LAND USE Ah? Q§.U?ANCY:

JD-In

 

10. That Indians occupied and used California lands
from.time immemorial and as the aboriginal inhabitants
thereof is unquestioned. The native population cannot be
definitely determined but has been estimated by Drs. Merriam
and Kroeber, who are recognized as the best informed of all_
students of the early Indians of California, as being free:
130,009 to 700,080. It is undisputed that these Indians
were not a homogeneous group but were made up of many groups
or tribelets which composed many linguistic divisions or
nationalities in California. It has been estimated by Dr.

Kroeber that there were 500 or more Indian groups in California

at the time we acquired this territory fron'Merico in l848.
These tribelets occupied and used fairly well defined areas

dependent in sizes upon the economic resources of the particular

area of and the population requirements of those living in it.
Differences in degree of use varied with conditions of climate,
topography, elevation, soil, vegetation, etc., rhich in turn

are related to the degree of economic resources in the
various sectior: ct tee state.

Dr. C. Ear: Eerrism, who devoted 35 years to research
and study of the Indians in California testified before
the louse Committee to Indian affairs on May 5, 1926, referring to a nap he nad prepared with reference to use and
occupancy:

‘The map is *or the purpose of showing that
the whole area of the State was occupied by a
large nunher of Indian tribes speaking different
languages; that there were no unoccupied lands;
they were either occupied as residence lands or
as hunting grounds. For instance, along the high
crest of the Sierra the Menuk Indians hunted from
the west up to the crest, and the Hone lake Piutes
hunted on the other side. The tribes had welldefined areas with definite boundaries.‘ (Pet. Ex. 2,
pp. 206-20?)

Dr. Alfred L. Kro
American Anthropologi
years to the study of

her, sometimes called the Dean of

, who has devoted more than fifty
the Indians of California, testified
that Indians of Calixornia occupied the whole of the State,
prior to the casing of the white man. (Record ?72).

Because of the great influx of white people entering
California and occnnying lands formerly possessed and used
by the Indian groups and the killing of many of the Indians
and the driving of many others from their place of abode and
the scattering of them throughout the state, as found in
Finding No. 4, proof of actual use or occupation of specific
tribelet areas is nor difficult. However, based upon years

of study of Indian culture, habits and ways of providing .«

subsistence and other evidence in the record, noted and
qualified anthropologists, whose testimony and writings are

in the record, have concluded that the Indian groups used and
occupied the lands in Area B in accordance with the Indian way
of life, to the exclusion of other In ian tribes. In aboriginal
times these Indians obtained their subsistence from the natural
products of the soil and waters of the areas they occupied.

Such an economy did not require an intensive cultivation of the
soil for the Indians of necessity ex loited the places which
provided the necessarie l life. The resources the Indians
relied upon for suhsisten e were not unifcrrly distributed;

o

o

c
they were largely seas nal and in scattered places, requiring
travel of considerable distances in their gataering, fishing
and hunting activities. Game animals moved from place to place
in search of food and had to be followed. The importance of
flora and fauna in all regions of the state cannot be gainsaid,
and the search for each resources was continuous rid covered

areas that were unproductive as well as those that were,
because of the variations in the production of the natural resources from year to year or even rrom season to season in
many years.

Because of the uneven and rather sparse distribution
of the available natural resources in the state, large
areas of land were needed to provide subsistence. The
Indians‘ permanent and main habitats were, in general, in
locations which provided the greatest abundance of natural.
resources, but they were required, and generally did, egtend
their searches over large areas beyond their places of permanent settlement. The record is replete with proof of
temporary camps occupied by the Indians in their seasonal
gathering, fishing and hunting operations which covered
large areas in the mountains, plains and deserts. It is
no doubt true, as the Government contends, the higher elevations in the mountains and some large desert areas produced little of economic importance to the Indians, but
such places had limited uses and were a part of the areas
claimed and defended when necessary by the tribelet océupying
it. The testimony and the ethnographic literature, of which
there are volumes in evidence, show that the Indian groups
ranged throughout their respective territories in their
gathering, hunting and fishing exertions. While these Indians
'were never considered nomads, their exploitation of the ’
available resources in a given territory required frequent
and extended traveling within the territories claimed.

IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that the Interlocutory Order of July 31, 1959,
is amended by adding at the end of Paragraph 3 the words "and of the Act

of March 3, 1853, 10 Stat. 244, the latter being the date of the taking
by the United States.“

Dated at Washington, D. C., this 7th day of December, 1959.

.§dgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Wm. M. Bolt
Associate Commissioner

