505
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 505

smonn rm incur gomms COMMISSION R ‘ C b   *

rm none, ‘oonencm, AND
. nmom mass or INDIANS,

Petitioners,
v. Docket No. 32

rm Umrro sures or AMERICA,

Defendant.
14”“ 9 zest
rxnomes _o_;e_ recs

The Commission makes the following findings of fact in the aboveentitled cause;

1. The petitioners herein, the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache Tribes

of ----'-u.-A-c--use, acquired the lands involved in this claim in the following
manner:

On the'2lst day of October, 1867, 15 Stat. 581, the Kiowa and
Comanche Tribes of Indians entered into a treaty with the United States
by which the United States ceded to said tribes, the Kiowa and Comanche,

the following described territory located in what is now the State of
Oklahoma, to-wit: W

"commencing at a point where the Washita River crosses
the 98th meridian, west from Greenwich; thence up the Washita.
River, in the middle of the main channel thereof, to a point
thirty miles, by river, west of Fort Cobb, as now established;
thence, due west to the north fork of Bed Fiver, provided said
line strikes said river east of the one hundredth meridian of
west longitude; if not, then only to said meridian-line, and
thence south, on said meridian-line, to the said north fork of
Red River; thence down said north fork, in the middle of the
main channel thereof, from the point where it may be first
intersected by the lines above described, to the main Red River;

at.-nu-.¢. -‘-- -3"

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 505  506
-' 2 1 - .

thence down, said river, in the middle of the main channel
thereof to its intersection with the ninety-eighth meridian of longitude west from Greenwich; thence north, on said
meridian-line, to the place of beginning, '5' '3 '5'.“

On the same day (15 Stat. 589) the United States and the Kiowa,
Comanche, and Apache mribes of Indians concluded a treaty by the terms
of which the Apache Tribe united with the other two tribes and there» _
by acquired aninterest in the above-described lands; so,‘ thereafter
the three tribes became the owners of said lands.
- Elhe above-mentioned treaties were duly ratified by the Senate of
the United States, and said Indians occnpied the territory ceded to
then following the ratification of said treaties.
' 2. .Pursuant to section 11! of the Act of March 2, 1889, 25 Stat.
980, the President of the United States appointed a Oonmission, com} prised of David H. Jerome, Chairman, Warren G. Sayre and Alfred M.

Wilson, to negotiate an agreement with petitioners for the cession of
'" their lands described in Finding 1 hereof, and pursuant to said Act‘
said Commissioners negotiated an agreement with said three tribes of
Indians on the 6th day of October, 1892, which agreement became historically known as the Jerome Agreement, and is in words and figures
as follows:

I Articles of Agreement made and entered into at Fort

Sill, in the Indian Territory, on the
by and between David E. Jerome, Alfred M. Ylilson and
lfarren G». Sayre, Commissioners on the part of the United

States, and the Gonnanche, Kiowa and Apache Tribes of
Indians, in the Indian Territory. '

1 Ind.C1. COIIIIII.  

ARTICLE I

Subject to the allotment of land in severalty to the
individual members of the Comanche, Kiowa and Apache Tribes
of Indians in the Indian Territory, as hereinafter provided
for, and subject to the conditions hereinafter imposed, and
for the considerations hereinafter mentioned, the said Gommanche, Kiowa and Apache Indians hereby cede, convey, transfer, relinquish and surrender, forever and absolutely, Withr
out any reservation whatever, express or implied, all their
claim title and interest, of every kind and character, in
and to the lands embraced in the following described tract
of country in the Indian Territory; to wit, Commencing at a
point where the Washita River crosses the ninety-eighth meridian west from Greenwich; thence up the Washita River, in
the middle of the main channel thereof, to a point thirty
miles, by river, west of Fort Cobb, as now established; thence
due west to the north fork 0fiB6d River, provided said line
strikes said river east of the one-hundredth meridian of west
longitude; if not, then only to said meridian line, and thence
due south, on said meridian line, to the said north fork of
Red River; thence down.said north fork, in the middle of the
main channel thereof, from the point where it may be first
intersected by the lines above described, to the main Red
River; thence down said.Red River, in the middle of the main
channel thereof, to its intersection with the ninety-eighth
meridian of longitude west from Greenwich; thence north, on
said meridian line, to the place of beginning.

ARTICLE II.

Out of the lands ceded, conveyed, transferred, relinquished and surrendered by.Article 1. hereof, and in part
consideration for the cession thereof, it is agreed by the
United States that each member of said Commanche, Kiowa and
Apache Tribes of Indians over the age of eighteen (18) years
shall have the right to select for himself or herself one
hundred and sixty (160) acres of land to be held and owned in
severalty, to conform to the legal surveys in boundary; and
that the father, or, if he be dead, the mother, if members of
either of said tribes of Indians, shall have the right to
select a like amount of land for each of.his or her children
‘under the age of eighteen (18) years; and that the Commissioner
of Indian.Affairs, or some one by him appointed for the purpose,
shall select a like amount of land for each orphan child belonging to either of said tribes under the age of eighteen
(18) years.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 505 ' 508'

...1;.....

ARTICLE III.)

It is further agreed that the land in said reservation
~ shall be classed as grain»-growing and grazing land; and in
making selection of lands to be allotted in severalty as aforesaid, each and every Indian, herein provided for, shall
be reqiired to take at least one-half in area, of his or her
allotments, of grazing land. It is hereby further expressly
agreed that no person shall have the right to make his or her
selection of land in any part of said reservation that is now
used or occupied for military, agency, school, school-farm,
religious or other public uses or in sections sixteen (16)
3 and thirty-six (36) in each Congressional Township; except
in cases where any Comnanche, Kiowa or Apache Indian has heretofore made improvements upon, and now uses and occupies a
-p part of said sections sixteen (16) and thirty-six (36), such
6 Indian may make his or her selection within the boundaries
so prescribed so as to include his or her improvements; it
is further agreed that wherever in said reservation any
Indian, entitled to take lands in severalty hereunder, has
made improvements, and now uses and occupies the land embracing such improvements, such Indian shall have the undisputed
right to make his or her selection within the area above provided for allotments, so as to include his or her said improvements.

It is further agreed that said sections sixteen (16)
and thirty-six (36) in each Congressional Township in said_
reservation shall not become subject to homestead entry, but

shall be held by the United States and finally sold for public s

school purposes. It is hereby further agreed that wherever in
said reservation any religious society or other organization
is now occupying any portion of said reservation for religious
or educational work among the Indians the land so occupied may
be allotted and confirmed to such "society or organization, not
however to exceed one hundred and sixty (160) acres of land to
any one society or organization”so long as the same shall be
so occupied and used; and such land shall not be subject to
homestead entry. 3

ARTICLE IV.

All allotments hereunder shall be selected within ninety
days from the ratification of this agreement by the Congress
of the United States---provided the Secretary oi‘ the Interior,
in his discretion, may extend the time for naidng such selection;
and should any Indian entitled to allotments hereunder fail or
refuse to make his or her selection of land in that time, then

1 Ind.‘ C1. Comm. 505 - 509
  _ 5 _ _

the allotting agent in charge of the work of making such
allotments, ‘shall within the next thirty (30) days after
said time, make allotments to such Indians, which shall
have the same force and effect as if the selection were
made by the Indian.

ARTICLE V.

When said allotments of land shall have been selected.
and taken as aforesaid, and approved by the Secretary of i
the Interior, the titles thereto shall be held in trust for
the allottees, respectively, for the period of twenty-five
(25) years, in the time and manner and to the extent provided for in the Act of Congress entitled: "An Act to provide for the allotment of land in severalty to Indians on
the various reservations, and to extend the protection of
the laws of the United States and Territories over the
Indians and for other purposes.” Approved February 8, 1887.
And. an Act amendatory thereof, approved February 28, 1891.

And at the expiration of the said period of twenty-five
(25) years the titles thereto shall be conveyed in fee simple
to the allottees, or their heirs, free from all incumbrances.

ARTICLE VI.

as a further and only additional consideration for the
cession of territory and relinquishment of title, claim and
interest in and to lands as aforesaid the United States agrees
to pay to the Comnanche, Kiowa and Apache Tribes of Indians,
in the Indian Territory, the sum of two million ($2 000 000 00)
dollars, as follows; two hundred thousand ($200 000 00) dollars
in cash, to be distributed per capita, among the members of
said tribes within one hundred and twenty (120) days after
this agreement shall be ratified by the Congress of the United
States; two hundred thousand ($200 000 00) dollars to be paid
out to _e_§ fee said Indians under the direction of the _§_:_:_r_etary
of the Interior in one year after said first payment and one
hundred thousand ($100 000 00) dollars in the same manner in
one year from date of said second payment and the remaining
one million and five hundred thousand ($1 500 000 00) dollars
to be retained in the Treasury of the United States, placed
to the credit of said Indians, and while so retained, to draw
interest at the rate of five per centum per annum, to be paid
to the said Indians per capita annually.

Nothing herein contained shall be held to affect in any
way any annuities due said Indians under existing laws, agreements

1 Ind.

Said Agreement was executed on behalf of the United States and a number

Cl. Comm. 505 L510

or treaties.

Article VIII.

- It is further agreed that wherever in said-reservation
any member of any of the tribes of said Indians has, in pursuance of any laws or under any rules or regulations of the ‘
Interior Department taken an allotment, such allotment, at
the option of the allottee shall be confirmed and governed
by _all the conditions attached to allotments taken under
this agreement.

Article IX.

It is further agreed that any and all leases, made in
pursuance of the laws of the United States, of any part of
said reservation which may be in force at the time of the
ratification, by Congress, of this agreement shall remain in
force the same as if this agreement had not been made.

Arti cle X.

, It is further agreed that the following named persons-—
not members by blood of either of said" Tribes, but whovhave
married into one of the tribes; to wit, Mabel R. Given, Thomas
F. Hoodward, William Wyatt, Kiowa Dutch, John Hestill, James
H. Jones, Christian Ke-oh-tah, Edward L. Clark, C-eorge Conover,
William Dietrich, Ben Roach, Lewis Bentz, Abilene’, James Gardloupe, John Sanchez, the wife of Boone Chandler-—whose given
name is unknown, Emmit Cox and Horace P. Jones shall each be
entitled to all the benefits of land and money conferred by
this agreement, the same as if members by blood of one of said
tribes; and that Emsy S, Smith, David Grantham, Zonee Adams, . C
John T. Bill, J. J’. Methvin, H. L. Scott, and George D. Day,
friends of said Indians who have rendered to said Indians
valuable services, shall each be entitled to all the benefits
in land only conferred under this agreement, the same as if
members of said tribes.

Arti cle XI‘.

This agreement shall be effective only when ratified by
the Congress of the United States.

IN wrnmss WI-EEREOF, we have hereunto set our hands this
sixth day of October, A. D. l892._

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 505 7 ' “ 511

of the members of the petitioner tribes and duly transmitted to the _ v
President, as required by said.Act of 1889. u
3. Shortly after the President received said.Agreement he

transmitted the same to Congress for ratification, as required by the
last-mentioned.Act. However, Congress neglected to ratify the same,
or take any action concerning it, until the 6th day of June, 1900, and
on that date passed an Act entitled @An.Act to ratify an agreement with
the Indians of the Fort Hall Indian reservation in Idaho, and make.apprqpriations to carry the same into effect." Section 6 of this Act
(31 Stat. 672), which is the only part thereof concerning the Comanche,
Kiowa, and Apache Tribes, reads as follows:

SEC. 6. Whereas David H. Jerome, Alfred M. Wilson,
and warren G. Sayre, duly appointed Commissioners on the
part of the United States, did, on the sixth day of October, eighteen hundred and ninetyatwo, conclude an an ’
greement with the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache tribes of
Indians in Oklahoma, formerly a part of the Indian Territory, which said agreement is in the words and figures as
follows:

“Articles of agreement made and entered into at Fort
Sill, in the Indian Territory, on the twenty-first day of
October, eighteen hundred and ninetyatwo, by and between
David H. Jerome;.Alfred M, Wilson, and Warren G. Sayre,
Commissioners on the part of the United States, and the
Comanche, Kiowa, and.Apache tribes of Indians in the Indian
Territory.

NARTICLE I.

"Subject to the allotment of land, in severalty to

the individual members of the Comanche, Kiowa, and.Apache
tribes of Indians in the Indian Territory, as hereinafter
provided for, and subject to the setting apart as grazing
lands for said Indians, four hundred and eighty thousand

acres of land as hereinafter provided for, and subject to

the conditions hereinafter imposed, and for the considerations.

, M”, -, , __,.,_—._:,._-...-..i...'_,.....;..'_.-.. ..:r.'en.

1 Ind. Cl.

Comm. 505 8

hereinafter mentioned, the said Comanche, Kiowa, and.Apache
Indians hereby cede, convey, transfer, relinquish, and surrender, forever and absolutely, without any reservation whatever, express or implied, all their claim, title, and interest,
of every kind and character, in and to the lands embraced in
the following—described tract of country in the Indian Territory to wit: Commencing at appoint where the Washita River
crosses the ninetyaeighth meridian west from Greenwich; thence
up the Hashita River, in the middle of the main channel thereof, to a point thirty miles, by river, west of Fort Cobb, as
now established; thence due west to the north fork of Red
River, provided said line strikes said river east of the onehundredth meridian of west longitude; if not, then only to
said meridian line, and thence due south, on said.meridian
line, to the said north fork of Red River; thence down said
north fork, in the middle of the main channel thereof, from

the point where it my be first intersected by the lines above
described, to the main Red River; thence down said Red River,

in the middle of the main channel thereof, to its intersection
with the ninety-eighth meridian of longitude west from Greene
wich; thence north, on said meridian line, to the place of

'beginning.
"ARTICLE II,

"Out of the lands ceded, conveyed, transferred, relinquished
and surrendered by Article I hereof, and in part consideration
for the cession thereof, it is agreed by the United States that
each.member of said Gomanche,_Kiowa, and.Apache tribes of India
ans over the age of eighteen (18) years shall have the right
to select for himself or herself one hundred and sixty (160)
acres of land to be held.and owned in severalty, to conform to
the legal surveys in.boundary; and that the father, or, if he
be dead, the mother, if members of either of said tribe of Indians, shall have the right to select a like amount of land for
each of his or her children under the age of eighteen (18)
years; and that the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs, or some
one by.him appointed for the purpose, shall select a like
amount of land for each orphan child belonging to either of
said tribes under the age of eighteen (18) years.

QARTICLE III.

“That in addition to the allotment of lands to said Indians as provided for in this agreement, the Secretary of the
Interior shall set aside for the use in common for said Indian
tribes four hundred and eighty thousand acres of grazing lands,
to be selected by the Secretary of the Interior, either in one

512 I 1 Ind. Cl._Com. 505 9 '513

or more tracts as will best subserve the interest of said
Indians. It is hereby further expressly agreed that no
person shall have the right to make his or her selection
of land.in.any'part of said reservation that is now used

or occupied for military, agency, school, school-farm,
religious, or other public uses, or in.sections sixteen
(16) and.thirty-six,(36) in each Congressional township,
except in.cases where any.Comanche, Kiowa, or.Apache Indian has heretofore made improvements upon and now uses and
occupies a part of said sections sixteen (16) and thirtySix:(36), such Indian may make.his or her selection within
the boundaries so prescribed so as to include his or her
improvements. It is further agreed that wherever in said
reservation any Indian, entitled to take lands in severalty
hereunder, has made improvements, and now uses and occupies
the land embracing such improvements, such Indian shall have
the undisputed right to make his or her selection within
the area.above provided for allotments, so as to include
his or her said improvements.

“It is further agreed that said sections sixteen (16)

and thirty-six (36) in each Congressional township in said
reservation shall not become subject to homestead entry but
shall be held by the United States and finally sold for public
school purposes. It is hereby further agreed that wherever
in said reservation any religious society or other organization
is now occupying any portion of said reservation for religious
or educational work among the Indians, the land so occupied
may be allotted and confirmed to such society or organization,
not, however, to exceed one hundred and sixty (160) acres of
land to any one society or organization so long as the same
shall be so occupied and used; and such land shall not be
subject to homestead entry.

WABTIOLE IV;

{All allotments hereunder shall be selected within
ninety days from the ratification of this agreement by the
Congress of the United States: Provided, The Secretary of
the Interior, in his discretion, may extend the time for
making such selection; and should any Indian entitled to
allotments hereunder fail or refuse to make his or her selection of land in that time, then the allotting agent in
charge of the work of making such allotments shall within
the next thirty (30) days after said time make allotments
to such Indians, which shall have the same force and effect
as if the selection.were made by the Indian.

1 I d. 01. . 505 514
It Comm, 7 p H 10 _ _

QABTICLE V,

"When said allotments of land shall have been selected
and taken as aforesaid, and approved by the Secretary of the
Interior, the titles thereto shall be held in trust for the
allottees, respectively, for the period of twenty-five (25)
years, in the time and manner and to the extent provided for
in.the act of Congress entitled.'An act to provide for the
allotment of land in severalty to Indians on the various
reservations, and to extend the protection of the laws of
the United States and Territories over the Indians, and for
"other purposes,‘ approved February 8, 1887, and an act amendatory thereof, approved February 28, l89l,

9And.at the expiration of the said period of twentyh
five (25) years the titles thereto shall be conveyed in fee
simple to the allottees or their heirs, free from all incumbrances. ”

€ARTICLE‘VI. °

9As a further and only additional consideration for the

session of territory and rclinqnishnent of title, claim, and

interest in and to the lands as aforesaid, the United States
agrees to pay to the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache tribes of
Indians, in the Indian Territory, the sum of two million
(2,000,000) dollars, as follows: Five hundred thousand
($500,000) dollars to be distributed per capita to the members
.of said tribes at such times and in such manner as the Secretary of the Interior shall deem to be for the best interests
of said.Indians, which sum is hereby appropriated out of any
funds in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated; and any
part of the same remaining unpaid shall draw interest at the
rate of five per centnm while remaining in the Treasury, which
interest shall be paid to the Indians annually per capita; and
paths remaining one million five hundred thousand ($1,500,000)
dollars to be retained in the Treasury of the United States,
placed to the credit of said Indians, and while so retained
ito draw interest at the rate of five per centum per annum,
to be paid to the said Indians per capita annually,

"Nothing herein contained shall be held to affect in.any'

way annuities due said Indians under existing laws, agreements,
or treaties,

QAEIICLE VIII.

“It is further agreed that wherever in said reservation

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 505 J 515'

any member of any of the tribes of said Indians, has in
pursuance of any laws or under any rules or regulations

of the Interior Department taken an allotment, such.allotment, at the option.of the allottee, shall be confirmed
_and governed by all the conditions attached to allotments
taken under this agreement. ‘

“ARTICLE IX.

_”It is further agreed that any and all leases made in
pursuance of the laws of the United States of any part of
said reservation.which may be in force at the time of the
ratification by Congress of this agreement shall remain in
force the same as if this agreement had not been made.

9ABIICLE.X.

_ “It is further agreed that the following named persons,
not members by blood of either of said tribes, but who have
married into one of the tribes, to wit, Mabel R. Given, Thomas
F. Woodward, William Wyatt, Kiowa Dutch, John Nestill, James
H. Jones, Christian Ke ohwtah, Edward L. Clark, George Conover,
William Deitrick, Ben Roach, Lewis Bentz, Abilene, James Garda
loupe, John Sanchez, the wife of Boone Chandler, H4089 given
name is unknown, Emmit Cox, and Horace P. Jones, shall each
be entitled to all the benefits of land and money conferred
by this agreement, the same as if members by blood of one of
said tribes, and that Emsy S. Smith, David Grantham, Zonee
Adams, John T. Hill, and J. J. Methvin, friends of said Indians, who have rendered to said Indians valuable services,
shall each be entitled.to all the benefits, in land only,

conferred.under this agreement, the same as if members of
said tribes.

EARTICLE XI.

C “This agreement shall be effective only when ratified by
the Congress of the United States.“

(a) Said agreement be, and the same hereby is, accepted,
ratified, and confirmed as herein amended.

. , (b) That the Secretary of the Interior is hereby author_ tired and directed to cause the allotments of said lands, provided for in said treaty among said Indians, to be made by any
Indian inspector or special agent.

(c) That all allotments of said land shall be made under

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 505 S16
.. 12 _.

the direction of the Secretary of the Interior to said Indians within ninety days from the passage of this.Act, subject
to the exceptions contained in article four of said treaty:
Provided, That the time for making allotments shall in.noy
event be extended beyond six months from the passage of this
Act. '

 

(d) That the lands acquired by this agreement shall be
opened to settlement by proclamation of the President within
six months after allotments are made and be disposed of under
the general provisions of the homestead and town-site laws of
the United States: Provided, That in addition to the landoffice fees prescribed by statute for such entries the entryman shall pay one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre for
the land entered at the time of submitting his final proof:
and provided further, That in all homestead entries where the
entryman.has resided.upon and improved the land entered in
good faith for the period of fourteen months he may commute
his entry to cash.upon the payment of one dollar and twentya
five cents per acre: And provided further, That the rights
of honorably discharged Union soldiers and sailors of the

late civil war, as defined and described in sections twentyfhrpa 1rn-:1-yR1naR Q9114 -F'n-:11"! e_-HR 4;?’.'f£'.'|?1'[‘1r_,_._“!'1‘!?*:!c5 1-n-u"Im4-rs;-,3 g-.1-u-V3 -P-I-¢;vn A-9

.¢-----— 1...: up -qr '.-.a-mans. has-In -In-vus-In-In no N-I|..Auh Aunt =-I-rib -id’ U4-III‘! ‘I-' "I" d--bio"!-b-ii-lad-v E’-lulu: Ghiahaihnhu uh an ‘In!’ Eli

the Revised Statutes shall not be abridged: And provided
further, That any person who, having.attenpted to but for any
cause failed to secure a title in fee to a homestead under
existing laws, or who made entry under what is known as the
commuted.provision of the homestead law, shall be qualified
to make a homestead entry upon said lands: And provided further,
That any qualified entryman having lands adjoining the lands
herein ceded, whose original entry embraced less than one '
hundred and sixty acres in all, shall have the right to enter
so much of the lands by this agreement ceded lying contiguous
to his said entry as shall, with the land already entered,
make in the aggregate one hundred and sixty acres, said land
to be taken upon the same conditions as are required of other
entrymen: And provided further, That the settlers who located
on that part of said lands called and known as the “neutral .
strip” shall have preference right for thirty days on the
lands upon which they have located and improved.

 

(e) That sections sixteen and thirtynsix, thirteen and

thirtyhthree, of the lands hereby acquired in each township

shall not be subject to entry, but shall be reserved, sections
sixteen and thirtyusix for the use of the common schools, and
sections thirteen and thirty—three for university, agricultural
colleges, normal schools, and public buildings of the Territory
and future State of Oklahoma; and in case either of said sections,

1 Ind._C1. Comm. 505 A n- 517
-13.. or part thereof, is lost to said Territory by reason of
allotment under this Act or otherwise, thegovernor thereof is hereby authorized to locate other lands not occupied

in quantity equal to the loss.

, (.1?) That none of the money or interest thereon which
is, by the terms of the said agreement, to be paid to said I
Indians shall be applied to the payment of any judgment

that has been or may hereafter be rendered under the provisions of the Act of Congress approved March third, eighteen
hundred and ninety-one, entitled “An Act to provide for the

adjudication and payment of claims arising from Indian depredations."

(g) That should any of said lands allotted to said
Indians, or opened to settlement under this Act, contain
Valuable mineral deposits, such mineral deposits shall be
open to location and entry, under the existing mining laws
of the United States, upon the passage of this Act, and the
mineral laws of the United States are hereby extended over
said lands.

(1-1‘ "”n!.'3+. can ‘Hr-o¢:: ("J-u-sn+av.r aw»-3 f".‘n-3 A1!-‘tr-'51-.9 Hnticng 

‘nu...’ 3......-u q qpo-p _y....o..p upgggg 90..-3; Iu~'.nL\.u. W nu‘..-llJ~Ca

to have some right, title, and interest in and to the lands
ceded by the foregoing treaty as soon as the same are abandoned by said Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache tribes of Indians, jurisdiction be, and is hereby conferred upon the United
States Court” of Claims to hear and determine _the said claim
of the Chickasaws and the Choctaws, and to render a judgment
thereon, it being the intention of this Act to allow said
Court of Claims jurisdiction, so that the rights, legal and
equitable, of the United States and the Choctaw and Chickasaw
nations, and the Comanche, Kiowa, and Apache tribes of Indians
in the premises shall be fully considered and determined, and
to try and determine all questions that may arise on behalf
of either party in the hearing of said claim; and the AttorneyGeneral is hereby directed to appear in behalf of the Government of the United States; and either of the parties to said

‘-- action shall have the right to appeal to the Supreme Court of
the United States: Provided, That such appeal shall be taken
within sixty days after the rendition of the judgnent objected
to, and that the said courts shall give such causes precedence:
And provided further, That nothing in this Act shall be accepted or construed as a confession that the United States
admit that the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations have any claim
to or interest in said lands or any part thereof.

(1) That said action shall be presented by a single

. q . . . .

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 505 l 518
_ - 1a.- * _

petition making the United States party defendant, and
shall set forth all the facts on which the said Choctaw
and Chickasaw nations claim title to said land; and said
petition.may be verified by the authorized delegates,
agents, or attorneys of said Indians upon their informa—
tion.and belief as to the existence of such facts, and no
other statement or verification shall be necessary: Provided, That if said Choctaw and Chiclazasaw nations de"?[5't
bring their action within ninety days from the approval

of this.Act, or should they dismiss said suit, and the
same shall not be reinstated, their claim shall be forever
barred: And provided.further, That, in the event it shall
be adjudged in the final judgment or decree rendered in
said action that said Choctaw and Chickasaw Eations have
any right, title, or interest in or to said lands for
which.they should be compensated by the United States,
then said sum of one million five hundred thousand
($1,500,000) dollars, shall be subject to such legisbation
as Congress may deem proper. '

 

Approved, June 6, 1900,
The lettering of the paragraphs shown above does not appear in
the original Act but is added as a convenience for reference in these

findings and in the opinion of the Commission.

' 9.97:  _ I '
1». By the set of June 6, 1900, the defendant acquired $796 , 3

‘ acres of land, out of which, and in accordance with the provisions of

said.Act, it set apart as grazing lands for said Indians H80,000 acres
(l00,000 acres of these pasture lands were later allotted to individual members of said tribes). The defendant also allotted, in
severalty, to the individual members of said tribes Mh5,000 acres out
of lands other than the pasture lands referred to above; so, there
were actually allotted in severalty to said Indians 5¥5,000 acres of
the lahds acquired by the defendant under said.Acte ‘In addition, the

defendant set aside l0,3lO acres for agency, school, religious, and

1 Ind. 01." Comm. 505 . 519
- 15 other purposesg After the disposition of the lands acquired as above

I set forth, the'balance of the area acquired by the defendant comprised
2,033,583 acres, for which balance the defendant eventually paid the
petitioners the sum of $2,000,000; which sum was either distributed
to or placed to the credit of'petitioners in the Treasury of the United
States.

5. So what defendant actually acquired.under the.Act of 1906 was
2;033,583 acres of land free of Indian title, andof this area the
defendant granted 225,953 acres to Oklahoma for educational purposes

3 and sold the remaining 1,807,630 acres to entrymen under the Public

Land Laws of the'United States. No part of the proceeds derived from

