1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 348

mm new TRIBE or INDIA}-ES ) L
on the relation of Keenan )
Pappan and Felix Mcdaaley, )
' )
Plaintiffs, )
) .
8 _ vs. . ' 3 Dockets nos. 33, 31+,..35
THE ITNITED smrss or -n»:E:aIcA, )
)
Defendant. ,)
Appearances:

‘Wilfred Hoarn, with whom was

Dennis Bushyhead and Chas. L. Tyler,,
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Ralph A. Barney and

John F. arran, with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney General

A. Devitt Vanech, Atjorneys
for Defendant.

SE? 2 6 1950
OPIHIOE

Per Curiam. Three separate cases were filed and given the docket

numbers shown above. In the respective petitions the parties are the

same, the allegations respecting the capacity in which Kennan Pappan
‘'3 ' .- , _ .1 _
and rellx hccauley act are ld8§DlC3;, and the defendant flled separate

‘-1- H ' I 1 5 g
anseers. lhe plaintlffs seen to recover the value of distinct tracts

of land,

On September l9, l9U9, the Commission made an order consolidating

all cases, Dockets Nos. 33, 3h, 35 and 35, for the par osos of trial

‘V3 MI‘!

J. Ind. Cl. Comm. 348 _ 349

O

and the trial proceeded as though the cases had been included in a

single petition, except that during the trial plaintiffs dismissal

1.

of Docket he. 35 eliminated that case from the consideration of the

Commission and the trial proceeded and was concluded as to the cases

ldooketed as Nos. 33, 3% and 35.

At the close of the evidence, with the exception of certain affidavits which will be referred to later, the defendant raised a question
as to the sufficiency of the plaintiffs‘ evidence by the following

demurrer;

"Comes new the Defendant and demure to the evidence of

the Plaintiff for the reason that the same is insufficient

to establish the oiair in favor of Plaintiff and against

the Defendent. and Defendant demure specifically to the

evidence on the ground that the evidence fails to establish

that the individual plaintiffs fairly represent the claims

of persons which they purport to represent.“

.As will be seen, the demurrer is both general and special. We
need not here discuss the general demurrer because it goes to the
sufficieno* of the evidence in eeneral to sustain the claims and the

J a

determination of the cases on the merits will likewise determine the
question 01 the sufficiency of the evidence; moreover, the only part
argued was the failure of the evidence to "establish that the individual plaintiffs fairly represent the claims of the persons which
they purport to representa“ As we understand the special demurrer
it directs our attention to the necessity of showing that the two

individual parties fairly insure the adeonate representation or th

group known as the Ear Erihe of Indians,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 348 350

'5

The Governnent relies upon two cases, namely, Pelelas V. Catterpillar Tractor C06, 113 F. (2d) 529, and Weeks v. Bareco Oil Co., 125

F. (2d) SH. In both of these cases it was decided that in a class

action it.i§ a condition precedent te_the maintenance thereof that.it
be proved and that the court find that the plaintiff's gen fairly

insures the adequate representation of all parties interested in the

case. It must be kept in mind that these cases are based upon Rule

23(a) of the Rules of Federal Procedure which reads:

"(a) Representationc If persons constituting a class
are so numerous as to make it impracticable to bring them
all before the court, such of them, one or more, as will
fairly insure the adequate representation of all may, on
behalf of all, sue or be sued; when the chareete” of the

-...4-n- -—«-soap --.p— U-I‘-b

right sought to be enforced for or against the class is

(1) Joint, or common, or secondary in the sense that the
owner of a primary right refuses to enforce that right and
a member of the class thereby becomes entitled to enforce
it;- '

(2) several, and the object of the action is the adjudi—

cation of claims which do or may affect specific property
involved in the action; or

(3) several, and there is a common question of law or

fact affecting the several rights and a common relief is
sought.“

We have no such rule nor are we governed by that rule. we are governed

in this case by the provisions of 25 UsS.C.A. 70(i) which, with the

emphasis supplied, reads as follows:

"$33 Claim wi+hin the provisions of this chapter may be
presented to the Commission by'any member of an Indian tribe,

-.-4-—- -4-I-.-u----—

 

4. on:
......... _....... ............. .._.- '33

 

_ .._

rs -3 - 4-" ' ' .-:~.: -* . ' * - 1 _ -.

/'“‘«Il-.4. 0.3 O eI1€3T‘ 1’iC‘Il'!I-3 .1. l%L’C?l{'.*- '3"3'.'O‘.*.1'} OI I135‘ 13.“ S .'-3.8 4.2-_-CC .1’."E‘;.‘_{‘;1"\.-":2"-‘.‘.":I. ’..{3.—,_

.-‘:9-. ..p:u-——.-up-.-1..

   

33?; of all its menbers;"

«I----un--n-9

 

 

....',_.,.._ .-.m...--as-.u U‘--v

.-.,._ ;4$‘l|«- -- __,_ ...',.‘..:.._. 

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 348 ' 1 ' _ ' ‘ L   351

.._l;...

\Here-, by express statute, a. member of a tribe, band or group may present
a claim as a representative of all the members and the only qualification fixed by the .-‘act is that he be a member of the Indian group he
represents. There are, of course, certain limitations contained in the
part of the section not quoted above, but these limitations apply to
organised tribes and have no application here.

In our kneral Rules of Procedure we provided in Section 1 for
presenting claims and in subdivision (d) thereof adopted the language
of ‘said Section 70(i) quoted above, and Section 8(c) of our rules requires that there be averred in a petition, by members of an Indian
group, that the petitioner or petitioners are members of the tribe,
band or group they represent. The statnte and said rules are the only
provisions which in angrwise relate to the capacity of parties in representative or class claims, so it is clear that the cases relied upon
by defendant are not precedents under the Act or our rules.

We believe that Section _'{O(i), (Section l0 of the original Act),
was enacted to simplify the procedure for pres-entingand prosecuting
Indian claims and to that end permits a member of a claimant group
to present a claim as representative of all its members, and where
it is alleged in the petition and proved that the individual is such
a. znerrber and that he is acting as the representative of all the members
of the group, he has done e’-rerything that is required of him. There
may of course be cases where it is shown the iI;di'vid*.1.e.l party, because

of ejverse interest, ‘cad fai th, lack: of capacity,, and the like; shoulcl

_l ‘Ind.’ Cl.‘ Comm. 348 . .‘:   “  7 . 1: . 352
1 5 1
not be permitted to act for the others; however, that is not the case

here, for the case was prosecuted with diligence and vigor by the

individual parties and there has been no intimation that their inter-‘

_ests are any different than those of the other members of the tribe,

or that the case was not fully presented.‘

The defendant calls our attention to Docket No. 38 wherein the‘

_ plaintiffs are “Kansas or Haw Tribe of Indians" and thirteen named

individual members of that tribe, The named individuals include Keenan
Pappan, one of the plaintiffs in Dockets 33, 3% and 35. Incidentally,

in Plaintiffs‘ Ex. l35 (3 parts) appear three documents dated Nov. 13,
l9H8, signed by about 70 members of the Kaw Tribe in which Keenan

Pappan, one of the plaintiffs, is referred to as "the late Keenan
Pappan.” This wonld indicate his death after the filing of the petitions in September, 1948. If such is the case his name should be stricken
as a party. There are two causes of action set forth in No. 38 which are
substantially the same as those stated in Nos. 3k and 33, respectively.
Defendant contends (Emnscript, pp. 269-70) that the pendency of No. 33
indicates that there is a difference of opinion among the members of

the Kaw Indians as to who should represent them. ‘he do not think the
filing of the last petition (Re. 38) necessarily shows dissatisfaction
by the members of the tribe with.ths plaintiffs in the other three

cases, in.fact the record shows Nos. 33 and 3% were filed on Sept; 10,

191-I-8. and ms. 35 on September 13, 1915, while No.. 33_Wa.S not filed until

A 339*» 39: 19U8. Had the Indians any objections to Keenan.Pappan and

an-1

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 3z+8- . ' - ' ‘H 2 . I 353
.-Q 6 H

Felix Mccauley they had plenty of opportunity toraise them in Nos.
33, 314 and 35, between the filing of the petitions in September, 1948
and the hearing on those petitions which began September 20, ‘E9749
and was not concluded until July 12, 1950. No such objections were

made or even suggested, so we must conclude the filing of the petition

‘ in No. 38 cannot be considered as evidence that the Km»: Indianswere

not properly or adequately represented in the three cases here under
consideration. Then, by their Exhibit No.  which was admitted
without objection on the part of defendant (p. 272 of Transcript of
Testimony) 20 members of the Kaw Tribe swore that the cases in Dockets
Nos. 33, 31} and 35 have their support and the endorsement and support
of a large majority or the Haw Indians, and Plaintiffs’ Ex. 135 sheave
that some 70 members of the tribe approved and confirmed the said
four actions ‘pending on November 13, 19148.

We conclude that Itile 23 of the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure
does not apply to cases under our jurisdiction and the dermrrer of the
defendant is overruled,

While we are discussing procedural matters it may be of value to
mention two questions of procedure that have caused the Commission
some concern. The first concerns the allegations of the capacity of
_individual parties to present» claims and to act as representatives
of the tribe, band or group. We have indicated above that under the

provisions of said Section 70(1) it is necessary to allege in the

petition and prove that the individual plaintiff, or plaintiffs, is

‘ ,¢._.'°. ‘ I" ' _C. '‘  - I _ ‘H

" .354

 -.7-_

G

a member of. the tribe and acting as a representative of all the
members. The importance of such allegations and proof is, of h
course, apparent in the pending cases. The only allegations.con— /it
cerning the capacity of the individual plaintiffs are as follows:
"That, at one of the meetings held September 6, l91lS, .

the relatcrs, Keenan Pappan and Felix Iviccauley, members of

said tribe, were chosen to represent said tribe, and to file

this suit against the defendant."

It may be in this case, where no question has been raised as to ‘
thesufficiency of the allegation to show the tribal status of the
individual plaintiffs, that it is sufficient, but we believe that
in representative suits the allegations should be definite and precise
so that there can be no question as to the membership of the individual
plaintiffs in the tribe they purport. to represent, and that they are
acting for and on behalf of all the members of their group. It so
happens in this case that the parties have stipulated (Transcript;

p. 71%) that the named plaintiffs are members of the Kaw Tribe of
Indians, so ‘the question is perhaps meet here but we wish to emphasize the importance of the allegations, not only to inform the
Commission. but to.enable the defendant to directly traverse or admit
them.

'The second matter concerns the form of instituting the claims

- in these cases. ‘It will be seen that the actions are presented by

‘The Kat: Tribe of Indians on the relation of Keenan Pappan and Felix

149931119? . Plaintiffs," and the allegations. of the petitions indicate

6

.--—

- -...L...'.:.u'......._' .'..-..:

1 Ind. c1“. Comm-. 34-8  . " 8 - ‘  3 - H  7 -355

0‘

claims in the above form. Just why counsel have adopted that form is

not clear to us in view of Sec. 9 of our General Rules of Procedure

which reads:

in petition filed on behalf of an organized tribe, band,
or group under the provisions of section l (c), or an un. I - organized g:oup'under section 1 Ld), shall be in the naqg

o—----——u-.-—.n—b

-2-u-9-1-—-.-—-an-up

of the member or members filing the same on the relation of

the tribe, band, or group.” (undcrsaoring supplied)

4

   

   

This rule is plain and requires that representative actions should be

in.the name of an individual member or members of the claimant group

on the relation of the tribe, band, or group. We can see no good reason

I

vary it has not been followed.

We have not heretofore questioned the form in which the parties
are set forth in.the petitions because it was apparent that the claims
‘were presented on the relation of the group known as She Kaw Tribe of
Indians, but we desire to emphasize the need of following our rules
governing such matter and rule relating to plaintiff in class actions,
Sec. 8(c).

In view of the above the plaintiffs in each of the pending actions
*will.be permitted to amend their respective petitions, either by inter_lineation or typewritten pasters, to conform to the views set forth

eibove, and the Order will so provide.

September 26, 1950

