6 552

BEPORE TI-E INDIAN CLAII-IS CO3:-?t«iISSION

THE MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA, also known ‘
as THE MIAMI TRIBE, et als.,  
Petitioners,

Docket No. 251

IRA SYLVESTER GODFROY, et al., on relation

of THE MIAMI TRIBE, et al., Docket No. l24—A

Petitioners,

VS.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Defendant.

\../'i_/

Decided: July lb, 1958
Appearances

Edward P. Morse, Attorney ‘Walter H. Maloney, Attorney
for Petitioners in Docket No. 251 for Petitioners in Dodcet No. 124-A

W; Braxton Miller, with whom was

associated Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perry W. Morton, attorney
for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COHMISSION

dwitt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the 0pinion.of the Commission.

Dockets Nos. 12h-A and 251 were consolidated as each presents identical claims involving the Miami Indian reservation in Kansas and the
commutation of tribal annuities under the treaty of June 5, 185A, 10
Stat. IO93.

The petitioners in Docket No. 251 are descendants of those Eiami

‘who moved to Kansas after the treaty of November 28, 18b0, 7 Stat. 582,

and who now reside in Oklahoma. They clai:-:3 they are the only I-‘iiazrgl.
whose ancestors acquired an interest in the Kansas reservation, rand
that the 1‘-Siazai Indians of Indiana were not entitled to participate in
tribal assets after 182.6 except as specified in the Treaty of June 5,
1852+, 10 Stat. 1093, and except for certain individuals who were entitled to draw a proportionate share of the tribal annuities in
Indiana under the treaties of November 6, 1838 , '7 Stat. 569 and
November 28, 181.0, supra. The petitioners in lbcket 121.-A are those
}«?:'Lami whose ancestors remained in Indiana when the tribe migrated to
Kansas in 181.6, and include descendants of Miami Indians who went to
Kansas and later returned to indiana. They assert they are part of
the Miarai tribe and entitled to share in its assets.

Both petitioners claim that the Kansas reservation contained fewer acres than were promised the tribe and that they are entitled to
recover for this shcr tage; and that the consideration paid for that
portion of the reservation ceded in 1851. was unconscionable. It is
claimed that the comtation of tribal annuities in 1851. was unfair,
and that defendant should be charged with interest upon funds diverted from the tribal annuities ' and upon the value of certain Kansas
reservation land wrongfully allotted to non-D-Iiazai persons.

The defendant does not controvert the right of either petitioner
to institute these actions and does not participate in the membership
dispute between petitioners. It is agreed that the Kansas reservation
assigned the Miauni tribe in 181.0 contained 32Z:,,796.88 acres; that the

tribe retained 70,638.51. acres in 1851:, and ceded 254,158.31-. acres to

the United States.

The issues presented at this time may be said to be: (1) Did

the Miami Indians residing in Indiana after 1816 have an interest in
the Kansas land; (2) Has the consideration paid in commutation of’ annuities unconscionable; (3) Mag: the petitioners recover interest on
principal sums refunded to them on March}, L391, 26 Stat. 1000. on account of allotments, and payments granted to spurious or unqualified

liiami Indians; (£«,)Are petitioners entitled to recover because of a
(5) Was the conshortage of acres in the Kansas reservation, and,

sideration paid for the acreage ceded to the United States in 1851;

unconscionable ?

Ownership of the Kansas Reservation

 

We shall first consider what, if any, interest the petitioners in
Docket No. 121+-A acquired in the Kansas land.

It is evident that the tribal unit with its inherent power and
authority moved to Kansas in 18b6, although.«.its membership is not

known.

-An additional 61 individuals migrated in l8£.8, leaving

about 100 Miami Indians then in Indiana. Upon the tribe suffering
a heavy numerical loss due to illness, many individuals returned to
Indiana, and these, together with those who had remained in that state
totaled 302 in l85£;. as compared to 24.8 who then resided in Kansas.
According toythe Miami treaties of l838 and l81+0 and the representations of the tribal delegation in Efashington during l85i., only three
familes had tribal permission to remain in Indiana after the tribe moved to Kansas.

These were the family of Chief John 3. Richardville,

whose health prohibited him from embarking upon the western journey,

6 55-’

6 555

the family of Chief Francis Godfroy who was then deceased and whose
property could not be sold until his youngest child reached the age
of 21 years, and I-ie-shing-go—me-sia and his brothers. Iéor does it
appear that this separation was intend ed to be permanent. It was a
tribal custom to award land grants to members for meritorious services rendered to the tribe. These grants were ordinarily quickly converted into cash for wider distribution by the grantees, and both
Richardville and Godfroy had recieved title to a number of acres in
this manner. The treaty commissioner's reports and the treaty terms
clearly imply the departure of the Richardville and Godfroy fandilies;
awaited only the death of Richardville which occurred in l8L;.l, the
maturity of the Godfrey children and the sale of their respective
lands. The l8hO treaty provided that the reservation set aside in
1838 for Ma-to-sin-ia‘s band should be patented in trust to his son,
Ne-—shing-go--me-sia, and the treaty corr.missioner’s report stated that
some of the Ha-to-sin—ia band might remain upon this reservation, but
that their eventual removal was to occur, we think, is a logical conclusion to be drawn from the fact that no provisionvas made ‘for payment of tribal annuities to them in Indiana after the tribe moved to
iKansas.

Since the 1840 treatye-rpressly committed the tribe to move f rom
Indiarato Kansas, those members refusing to accompany it and who did
not have the tribe’s consent to remain in Indiana, and those who noved with the tribal unit to Kansas but later returned to the State of
Indian, separating themselves from the tribe, and having no further

participation in the tribal consultations of transactions, must, we

think, be held in accordance with previous decisions of this Commission, to have deliberately severed their tribal relationship and to
have lost the acco:npany.i.ng right of participation in tribal assets.
Prairie Band of Potawatomi Indians vs. United States, Docket l5-J, et
al., A I.C.C. #73. This group also included those 31. persons who Congress by Joint resolutions directed be paid a proportionate share of
the I-.-'ia:ai annuity funds, but who were not recogniaed by the tribe in
Kansas or by the Miami Indians in Indiana as being Miami Indians and
entitled to participate. The record indicates that all of the Miami
Indians in Indiana subsequently united, and that they have conducted
themselves as a unit, and as independent of the tribal entity.
This separation of the Indiana  from the tribe and the

termination of their interest in the tribal land in Kansas seems

to have been recognized and acquiesced in by both the Miami in
Indiana and the Miami in Kansas at the time of the negotiations in
1852+ which terminated in the treaty of that year. The Eiani tribe

and those Miami Indians having tribal consent to live in Indiana had

each complained that the tribal annuities were being paid to persons

who were not entitled thereto.” Five headmen of the Indiana group cane '

to Washington in May, 1851+, to discuss this matter with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and to meet with and discuss it with a delegation

of the Kansas Miarni or the "western It-Iiani” as they were called which

.v<’r"‘.-°-‘If3?';'-.

‘was then in Washington and authorized to negotiate a cession of the
Kansas land. Under the supervision of the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs and these representatives of the Indianagroup, a list of
302 persons as representative of all those of Hiami blood residing
in Indiana and entitled to participate in tribal annuities was prepared and attached to the treaty of June 5, 1854, when it was submitted to the Senate for ratification. Petitioners in Docket l2A—A
deny that they are bound by this treaty, asserting that the Eiami
Indians in Indiana never approved, agreed to, or authorized the exa

ecution of it, although they accepted the attached list as correct

and received their share of the commuted funds according to that list.

‘We think they err in contending this treaty was not binding on them,
for it was executed by an authorized representation of the Miami

ribal unit and if petitioners in Docket 12h-A were a part of that
unit, as they allege, they were necessarily bound thereby.

It is quite clear, however, that the Indiana residents approved
and participated in this treaty entirely aia separate and distinct
unit apart from the Miami tribe. The preamble (Pet. Ex._36, p. 175,
Dkt. 251) to the 185A treaty sets out as the negotiating parties the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs representing the United States, and
five duly authorized delegates representing the Miami tribe in‘
Kansas. There are then listed five additional persons who are described as "Miami Indians, residents of the State of Indiana, being present, and assenting, approving, agreeing to and confirming

said articles of agreement and convention.”

The first three articles provide for the cession of the Kansas
land; reserve 70,650 acres of it, and specify its future disposition;
set out the considerction and manner of payment agreed upon and spec-ifically provide that no part of the money payable under that article
of the treaty or arising in event of the subsequent sale of any of the
reserved land should ever be paid the Indiana Miami; limit the allotments provided for to Eiani Indians ”n0w‘residing on said lands". The
4th, 5th, and 6th articles deal with the commutation of annuities. As
the treatymvas worded when originally executed, Article A provided that
if the Indiana I=Eiasi so desired, the United States would retain their
proportionate share of the principal fund resulting from.such commutation, $23l,OOh, and pay them.an annual interest, and their representatives agreed to submit this proposition to their People for consideration, with their decision thereon to be immediately conveyed to the
Commissioner.

The evidence of record discloses that the Indiana Miami thereafter
met in.open council and that the same five individuals who signed the
treaty on their behalf were thereafter dispatched to Washington to reé
present the Indiana Eiani in reference to the treaty which was then
pending ratification. It was at the request of the delegation that
Article A was amended to provide for the United States to retain said
$33l,00h, at annual interest 25 years and to make disbursement of the
accruing interest and eventually the principal to only those persons
‘whose names appeared upon the corrected list of June, l85h, are their

descendants, unless other persons were added to that list “by the consent of the said Niami Indians of Indiana, obtained in open council”.

The Senate also inserted a paragraph in Article A finding the delegation was a duly authorized deputation of the Miami Indians of Indiana and, as so amended, the treaty was ratified in August of l85A.

There is no direct evidence of the full powers which were granted to the second delegation from Indiana, buttve believe it is quite
unlikely it would have been given anything less than full authority
to represent the Indiana Miami in all aspects of the pending treaty
which was of vital importance to them.

The treaty clearly refutes their present claim.of interest in
the Kansas land, and we think the Indiana Miami are bound by it;
that by assenting/::d participating in it, they divided the tribal
property with the Kansas unit and that such action amounted to a
recognition upon the part of the Indian.Hiami that they possessed
no interest in the Kansas land.

The defendant had no interest in the settlement of any claims
of the two petitioner groups which were wholly against each other.
It accounted according to the division agreed upon by them. There
is no evidence of fraud, duress, undue influence or coercion upon
the part of the defendant or any benefit to be.derived by it from
a division of the tribal assets between the petitioners; that petitioners did not understand the effect of the treaty provisions;
or any good reason why the division of the property rights as provided by the 1854 treaty should be disregarded. It follows that

the petitioners in Docket No. l2h-Alhave no interest in any claim

which is based upon a claimed interest in the Miami reservation in

USES.

6 559

Commutation of Annuities

All parties are agreed that the annuities comrnuted in 1851; for
the Sum Of $421,438.68 represented a $25,000 cash annuity established
in the treaty of 1826, and other annuities of merchandise or labor

having the following actual cost:

 

$320 5311-, per treaty of 1803,1818
770 iron, steel, tobacco ” " " 1826
200 agricultural aid " " " 1818
250 laborers " " " 1810
51,540

Defendant has not denied the validity of these obligations, but it
claims that the 1826 treaty ‘which limited the $25,000 annuity’ to ”as
long as they (the I-Eiani) exist together as a tribe" makes it less than
a perpetual annuity and consequently reduced its cash value in 1851;.

The parties agree that the present value of an anrziliisy is that ‘sum
necessary at current interest rates to annually produce the amount of

say, however, that in arriving at the prethe annuity. Petitioners

sent value of these annuities as of 1854, six per cent per annum rather than five per cent per annum would, over some periods, more accurately reflect the varying rates of interest. Interest rates have been
consistently applied at five per cent per annum prior to 1931:. and at
four per cent per annum thereafter when interest has been used as a
measure of just compensation in these Indian suits against the Government, and We 83% no good reason for departing from these recognized
rates which were fixed by the Court of Claims after an exhaustive exam.ination into the history of interest rates.

Shoshone Indians vs.

United States, 85 Ct. Cls. 313, 380; Alcea Band of Tillauooks vs.

6 560

United States, . 315 Ct. Cls. A63," 518; Yakima Tribe vs. United States,
5 I. C. C. 630, 660. On this basis the present cash worth of a permanent
annuity of $26,5L,0 is -$530,800.

It is true that Article 1;, Treaty of l85L, recites that the
$h2l,l+38.68 stipulated to be paid is in corzznutation of these annuities
and in satisfaction of all claims or damages on account of non-fu]_fillment of any treaty terms or for injuries or damages to, or loss of property due to wrongful acts of citizens or agents of the United States.
There is nothing disclosing vrhat, if any, claims were presented or a
agreed to by the parties, and we must assume the -S$L;2l,h38.68 represents
the consideration paid for the commutation. However, that is not all
the. received, for by the next article it was stipulated the defendant should pay the $25,000 annuity in l8SL; and in 1855. So, what
the Miami actually received was $471,438.68 for a release of an obligation having the present cash value of $530,800, if the annuity of
$25,000 is considered one in perpetuity.

We can not say that an annuity which is terninable upon a future
contingency, however improbable that contingency mag: be, is permanent
in its nature, and it follows that its value is something less than
that of an annuity in perpetuity. We do not believe, however, that
it is necessary to the final determination of this matter that we attempt to fix upon any definite figure as representing the l85Z+ value of
this $25,000 annuity.

It is evident that none of the parties participating in the commutation n-egotiations contemplated the perpetual existence of the I~Eia;ni

6 561“

tribe. More than half of the Hiami Indians then living were no longer
tribal members, and those who were members were taking allotments of
the tribal land as quickly as it could be surveyed and their selections made, with all excess acreage in the 70,640 acres reserved for
this purpose to be sold and the proceeds divided upon request of a
majority of the tribe. Undoubtedly the individual members considered
it more beneficial under these circumstances to receive their proportionate share of the agreed consideration (which would be some $850)
during this time, than an annuity of approximately $h8 per person
indefinitely.

‘Whatever may have been the controlling inducement, there is no
evidence of over-reaching, of fraud, duress, coercion, or misunderstanding. In satisfaction and release of a claim of indefinite
value, the parties agreed upon a specific sum.which was forthcoming
at a time when.the tribe was passing:from.a communal mode of living
to that of individual allotments and was i‘ aced with the expense incident thereto. Under the ciréumstances disclosed, we can not say
that the $471,438.68 consideration was unfair or dishonorable, or
that it fell so far short of the true value of the annuities commuted as to be unconscionable. The petitioners may not recover upon their claims arising out of the commutation of annuities under
the Hiami treaty of 185A.

The Interest Claims
Petitioners have submitted Proposed Findings for an award of interest computed upon.funds wrongfully diverted from annuities due the

Miami Indians and paid under Act of June l2, 1858, ll Stat. 329, 332 to

6 562 is

..'_._,‘__,. ..._.-a

,.e:§_"f51_i_t.\l
L: "'.""."-.‘non—Hiami individuals, and upon the amount paid by defendant as compensation for certain allotments of reservation land made to such nonMiami persons under tlat Act. Under a proposed finding denying recovery on the ground that the allotments and disbursements were wrongfully made under apparent mistakes of law and fact but did not involve a
taking or appropriation for public purposes under the Fifth Amendment,
defendant cites as supporting evidence that the claim pleaded in Docket
No. 251 is not based upon that amendment, and is not specifically pleaded at all in Docket No. l2h—A.

‘We are unable to find any pleadings on the part of the petitioners
in either Docket 251 or l2L—A whereby claim is made for interest based
upon an alleged taking or appropriation for public purposes under the
Fifth Amendment. As a matter of fact, it is difficult to construe any

f the allegations of liability on the part of the defendant which appear in either petition as alleging a claim based upon failure to pay
interest, although Section 7 of the Commission‘s Rules of Procedure
requires a clear presentation of all claims being asserted.

In their briefs petitioners do not refer to any language in their
respective petitions as covering a claim for interest, nor do their re‘quested findings refer to any language in the petitions under which
their right to interest is asserted.

In any event,even.if the language in the petitions may be construed as.making a.claim for interest, the facts show only a misapplication of funds and.an erroneous assignment of allotments.

They

do not, in our opinion, show a constitutionally approved appropriation

K2.)

‘HE!’
‘J O

of property for public purposes. Restitution of the funds and payment
of the determined value of the land at the time of its allotment are shown
to have been made. Congress has never authorized the payment of interest
in either instance, and the Commission is without authority to grant an

award for interest resting upon such facts as are shown.

Alleged Shortage of the Kansas Reservation

The petitioners contend that the defendant promised them.in l8h0
as.many acres in Kansas as thetribe ceded by the l8h0 treaty or, in any
event, 500,000 acres, and that thetribe was placed in possession of but
32h,796.88 acres in Kansas. A cursory examination of the l8h0 treaty
discloses the Kansas land was not part of the recited remuneration for
the l8h0 cession; nor is it so presented by the petitioners in Docket
l2h-A in their companion case, Docket l2h~F wherein they seek additional compensation for the Indiana land, and Er. Rothchild, Attorney for
the Petitioners in Docket 251, stated during final argument before this
Commission on April 9, 1958 (Trans. p. A62) :

In other words, the consideration for the Big Reserve was

money; the consideration for moving West was the Kansas

land. This was earned when.the tribe mcved'West, and it

‘was earned by those who moved west.
So petitioners seek to recover the difference between the acreage allegedly promised in consideration of the tribe moving west, and the actual
acreage assigned to it, computed at a.sum per acre equal to the average
per acre value of the Kansas land when it was ceded to the United States

in l85h. Clearly this claimed shortage or taking was known before 185a

and could have occurred

a, if at all, only when the tract was assigned to

tr‘?
'1 U

and accepted by the Miami in l8hl, at which time the tribe approved the
amended treaty. t could represent only land contiguous to the 32h,796.88
acres received by the tribe and lie on one or more of the north, south or

western sides of that acreage. Passing, however, the fact that no evidence
has been presented concerning the l8hO or l8Ll value of any land in Kansas,
and the difficulty of fixing a mine on any tract so indefinite of location,
‘We reach the problem.of how much land the Eiami'were entitled to receive in
Kansas.

The defendant first approached the Miami seeking to secure the tribe's
removal from Indiana in l833. It was not until l838, however, when Chief
Richardville expressed his concern that the tribe was surrounded by white
settlements and that its removal was necessary if it was to remain extant,
that the Hiami evinced any interest in moving west. The tribe made no

Lrm.commitment but in the treaty of that year it agreed to send a.delegation at the Government's expense to explore the western country,*where
the defendant promised "to possess, the Miami tribe of Indians of, and
guaranty to them forever, a countryvvest of the Fississippi river, to re.move to and settle on, when the tribe may be disposed to emigrate * * *
sufficient ineaxtent and suited to their wants and condition and *'* *

in a region contiguous to that in the occupation of the tribes *'* * from

the 3tateS Of Ohio and Indiana". The record does not indicate whether
this delegation had explored the land here involved or any other western
land before the tribe agreed in l8hO to move within five years to the
country assigned to it in the west, or when it accepted the land selected for its future home by its approval in.hay, l8hl, of the Senate Amendment to the l8LO treaty'which amendment designated the particular tract

here involved as the tribe’s future home.

An agreement calling for a specific acreage of western land is not
indicated by the evidence. A westward migrationvvas not considered at
all in 1833 or 1834 and the fact that the l838 and l8AO treaties each
fail tociescribe the western land as a 500,000 acre tract or as equivalent in area to the acreage being ceded in Indiana, instead of the much
more lengthy and more general description of the country promised to the
tribe which the l838 treaty specified should be within a certain region
and suitable in area for certain purposes, isstrongly indicative that
there was no agreement that the westerntract should contain any specific acreage. when the Senate, by inserting ticle l2 in the l8h0 treaty,
tendered the tribe a specifically described tract which tract met with
these specifications and the Hiami tribe accepted that tract by approvingthe amended treaty after the effect of such action upon their part
had been explained to than the tribe must be said to have accepted the
described tract. That it ceded some 25h,OOO acres of such tract in 1854
and thereafter continued to reside upon 70,638.54 acres of it is an
effective argument that the Kansas land was "sufficient in extent, and
suited to their wants and conditions." That the tract was within the
region designated is not disputed. That the United States did not
guarantee it to contain a definite acreage is established by the use of
the word “estimated” in Article 12, and that the Miami tribe understood
this is evidenced, we think, by the fact that no complaint was made of

the size of the tract when the tribe went into possession and none was

presented until negotiations were pending for the sale of a part of the

land in 185A.

From.the several reasons stated we think the Government promised
the Miami tribe an indefinite location in the west; that in 1840 it
offered the tribe a particular tract and the tribe accepted that tract
as meeting its specifications for a country within the region occupied
by other Indian tribes from Indiana and Ohio, and sufficient in size for
its wants. It is evident that the Kansas reservation met these requirements. 9

There appears to be no basis here for a recovery on thetgrounds of
unfair and dishonorable dealings. The movement of the Miami into Kansas
‘was beneficial to the United States who desired to free Indiana from the
presence of the tribe, but it was also essential to the welfare of the
tribe that it move from its location within a ring of white settlements,
By purchasing the tribal land within this unsatisfactory area and by
placing the tribe in possession of a tract within a region preferred by
-t and containing 254,000 acres more land than sufficient for its wants
(as evidenced by the subseqpent cession), we think defendant fulfilled
every requirement of fair and honorable dealings.

185A Value of the Kansas land

The Miami tribe contends that the land ceded on June 5, 1894, had
a reasonable value of $2.L0 per acre ($609,980.00) and that it received
an actual consideration.of $l2l,97h.23. Defendant values the land on
June 5, 1854, at from.35¢ per acre ($89,035.42) to 50¢ per acre (3127,079.17), and claims a.consideration paid of $200,000. This variation in
the amount of consideration claimed to have been paid results from the

defendant using the consideration recited in the treaty, whereas petitioner tribe has treated the installment payments as an annuity

6 567

which it has commuted back to the treaty date. The propriety of its
action in so doing becomes material when determining whether the consideration paid was unconscionable.
In Miami Tribe vs. United States, Docket 67, the United States

‘was permitted to offset agains;an award based upon the Miami treaty

of 1818 only the sum of the commuted value of certain annuities forming
a part of the treaty consideration instead of the total sum it had paid
out to meet the annuity obligations. However, we do not find that situation analogous to the one before us. There the annuity promises were
the consideration for the cession, and it was necessary to determine
the value of those promises as of the date they were made. Here the
consideration is clearly stated: $200,000. ‘Whatever arrangement was
agreed upon concerning the method of its payment, that sum.was the consideration passing between the parties, and upon its payment the obligation was satisfied accordingto the treaty terms. The fact that the
greater portion was paid in installnments did not convert the installment

payments into an annuity, and to so treat them would in effect constitute an interest charge when the treaty is silent in that respect. The

Crow Tribe vs. United States

 

6 I.C.C. 98. Receipt of payments totaling
$200,000 is not denied, and we1;urn to a consideration of whether that
sum.approximately represents the fair and reasonable value of the Hiami
land.

This value is to be determined as of June 5, 1854, the treaty date,

for it is a principle of international law which has been applied to

treaties or agreements between Indians and the United States, where

6 568

g rairie soil over a clay subsoil.

individual rights are not involved, that when the instrument is silent as
to the time it shall become operative the rights of the parties relate
back to the date of signing and not to the date of ratification, unless

the instrument provides otherwise in which event the stated terms con-—

6

trol. Coeur d’Alene Tribe vs. United States, Dkt. 81,/\I.C.C. 38, 1+6.

The parties hereto each rely upon information contained within the
original survey notes of 1856-’? as a basis for the claissification of the
Those notes disclose the reservationwas classified at that

Hiami tract.

date as l3.3% Class I land, 65.7% Class II and 21% Class III. Class I

was bottom, terrace, and upland, having 2% or less slope, with alluvial

and dark residual prairie soil. Class II encompassed the present—day

Soil Classifications of the United States Governmental Departments of

Classes V, VI, and 3711,, having slopes up to 12%, and dark residual

These four soil types are all good

agricultural lands and under the climatic conditions prevalent in eastern Kansas are well suited to the growing of small grains. Class III

is land unsuited for‘ agriculture, but produces a good prairie hay.
There was a 10% overall timber coverage of walnut, hickory, elm, sugar
maple and other hardwoods on the uplands with sycamore along the streams.

Within the tract exclusive of the 70 ,638--acre reserved area, this cover389 dropped 130 15%. The land is drained by the Osage River and its tributaries, which generally flow south and southeast throught the tract.

There is some flood history along the Osage within a limited distance of

the stream. limestone outcroppings are found in the southeast quarter

of the reservation.

Iron ore ,. coal and tar springs (indicating the

possible presence of petroleum) were noted by the surveyors as present

6 569‘ 1

throughout the.3ntire tract but there is no evidence that either contributed to the land values.

Timber and limestone were considered attractive as materials for
the construction of crude homes and fences but in 1854 possessed no
value apart from the land. The highest and best use of this land was
for small-farm agriculture, and a timber site with adjacent prairie
was considered preferable.

Clearly the present instance is one where our valuation can not rest
upon.market value alone for the size of the tract and its location in the
unsurveyed Indian countr*, limited any immediate purchaser to the United
States Government. In the absence of an ordinary market value, we must
turn to a consideration of other factors which demonstrate a present or
potential value and thereby establish a basis of evaluation. our findings of fact are therefore somewhat voluminous. They are designed to
cover all factors influencing value, such as soil, climate, classification of land, natural.resources and economic or potential value; water,
rail, and wagon transportation systems; population; economic conditions
and potential agricultural use. "We have also given careful consideration
to the testimony of the expert witnesses which were called by'both parties
hereto.

On behalf of'the=petitioner Ida Fox testified concerning historical
documents and events prior to l857 and Professor John long testified
concerning infomnation found in the notes of the original survey run of

the Miami reservation and of the Eeoria trust lands, a 208,585.69-acre

traét adjoining the original  reservation on the north. Neither

6 570 

itness placed a monetary value on the I~Iia::1i land but petitioners rely
primarily upon Mr. Long‘s testimony of comparability between the Miami
and Peoria land and the sales history of the Peoria land to establish

a value for the Idiazzxi tract under the conditions prevailing as testified
to by Miss Fox. Defendant's witnesses, Richard B. Hall and Dr. William
Gordon Murray, had also studied the notes of the original survey run of
the Miami tract as well as those covering the survey of a 350,000-acre

tract in Missouri adjacent to the Eiianii land, and taking into consideration the rate of transfer of the Missouri land, comparability of the

" tracts, state of development, economic conditions and other factors, Dr.

Hurray valued the Miazni land ceded in 1851; at 50¢ per acre as of 1852+.
Mr. Hall's valuation of 35¢ per acre was based upon the fact that similar and contiguous land in I-iissouri had been on the market for years at
191.25 per acre; that a hypothetical purchaser would have considered himself entitled to 25% profit because of time involved in realizing upon
his investment; would need consider 25% of the land must be given away
to finance transportation facilities and internal improver.1ents , that

25% would go to advertising, sales promotion and carrying expense; and
25% would remain to care for the original purchase. He did not estimate
the time necessary to complete the disposal program. Factors contributing to his net valuation included the Graduation and Military Bounty
Acts, neither of which was in existence on June 5, l85b,. However, since
legislation similar to the Graduation Act had long been pending, a prospective purchaser would have been aware of the probability of this or

similar legislation being enacted. The Military Bounty Act of 1855

increased the supply and made military warrants assignable but both warrants and script had been in existence since l820. The value of opinion

i evidence, as we said in I-iiar.-'_=i Tribe vs. United States, (l;I.C.C. 15,36) depends upon the qualifications of the witness, the correctness of the facts

upon which opinion evidence is based and whether all relevant factors have

been taken into account.

Evidence concerning the so-calledPeoria trust land (that land ceded
by the Kaskaskia, Peoria, Piankeshaw and 1-'~Iea tribes in 1851:, for sale by
the United States on behalf of the Indians) is that it was 208,585.69
acres in size, adjoined the Miami reservation on the north, was very comparable to the Miami tract in climate, soil, topography, timber coverage,
best potential use, want of mineral values and lack of improvements. It
lay between the I-I_‘i.a:ni tract and the town of Kansas City andwas hence
nearer to Kansas City and to I-eavenworth than the Miami land; the Fort
Leavenworth-Fort Scott Trail also crossed its eastern edge and the Santa
Fe Trail ran within a few miles of its northwest corner. It was surveyed
in 1856 and appraised at an average $1.66 per acre. All but 700 acres sold
in small tracts at public sale within ‘a period of less than anonth in 1857

for an average $1.67 per acre. The tracts not claimed by pre-emptors at

$1.25 per acre brought generally $3.00 per acre.‘

Petitioners also point out that in 1857 pre-emption claims in the
Miami reservation were reputedly bringing $5.00 to $7.00 per acre near
Sugar Mound within the Sugar Creek valley,‘ and that claims within the
Osage River valley brought $1.25 to $3.12 for prairie land and $1.87 to

$6.25 per acre for timber land; that Iowa trust land, along the KansasNebraska state line, sold for an average of ‘-332.35 per acre in June, 1857;

._._... —.-.— ----.-—

6 572 5

Delaware trust land within 50 miles of the Miami tract, including me
land in the valleys of the Kansas and Hissouri rivers, sold for an a‘
age $2.00 per acre in 1867 when pre-emption purchasers and combines :
speculators were reported to have acquired the land for less than the
free market value, A 2,57l—acre tract of well-timbered land, within an
area where timber was scarce, sold to the Christian Indians in l85h for
$2.50 per acre. There is no comparability as to size between either of
the smallstract trust sales or the Christian Indian tract and the 254,l58.3h acres under consideration. There is no soil, topography or stream
data concerning any of these lands for comparison use, but the Christian
Indian tract lay within two miles of Ieavenworth, the most rapidly developing community in Kansas where agricultural produce had a market. The.
chief commercial road to the west bisected the tract, and it could be exe
ected that rail transportation would soon follow it westward, whereas

the Miami tract was L5 miles from.the closest settlement in Kansas, was
serviced by'a dirt road over which transportation was difficult, and
there was no apparent reason to expect railroad service within its vicinity in the near future.

The relative size of the tracts and the sale dates require consideration when these respective sales are compared with the Miami tract. It
is the 1854 value of the entire Miami tract that we must ascertain and
not the't0tal of the values of the innumerable smaller units into which
it may be divided. A 160-acre tract, as the trust lands were offered
f0? 5819, is Usually purchased for a home, but a 25h,0OO~acre purchase

becomes 3 Speculation, with the purchaser confronted with the expense of

financing, surveying, advertising, carrying expenses, the sure knowledge

5 573‘

that the land will be picked over and culled by the first of his pur4

chasers, and that an indefinite tine will pass before he will realize."

a return or profit from his investment, whereas a quicker and nore
certain return and profit could be derived from negotiable paper or
other investments.

Petitioners also point out that in l89l the Court of Claim,
upon a question submitted to it by a Congressional Committee, certified to that Committee its finding that lh, 533,38 acres within the
70,638.51; acres reserved in l85!.; by the I~iia.mi Indians had an average
value in November, l859, of $3.00 per acre.

The unexpectedly rapid settlement of eastern Kansas, its early
attainment of tatehood, and its corresponding economic development,
its increase in population and the roads, markets and railroad facilities developed during the next decade, are all elements of hindsight which were not available to a prospective purchaser of the
Miami land in 1854, yet each contributed to a much higher market for

the Kansas land in 1859 than existed in 1851;.

Taking into consideration the fact that 85% of the Miami land
sold to the defendant was without timber, that a vast amount of
public land was available in the United States and particularly
within the adjoining state of liissouri, and the vast acreages in
Kansas which had been ceded to the United States outright or in trust
by the Delaware, Shawnee, Iowa, Sac and Fox, Kickapoo, and the United
Tribes of Kaskaskia, Peoria, Piankesha‘.-J and idea, immediately prior
to the  purchase, which land a prospective purchaser could expect would appear on the market in small units within the immediate

6 574'"

future, and such other elements bearing upon value as appear from the entire record, with due considerationtaeing given the reasonings and conclusions of the expert witnesses, it is our conclusion that on June 5,
185A, the 25h,l58.3h acres of Kansas land ceded by the Kiami Tribe to

the defendant were reasonably worth $1.25 per acre or $317,697.93.

The question next arises: Does the payment of $200,000 or .7867¢

per acre for land worth $1.25 per acre or $317,697.93, being about 63%

of its value, constitute an unconscionable consideration?

Webster‘s New Collegiate Dictionary defines "unconscionable" as:

"1. Not conscionable; unreasonable; as, an unconscionable charge. 2.

Not guided or controlled by conscience; unscrupulous; as,an unconscionable rascal." Webster's International Unabridged Dictionary also likens

it to ”outrageousP, "egregious", and "exhorbitant”. Bl ck's law Dictionary defines an unconscionable bargain as "A contract which no man in his

senses, not under delusion, would make, on the one hand, and which no

fair and honest man would accept, on.the other", and cites the case of

Hume vs. United States,

132 U. S. A06, 10 Sup. t. 136, 33 L. ed 393.

It appears that there is no hard and fast rule for determination of

what is or is not an unconscionable consideration. The sole criterion is

whether or not the consideration is so out of line with the true value of

the PT0P9TtF 38 to " shock the conscience ”. The Supreme Court said in

Klamath and Nbdoc Tribes vs. United States, 286 U.S. 2LA,'when consider 

ing whether a.release was invalid which was granted for less than four

per cent of the value of the land involved:

EVER if judiciall3'cognizable, as would be a like contention
in ordinary litigation.between individuals, plaintiff's insistence that inadequacy of consideration invalidates the release

6 575

could not have been sustained. That is so because the findings

fail to show that any person acting for the United States deceived
or misled plaintiffs as to thetvalue of the land or, indeed, had
knowledge of any fact bearing upon its value that was not well known
by plaintiffs when they made the settlement and gave the release.

\I

Here inadequacy of consideration is not enough. ‘3~" ‘A’ ‘A’
Payment of less than half the true value appears to be unconscionable. 3 Pomeroy‘s Equity Juris., (5th ed._, l9£;l), pl. 637; Butler V. Miller,

1 Ir. Eq. I95, 211, 1511. R. 779, Kussleman V. Knott, 7 Ky. 1.. Rep. 380.
Yet the courts have fixed no exact division line and what one person may

think unconscionable, another may well consider otherwise. The present
record does not indicate that petitioners were deceived or misled by defendant as to the value of the land, or that any fact bearing upon its
value was withheld from them, that the delegation did not fully understand the effect of its action:,_. or was lacking in freedom of action.

Nor is there proof that the tribe was so destitute and suffering such financial embarrassment as to place it at the mercy of defendant during

the treaty negotiations. Under the circumstances we do not think an unconscionable consideration has been established within the meaning of the
Indianoclaims Commission Act. (Osage Tribe v. U. S., ll‘? C. Cls. 592;

Otoe and Missouria v. U. 3., 13193-E-93. 533).

 

 

Pet.'L'iLi'm1ers have plead alternatively under Section 2 (5) of the
the Act. In order for the transaction to be unfair and dishonorable
and entitle petitioners to relief under this section, some mistreatment must exist other than mere inadequacy of price. When relief, if

granted, must be based upon inadequacy of consideration alone, such ina-:3;--.~

eqzacy nnstbe such asmay be characterized "unconscionable". The Commission '

6 577

is of the opinion that the facts and circumstances shown here disclose
no ground for relief other than an inadequacy of consideration which
in itself alone falls short of the requirements of our Act for the
granting of relief. Wherefore petitioners’ prayer in this respect

must be denied.

/§[ Edaar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

[sf Iouis J. 0‘Marr

Associate Commissioner

[sf wm. H. Holt

Associate Commissioner

