BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

UPPER CHEHALIS TRIBE, ET AL,,
Plaintiffs,

Docket No. 23?

O
VVVVVVVVV

Defendant.

Decided: June 25, 1956

Appearances:

Garland So Ferguson, III,
Joseph'w. Creagh and

E. L. Crawford,

Attorneys for Plaintiff

Donald R. Marshall,sith

whom was Mr..Assistant.Attorney

General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION OF THE COEMISSION

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

This claim was filed with the Indian Claims Commission by the Upper
Chehalis Tribe, Lower Chehalis Tribe, Satsop Tribe, Hnmptnlip Tribe, Upper
Chinook Tribe,,Loser Chinook Tribe, Chinook Tribe, Hoqniam Tribe, Clatsop
Tribe, Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation and portions and
descendants of such tribes and bands as plaintiffs. Flaintiffs were
permitted by this Commission to omit the Upper Chinook, Lower Chinook,

Chinook and Clatsop tribes as plaintiffs and to add “Ralph A, Heck,

Frank E2 Pete and Murphy Secana, who are members of the Chehalis
Tribe individually and on behalf of all other members of the Chehalis
Tribe and subordinate bands not members of the Confederated Tribes off

the Ghehalis Reservation” as plaintiffs. The Confederated Tribes of

the Chehalis Reservation is organized and recognized by the Secretary
of the Interiors The other named plaintiff tribes are not organizedo
ln the original and amended petitions, it is alleged that the Gonfedu
erated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation is "composed of a confeder»
ation of the other plaintiffs named above, and as such confederation of
Indian tribes, said plaintiff has capacity to maintain this proceeding
and to prosecute the claims hereinafter namedo“ (Pare I)e In the
original petition, plaintiffs alleged joint and several occupancy of
certain lands in what is now the State of'Washington (Pare VI)e In
the amended petition, plaintiffs apparently allege joint ownership
by'Indian title to a large area of land in northwestern'Washington

(Edge 2), bordering the Chehalis River and its tributaries (Par. VIE):

totaling an estimated l,hhh9h8O acres (Pl. Reply Bro, D. 22)o

4|

"'1

contend that the alleged taking of their tribal lands occurred on
March 3, 1855 (91. Reg. reg‘. 22)::

Pl_ain'tiffs admit that they must prove that they are entitled to
prosecute this claim throrgn the Colfederated Tribes of t»
Reservation.C?l. Br., pp. 2S~26)3 that is, in effect that said creasization is the successor in interest to the tribes they claim were the

.3
(T)
P-’
E13

.5
CL
U)
? ‘J
0
w
..;..
}.,.|
O
.'i.‘.'.‘

*o
}.....J
93
J
B
C?"
‘tum’ I
F4)
H:
U)
U]
(0
('')_‘
Ix‘
(3
O
I-S!
"L3
(D
:75
U)
{D
Ci“
I-.Jl
O
5:5
0

Plaintiffs

tribes and the failure to prove tribal affiliation of the individual
plaintiffs, leaves the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation
as the only plaintiff.

Plaintiffs further allege, as a second claim, that the Chehalis
reservation consisting of h,22h.63 acres was set aside for plaintiffs
by the Secretary of the Interior on July 8, l86h3 that by Executive
Order, dated October ll, 1886, a total of 337S3c63 acres of said reservation was taken from plaintiffs and opened to the public domain and
that following said “xecutive Order defendant removed plaintiffs from
the reservation lands, opened said land for settlement, and authorized
patents and land grants by which persons other than plaintiffs were
put into possession thereof to the exclusion of plaintiffs and without
plaintiffs‘ consent. (Amended Peta, paragraphs V - VII, inclusive).

In his opening statement, counsel for plaintiffs asserted that the
plaintiffs were "claiming tribal lands of the Upper and Lower Chehalis
and those tribes which have become known by names such as Clatsop,
Humptulips and other tribes which in reality are not distinguishable
from the Chehalis as such." Plaintiffs‘ counsel also stated: "The
Chehalis Tribe in our theory of the case and from our research is:made_
up of two segments, that is, the Upper Chehalis and the Lower Chehalis.

And the evidence will show that the Upper Chehalis was referred to by

_L U Q

the early historians and visitors to the coast as being inland, and the

Lower Chehalis are those nearer the coast as around Grays Harbor."

s in their brief contend that, aboriginally, he Chehalis

were divided into two separate, but closelv affiliated tribes~~the Upper

(I

h 332

Ghehalis Tribe and the Lower Chehalis Tribe (P10 Br. 8), at the time
this claim allegedly arose in 1855, and that through the passage of
time and the process of amalgamation these two tribes have been conn
federated "into one identifiable group at the present times namely}

the Chehalis tribe.” Plaintiffs‘ counsel in their brief contend that
in View of the huckleshoot decision, 3 Ind. Clo Comm. 6589 the Chehalis
tribe as such is today the identifiable group in whose favor judgment
should be renderedo (Pl. Br. 25). In their reply brief (page 26)9
counsel for plaintiffs contend that in View of this Commission’s
decision in the Tillamook case, 3 Ind. Clo Comma 526, it is probable
separate judgments should be entered in favor of the Upper Chehalis
and the Lower Chehaliso

Defendant‘s chief contentions on the other hand are that the

term ”Chehalis" does not designate an aboriginal tribe, band or group
of Indians other than a village, and th—t the terms "Lower Chehalis“
and “Upper Chehalis” are general geographic terms and do not designate
an aboriginal tribe? band or group of Indiansg other than a village

(Def, Reg, Fdg. 2h). Defendant further contends that each village

ml‘

in she area involved was politically autonomous and each village had

its own section of territory {Def. Reqo Fdg. l6); that there is no

evidence that aborieinally and prior to 1850 or l8SS3 there was a

merger of the autonomous villages within the claimed area (Defo Rees
sdgo “S23 and that according to the best ethnologies concerning the

area the village was the only entity'"which could be designated as a

8).

(+5
3-‘;
C3
mi}
0
cf''''''‘‘‘\
l'.;.‘J
C D
1*’)
(I
a
Q
0
'n
D»
U 7
O
f\)

'r':nI

K.-J

The issues of this case which are before this Comnission for
determination are stated by plaintiffs to be as follows:

1. Aboriginally, were the Upper Chehalis and Lower
Chehalis tribes, bands, or identifiable groups
of.American Indians within the meaning of section
.70a of the Indian Claims Commission.Act?

2. what were t.e boundaries of the lands owned or
occupied by such tribes of Indians?

3. Did the Chehalis Indians as a group become an
identifiable group within the meaning of section
70a of the Indian Claims Commission.Act following
their being consolidated together upon the reservation?

h. Is this proceedings properly prosecuted on behalf
of the Upper Chehalis tribe, Lower Chehalis tribe,
and the present day consolidated Chehalis tribe
through the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis
Reservation, a duly organized and recognized Indian
group?

5. Did the Chehalis Indians have, or acquire, an
interest in the original reservation set aside for
them by the Department of the Interior in l86h for
which they should.be compensated?

6. Is the taking of the Chehalis tribal and reservation lands contrary to the Fifth Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States, to entitle claimants
to interest on the value thereof from the time of taking to the time of payment.

Defendant contends that the questions presented to this Commission for determination are:

1. "whether one or more of the nlaint' ibes or the
° a

if tr
Confederated Tribes has establisded by a preponderance of t-e evidence that a particular historical
T1 ‘-3,

tribe, band or group of Indians aboriginclly and
exclusively'held and occupied any specific and
definable area of land in western Washington.

‘Whether one or more of plaintiff tribes or the
Confederated Tribes has established by a preponderm
ance of the evidence that any one of then was
aboriginally a tribe, band or identifiable group,
 I ndians .

Whether one or more of plaintiff tribes or the
Confederated Tribes is a real party in interest
entitled, by legal succession or continued existence
as an entity of some recognizable sort, to maintain
the claim of aboriginal occupancy.

3°

'Whether one or more of plaintiff tribes or the Con»
federated Tribes of Indians is a presently existing
tribe, band, or identifiable group of.American Indians.

Whether plaintiffs? petition states a claim or

claims upon which relie: can be grantedo

6°

Whether this suit is barred by the judgment in
Duranish V. United States, 79 C. Cls. S30.

   

The main questions to be determined therefore are (l)'Ehat was
the political composition of the Indians residing within the area
claimed at or near the time of the alleged taking in l8SO or l8SS3
(2) If there were two or more tribes within the claimed area at said
period, was there a later merger of said tribes?; (3) Are the plaintiffs
herein the successors in interest to the claims of the tribe or tribes
who used and occupied the lands at or about the time of the alleged
and (h) Have the plaintiffs proved exclusive use and occupancy
by them of a definable area of thclaimed land as of the date of

E
bile

ther issues in View of the decision herein become

In support of their position, nlaintiffs called as an expert ?

__‘_ £

Taylor, Jr., assistant professor of anthropology

afied

I

I»;

‘co

that from his study of the historical, documentary and ethnological

material he found that there were two recognized tribal entities on

the Chehalis river—-the Upper Chehalis and the Lower Chehalis. (Tr. 136).

Taylor stated that the Lower Chehalis seem to have been made up of at
least five bands, the Satsop, the'wynoochee3 the Humptulips, the Copalis

and the Lower Chehalis proper. The Upper Chehalis, according to the

‘witness, consisted of four bands. (Tr. k2, 85). These bands, Taylor

testified, for most purposes were semi~antonomons and that in any form

of emergency the Lower Chehalis were apt to band together and the Upper

Chehalis were apt to band together; (Tr. 83). These bands, according

to the witness, were in turn divided into villages which were semiautonomous. (Tr. 139). Generally speal«_:ing, this witness stated, the
Chehalis villages did what they pleased. Ee knew of only two instances
"when the Chehalis got together beyond the village level—-one being the
abortive treaty negotiations of 1855 and a tradition of a war party of
Upper Chehalis in the middle of the 19th century, uniting with other
lndians for a grand raid against the Snohonish. (Tro lbh, and 82).
‘Witness Taylor agreed that other ethnologists stch as Dr. Verne Ray,
Dr. A. L. Kroeber and Dr. Ruth Underhill all stated in their writings
that village autonomy existed in thj3o_.€:‘~1"ea5 (Tr. 1.3.16) but he believed
this conld.be so if the definition of a tribe as adopted by him was
need (he selected a definition formulated by the Royal Anthropological
says the word tribe applies to "a nonadic or sedentary

. '! "'—: 1"’ -: r "‘ 4" D P‘  "'-.o'-xi‘ . .
entitv occupying a glten area or lertg spearing a common language

- A * " % "--'-u-v-r “' ‘£1
goteennent for warlare

14,33

/
O

(Tr. lb? and 76). Taylor further testified
nat during peaceful times there was no one chief over all of the

villages of either the Upper or Lower Chehalis.

(Tr. l?6)o Taylor
prepared a map (Pl, Ex. 12) ard placed thereon the boundaries of
Chehalis territory both Upper and Lower as he believed they were £3
 (Tr. 199).

Dr. Jacob Fried, anthropologist, appeared as a witness for
defendanto Defendant's witness testified that, based upon his rem
search; the largest social political land—using unit in the claimed
area was the village. He further testified that the word “Chehalis“
is a name (Tshels) of a magor village at Hansonis Point at Gray3s
Harbor which word has become a generic term used by'map-marers for
an entire stretch of land from the Pacific beach north of Qrayist
Harbor all the way inland to past the Newaukum River? (Tr. 223).

In addition to Dr. Fried‘s testimony, defendant introduced

several hundred exhibits consisting of historical accounts, governu
ment documents, ethnological studies of the Indians of nortlsestern

'wask%ngton, maps and journalso .All of these, together sitf the

$5....

xhibits
iggyoduced by plaintiffs and the written reports of each expert witness?
were c.a3:~ef11ll;r ar‘-.a.lj,FZed in reaching a determinaition of the questions

All of this evidence was either considered or

H4
E?
»J
(:--'a..5
}.J
U?

{"1
lhe recorc

* ..L

. the enorance

= 5
O
L;
C P
'35‘
(T?
:3

3
.3;
("D
O
' '3
'33
(I
}.J
; _.
}....J
(D

r} 3

U.)
€13
4'‘ 1*h 3

case justifies holcins that the ecrd “Chehalis,“

4-u-a.._.«-\of Gray’ Harbor, near‘westport,‘Washington, and the name has been
extended by the whites as a collective designation to include all
the Indians living in-the vicinity of Gray‘s Harbor, the Chehalis
river and its affluents, such as the Copalis, Humptulip, Wynoochee,
Black, Hoquiam and Satsop rivers. (Fdgs. 12, 1h, 16).

It is clear also that village autonomy prevailed in the claimed
area and that the largest land-using entity, therefore, was the village
tribe. (Fdgs. 17, l8, l9).' The aboriginal inhabitants of the area
were fish-eating Indians and their main source of subsistence was from
the sea, making limited use of other areas for berries, roots, and
occasional hunting. (Fdg. 22). The villages of the Indians were
located at or near the mouth of the rivers and on the shores of Gray's
Harbor. Apparently, potatoes uere raised by these Indians prior to
1850. Travel was mostly by water, the lands away from waterways being

covered by dense undergrowth, except for small prairies along the

upper Chehalis river. It is evident from a study of the l8SS council

notes (Fdg. 7) that these village-tribes considered the lands near
their villages as their own and the desire of some to remain on their
own lands, rather than consolidate, resulted in no treaty being made

with them.

The exact location of these villageutribes in the claimed area
J.

in 1855 is not readily ascertainable from the recordc .Elaintiffs’

anthropologist, Dr. Taylor, has map,ed what he believed to be the

1']

lands used and occupied by these Indians as of 1886 (PI. Ex. 12) at

"""1

a time when he estimates the Indians known COJ;€Cil?€lV as Chehalis

A 3

8

numtered.betueen 1500 to 2000 souls, which was before their number
appreciably declined due to fever and disease and which was also
before a sottherly'movement out of the claimed area of these Indians
into lands previously occupied by the Chinook, Willipa ahd Cowiitz
lndianso according to the eviderce the Lower Chehalis, collectively’
speaking, numbered but 2l7 in 1855, while the Upper Chehalis totaled
216° It is readily apparent that such a reduced population would
not be using and occupying at the date of the alleged taking (l8§§)
the same amount of territory that an Indian population four or five
* —

times that number was utilizing in 1800, especially in View of their

marine economya (See The Quapaw Tribe V. United States, 1 Indo Clo

 

Come. h69)o Indian title is based on use and occupancy and there

must be clear proof as to the lands actually used and occupied as

of t;e<iate of the alleged taking by the United.Stateso The use

of the 1800 date as a basis for defining their territory would be

misleading because of the population decline and the southerlyimoveu

meat into lauds not claimed by these plaintiffso There is no subm

stantial evidence as to the lands exclusively used and occupied by

these viliage—tribes as of the date of the alleged taking in 18559
Plaintiffs admit (P10 Reply Br., Do 22) that ”The issue before

an

the Commission is what lands were actually used and occupied by these

\ I

people on the date or the taxing, % e e“ (which date is allegedly

--»—--4.-g D !\ --. -_-I _ $4--1 wr-u -‘aw--L -. - gfxc--L --5‘ 
‘;__.--_C}O.s-3 1.'C}.*‘.3".r-3179 l-.3 _L.)O_1.-Ataed CO ‘s-.'J.:c‘.u lE.;,C.S 931888

Indians allerediy used and occupied in l80i, as previously indicated

-.9

above.

Plaintiffs further admit that they must establish the

boundaries of the lands owned and occupied by their predecessors

in interest. (Pl. Br-., p. 17). To fix the boundaries, plaintiffs

submitted in evidence their Exhibit l2, which is a map prepared by

Dr. Taylor showing said boundaries as found by him as of 1800 for

plaintiffs. On crossnexamination, the following testimony of Dr.

Taylor, plaintiffs‘ expert witness, is enlightening: (Tr. l63, 16h,

165).
Q0

A.

Q.

A.

There is another thing by Kroeher in the "Handbook of
the Indians of California,“ Bureau of Ethnology,
Bulletin 75 (l92S), page 891, in which he makes this
statement, "In short, the Indian did not think of
territory in terms of plane area as we do. Every
representation of group lands as filling area on the
map is therefore misleading and must be considered a
makeshift tolerable only as long as our precise know—'
ledge of the facts remain inadequate for most regions."

Now, if I understand what he is saying there, he
is saying that some anthropologists are prone to put
a line around the whole territory of let's say, Oregon—Yes.

«wand that that is not a correct thing to do. ‘Would
you comment on that?

I agree with that unequivocally. Esp 12 does not
represent truth. It represents truth so far as I can
arrive at it from the data that are available and make
it clear to a western European audience. (Underscoring
supplied). ”%

 

I am quite convinced, for instance, that while the
Chehal s re arded the upper regions of the Satsop as theirs,

d d nOb regard it as theirs in the same sense that they
d " ' ’ S s theirs. .And I
_:ve a gcll-darn who
occupied the p9;k of the nills in between, let us say, the
Satsoo and the Eynrchee. This wouldnit mean anything to
them. Therer*

it BLLO

such as this is only an approximation of the truths It is
unfortunately, however, the best that we can do with the _
data that we have and wit the nature of the problem presenteda
The many maps pertaining to the general area under consideration
are discussed at length in defendant's trief, pages l§l=l60. t is
sufficient to say that many of these maps were made to locate the
Indians of the region in a general way without boundaries being shown;
or were basically made for linguistic or military reasons; or arbiu
trarily assigned specific territory to geographical groups; or assigned
parts of the lands claimed to other Indians; and are not consistent in
locating the Indians of the region. (See also Def. Ex. 2).

As hereinbefore mentioned, the plaintiff3 The Confederated Tribes

of tne Chehalis Reservation, allegedly is a confederation of the other

the Lower Chehalis (proper) Tribe and the Upper Chehalis Tribe ever
merged or confederated; or that plaintiff members of Confederated

Tribes are their descendantso There is some proof that some Chehalis

and other Indians went on the Chehalis reservationo The record indicates

that the Chehalis reservation was established in l86h, but that as late

....I

as l873 the Hnmptnlips still refused to leave their country and go on

the reservation. In l8T9, the Gray's Harbor Band (no doubt Chehalis}3

nnmcering 16h souls, were still living on Gray‘s harbor and its tribes

in l33§, Satsop, Eoquiam, Hnmptulips, Oyhzt,

and 'hehalis

lndians were reported ulcer the jurisdiction of the Quinaielt aaencr

_ I
4Plaintiffs’ expert, Taylor, testified that today there is now no living
Satsop Indian. (Fdg, l6).

At first glance the reports of some Government agents and officials would seem to indicate that all Chehalis Indians were brought_
together and settled on the Chehalis reservation. (Fdgs. 9 and 10).

A study of all the evidence indicates quite the contrary, however, as
hereinabove set forth. These reports also speak of the large country‘
claimed or possessed by the Indians of this area when first dis—

\

covered by the white man, but are of little value in determining the
actual lands exclusively used and occupied by the various villagetrihes in l8SS.

Adding further to the confusion respecting the Indians of this
area are the comments of certain ethnologists who would link the villagetribes north of the Chehalis, such as the Copalis, Hunptulip and Hoquiam
with the Quinaielt. (Fdg. 16)., ther ethnologists find these same
village-tribes and the Satsop to be distinct entities; (Fdgs. l2, l3,
lb). The internixing of the Chehalis people with the Chinook and the
Cowlitz Indians and the resulting movement into the areas occupied by’
these Indians also makes it difficult to ascertain clearly the location
of the villages, the lands they used and occupied and the aboriginal
composition of such due to interninglin$o Some parts of the lands
claimed were undoubtedly used by other Indians from outside the area
claimed such as the Quinaielt using Gray’s harbor (Fdg° l6), the

the rally“ of the Newaukun river (E65. 15) and some

5-.‘ °
uowlitz usin

C’
D

-J--r—v_..x. CJQ

Nisqually'reror+ed‘v being on Grand or hound Frairie (Fde lb). ‘With

h 3

1

respect to the Nisqually, Doctor Taylor testified in setting tneir
southern boundary as the northern Chehalis boundary (see testinont in
consolidated Dockets 19?, 203, 206, 208, Aug. 26-27, 195M) that ”thiS
shadowed area between l82O and 1850 was occupied by the Indians who

called Nisqually or Chehalisg but were a mixture

of Shahaptinusgeaking peoples, Nisqually and Chehalisa" Thus, we have
the Chehalis mixing with the Nisqually as well as the Chinook and

Cowlitz Indians. Other claimants are claiming parts of the area

contended for by plaintiffs such as the Quinaielt are claiming the

area of the “peninsula or arm” on the north side of Grayis Harbor (Fdgo

.L.

tt the Skookumchuck river as their

\J...'.

l5) and

e Coelits are claiming

W40

~'- :3

northern boundary (

. 15). As stated by the Court of Claims in the

o

Busanish case, 79 C. Cls. 530, at page 573, (in.which the court was

 

considering the claims of various claimants from the region now under
consideration including the claims of the Upper Chehalis) "E0 possible

_-.--It

which the court may ascertain the landed boundaries of

U!
plaintiffs and award one tribe a judgment which may not do
an inexcusable and palpable injustice to anothero“ This statement is

applicable to the situation developed in this case w-ere not only does

the etidence disclose that villageutribes were the'land«using entity
{though no proof of tie lands exclusively occupied), but also discloses
that tlere is no substantial proof that plaintiffs are the successors
in interest to the claims of such village tribese The evidence further

LT?

 ‘‘__L ‘I: -n -u_ 4‘ it
coders outside 33 area and sucn

. -. ‘'2 _._,. .0 .1. ...‘:_'- _ _

reveals COXmOH use oi territory op c

“ L “v"r'-'-re‘ "' Q ‘'‘'~ I‘ -1 -1 —: 0 " - 4‘!/\ ""
inoe_nlKture of the VaTlOUS :3u‘CJ that it lS lX.Qs51bjj to ce§ej1in€ who

"" J-V-u -— ‘*5!-.“ - " ""' I-I -1-.‘ .--\ v--._ -n—1 ‘.,-q—.—._ ..-... I! 1- 
‘Pas ac,lall* using and occ,Hg_ _ ode Area at one date of the all~:CG u3£?WS

with respect to the claim for the taking of 3,753.63 acres of

land from the Chehalis reservation by the Executive Order of October 11,
1886, which restored said acreage to the public domain, it is clear
from the record that no recovery may be had on said claim. It appeared
that in l86O a piece of land was selected by Indian agent Simmons of
‘Washington Territory on which he thought it advisable to have the
Cowlitz and Upper Chehalis tribes settle. iThe Superintendent of_

Indian Affairs directed the setting aside of 5,000 acres in 1560.

The Commissioner of Indian Affairs in 186;; recommended the setting
aside of a reservation for the Chehalis Indians and on July 8, 186M,
the Secretary of the Interior approved setting aside h,22h.63 acres
as a reservation. In 1885, Agent Eells stated the lands on the reservation had been allotted to the Indians, but that there being no way
for them to get patents he recommended that the executive order establishing the reserve be so changed that the Indians residing thereon
could take the lands they occupied under'the Indian homestead laws.

In 1889, Eells reported that the Indians on the Chehalis reservation
had received patents for their allotmentss (Fdgss 8, 9, 10, 11).

The Court of Claims in the Duwanish case, supra, at pages 55h, 555,

found with respect to the reservation that:

Finding XXVI: % t % _

As thus esta‘disted the reservation consisted of h,22h.63
acres. By the Executive order of October l3 l856 (I Kapp. 903),
3,753s63 acres of the reservation vere restored to the public
dovain for Indian homestead entry and LII acres set aside for
school pnrposessi Thirty-six of the Indians upon the reservation nade homestead selections covering all the land with the
erception of the amount reserved for school purposes.

As previously staied, Agent Eells in l889 reported the Indians had ren
ceived.pa%ents for their allotments. Plaintiffs have offered no proof
to rebut this evidences In any event the land was included in an
executive order reservation and plaintiffs have shown no damage because
of the allotting and patenting of said lands to the individual Indians
living thereono

Based on the foregoing and the findings of face herein made, and
the record as a whole, it is the conclusion of this Commission that the

claims of plaintiffs should be dismissed, and it will be so orderedo

Edgar Ec Witt
Chief Commissioner

  

Eggmo ZN-o 
Associate Commissioner

 

