BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

.ED LAKE, PEMBIEA AND EEITE EARTH
BANDS, ET AL.,

Petitioners,

VI DOC  N00 

THE UNITED STATES,

Defendant .

ENDIANS,

Petitioners ,

V. Docket No. 113

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

TURTTE EOUNTAIE BAND OF CHIPPEEA )
)

)

)

)

3

‘HE UNITED STATES, )
)

)

TN... .15‘- .- .3 .. ._.1-I-*€=J.\'...Lz\.:.<:u'.1u¢

HE LITTLE SHELL BAND OF CHIPPEEA )
EDIAES, ET AL., )
Petitioners , g
v. 3 Docket No. 191
IE UNITED STATES, §
De fendant. 3

Decided: I-‘Lay 21, 1958
FINDINGS _c_2_1j_ FACT

Preliminary Statement
The petition filed with the Commission in Docket Iio. 18-A set

*th a claim on behalf of the Red Lake and Penfoina Bands of Chippewa

Indians for additional compensation for lands in Minnesota and North
Dakota ceded to the United-States jointly by said bands under the Treaty
of October 2, 1863, 13 Stat. 667. The cession is shown as Area hh5 On
Royce‘s Maps Nos. 1 of North and South Dakota and.Minnesota. The case
was tried and.submitted, and on September 17, 1951, this Commission
entered findings of fact and judgment dismissing the petition. Petitioners filed and presented a timely motion for rehearing. By order
entered March 13, 1953, this Commission vacated and set aside its findings of fact and judgment and granted a rehearing to be based on the
evidence in the record and such further evidence presented by the parties.

Pursuant to the two separate stipulations fi1ed.prior to the reLu-.

4'-J-N-r

Q--n-t-In ‘

aring, one oetween petitioners in 18-3 and petitioners in Docket Do.
113, and the other between petitioners in 18-A and petitioners in Docket
No. 191, the three cases, 18-A, 113 and 191, were consolidated for trial
to the extent that the areas claimed in the separate petitions filed in
Dockets 113 and 191 overlap that portion of Royce Area hh5 lying in
North Dakota claimed in Docket l8—A.

Thereafter, hearings were held on the consolidated cases at which

additional evidence was recieved. ‘However, no evidence was offered.by

petitioners in Dockets 113 and 191. Since no request for findings of
fact has been filed by petitioners in either Dockets 113 or 191, the
Commission’s findings of fact hereinafter set forth will apply to all

three cases.

The Commission, therefore, makes the following findings_of fact:

i 6 zue

Farties

l. The Red Lake Band of Chippewa Indians, a petitioner in Docket
No. 18-A, is a duly organized band of American Indians with a tribal
organization recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having
authority to represent said band, and is authorized to maintain this
action by the Indian Claims Commission.Act of August 13, 19b6, 60 Stat.
1019 .

2. The Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians, also named as a petitioner
in Docket No. l8~A, was recognized by the United States an an organized
band of American Indians at the time of the treaty of October 2, 1863,
13 Stat. 667, was executed jointly by said band and the Red Lake Band
for the cession of the lands in Minnesota.and North Dakota involved in
these proceedings.

At the time of the 1863 treaty the majority of the members of the
Pembina Band were located in the area ceded and a portion of the members
were living on lands in North Dakota to the west of the ceded area.
After the treaty they continued to live in the same areas until, in
1873, the United States purchased a township in the White Earth Reservation in Minnesota as a home for Pembina Indians. Thereafter, some
members of the Pembina Band were removed.to'White Earth and others were
placed.on the Red Lake Reservation also in.Hinnesota, but many remained
in North Dakota, principally in the Turtle Mountain area.

The Pembina Indians who remained.in North Dakota were interchangeably

referred to as Pembina Chippewa; Turtle Mountain Band of Pembina Chippewa;

Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas; Little Shell's Band, and other

variations of these names. In I882, the President by Executive Order
estaeiished a.reservation in Earth Daheta at Turtle Mountain, with
certain corrections in description in 188k, for the "Thrtle Mountain
Band of Chippewas and such other Indians of the Chippewa Tribe as the
Se°TetaTY of the Interior may see fit to settle there.“ These Pembina
Indians became known and.were recognized by the defendant as the Turtle
‘Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians.

The Pembina Indians who were removed to the White Earth and.Red
Lake Reservations in Minnesota, and those Pembinas remaining in North

Dakota who became known as the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewas or

the Little Shell Band of Chippewas, were all part of the Pembina Band at

-I-kn 4-.:........ 4.1....

'''-'‘--*\-r ‘H-'.&..u.s\.v

-10/A u

xieatf was negotiated and signed

 f\..._*...1.._.._ -3 _
I-IA-4-‘hf N-Ix, gr‘; ;___;\_,_J'_  L09)

bv their

11

chiefs: Little Shell and Red Bear. Although the Pembina Band does not

presently maintain a tribal organization, the members and descendants
of members of the Pembina Band, as it was constituted in 1863, are an
identifiable group of'American Indians within the meaning of the Indian
Claims Commission Act, and have a common claim.which they are authorized
to have heard and determined by the Commission under Section 2 of said
Act. The individual petitioners in Docket No. 18-A, Resetti Villebrun
and Katherine Carl Barrett, are members of this group of Pembina Indians,
and they have presented the claim arising out of the l863 treaty cession
of ROYCE Area LE5 in a representative capacity on behalf of all the
descendants of the Pembina Band as constituted in 1863.

3. The Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians are petitioners

in Docket No. ll3, and in their petition assert a claim based upon.imQ
31
}.
LL
} J
"0
L
[1
(0
('3
(0
U1
}_1.
0
H
(*1
C)
(1)
F4
3

:6 area of land in North Dakota which

"*1

-6 250

overlaps and includes that portion of 53- ;'}’Qe Area M45 in North Dakota
lying north of the Goose River ceded to the United States by the Red
Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewas under the Treaty of October 2, 1863.,
The petition alleges that petitioners were not parties to that treaty,
however, the attorney of record for petitioners in Docket ll3 has now
agreed with the attorney of record for petitioners in Doclmt 18-A in
a stipulation filed herein on April 2, l95h, that the Treaty of
October 2, 1863, ceding said land, in Royce Area 141:5, was signed on
behalf.‘ of.‘ the Pembina Band of Chippewas by its duly authorized chiefs,
Little Shell and Red Bear, and that at the time of its execution the
petitioner band in Docket No. ll3, now known as the Turtle Mountain
Band of Chippewa Indians, was a constituent part of the Pembina Band
who executed the 1863 treaty.

h. The Little Shell Band of Chippewa Indians, sometimes known as
the 'I‘LIrtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and as the Pembina Band of
Chippewa Indians, and twelve named individuals as members and representatives of said band, are petitioners in Docket No. 191. The petition
sets forth a claim of ownership in the Little Shell Band, based on exclusive occupancy and title by conquest, to a large area of land in
iiorth Dakota which also overlaps and includes all oi‘ Royce Area M5
lying on the west side of the Red River in North Dakota, ceded to the
United States by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands under the October 2,
1863 treaty.

It is alleged the claimed area has never been lawfully

ceded to the United States and that said lands were acquired by the

defendant under a purported agreement dated October 22, 1892. However,

625

6 252

the attorney of record for petitioners has now agreed with the attorney
of record for petitioners in Docket l8—A in a stipulation filed with the
Commission on October 21, 1957, that the October 2, 1863 treaty'was
signed on behalf of the Pembina Band of Chippewas by its duly authorized
chiefs, Little 5hell and Red Bear, and that at the time of its execution the petitioners described in the caption of Docket No. 191 as

"The Little Shell Band of Chippewa Indians, sometimes known as the

Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and as the Pembina Band of

Chippewa Indians“ were a constituent part of the Pembina Band who ~

texecuted the 1863 treaty.
S. Petitioners in Docket Nos. 18-A, 113 and 191 agree and the

Commission finds that the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa: and such
members of the petitioner group represented.in Docket l9l,'who are
descendants of members of'the Pembina Band of Chippewas as it existed

in 1863, have an interest in.the claim asserted on behalf of said band

in Docket l8~A.

Indian Title

 

6. The lands involved in these proceedings which the Red Lake
and Pembina Bands of Chippewas ceded to the United States by the Treaty
Of 003058? 2, 1863, consists of about 9,799,9hO acres lying onfboth‘r.
sides of the Red.River in northeastern North Dakota and northwestern
Minnesota and will be identified as Royce Area M15. The boundaries of
the area ceded as given in Article 2 of the treaty are as follows:

£'.'>""

poirt where the international boundary beALI

tates and the British possessions intersects
ake of the Woods; thence in a direct line

Berri hr-xi no 9+ -th

D-2-.--¢_....a-C‘-.3 |..n.\'

tween the Unite
the shore of th

<0 £:L(D
t-‘m

southwesterly to the head of Thief River; thence down the
main channel of said Thief River to its mouth on.the Red
Lake River; thence in a southeasterly direction, in a direct line towards the head of'Eild.Rice River, to the point
‘where such line wowld intersect the northwestern.houndary
of a tract ceded to the United States by a treaty'concluded
at Washington on the twenty-second day of February in the
year eighteen hundred and fiftywfive, with the Mississippi,
Pillager, and Lake Winnebigoshish bands of Chippewa Indians;
thence along the said boundary line of the said cession to
the mouth of Wild Rice River; thence up the main channel of
the Red.River to the mouth of the Shayenne; thence up the
main channel of the Shayenne River to Poplar Grove; thence
in a direct line to the Place of Stumps, otherwise called
Lake Chicot; thence in a direct line'to the head cf the
main.branch of Salt River; thence in a direct line due
ndrth to the point where such line would intersect the international boundary aforesaid; thence eastwardly along said
boundary to the place of beginning.

This is the area to which the Red Lake and Pembina Bands are seeking to

nr~+nT'\::-r- '2 '1 Q‘?

---A..- I-\.II-"---u‘-  -h.4-rau-/‘6

establish title as of the date of the ireaty on

7. The area of the present State of Minnesota fell within the dcmain of the French who first entered the area around 1660. Under the
French considerable exploration took place in the upper Mississippi
River region and trading relations were established.with the Indians.
In 1763, following the French and Indian'war, France transferred all
its territory east of the Hississippi.River and Canada to England.
1 tor the Revolutionary tar, the United States acquired Minnesota east
3f the Mississippi from England under the Treaty of September 3, l873,
and it became a part of what was known as the Northwest Territory. By
.he Convention of 1818 with England, the fortynninth parallel of ndrth
tatitude from the Lake of the'Woods to the Rocky Mountains was adopted

0
4-.etween Canada and the Unated States, and England relinquished its

-any-:laim to the Red River Valley, which included Royce Area.hh5 in issue

here. It thus appears that Royce Area hhS was not a part of the
Louisiana Purchase from France in 1803.

8. The Chippewas were one of the larger groups of Indians of
Algonquin linguistic stock located in the northern section of the
United States. when first contacted by white explorers in the seventeenth
century, the Chippewas were in the area around Lakes Huron and Superior.
Beginning in the early part of the eighteenth century, they started
pushing their way westward across Minnesota, gradually displacing the
Sioux and driving them across the Mississippi and south to the Minnesota

River, and by the end of the century had extended their occupation

through northern.Minnesota and across the Red River into northeastern

W rth Dakota

'1"!-u-my Isa.-3 .u-. '1 4-_-err”: -".-.--.-".- -.-.'r
0- --....-....J .u.£.'.~-..-‘u G. .l.c.u by J.:.uI.suu\.-.3.

of villages, hands, and local
divisions scattered over a region extending a thousand miles from east
to west, and many of these bands cane to be known by the name of the
‘village, lake, or river near which they resided. Two such Chippewa bandsi
were the Red Lake Indians and the Pembina Indians.

9. The militant westward expansion.of the Chippewas into the Red
River Valley is confirmed by the reports of explorers and French and
English traders who were in the area during the latter part of the
eighteenth and the early part of the nineteenth centuries. In l790,
Alexander McKenzie reported that the natives of the Red.River Valley

were "of the Algonquin tribe“ and refers to "Algonquins from the country

between the Red.River and Lake Superior." In 1797, Chaboillez, a trader,

reported trading with the Chippewa from south of the post at Pembina,

as far south as the Goose River. In 1798, David

-6251.

Thompson, who traveled through much of Area hhS as a surveyor for the
Northehest Trading Company, reported that "the Red River, and all the
country southward and.the upper Mississippi, and countries eastward to,
and all Canada, are the hunting grounds of the Chippeways (or Ojibaways).”
Between 1800 and l809, Alexander Henry operated a number of trading posts
for the Northéwest Company in Area hb5 and adjacent areas'with the main
post at Pembina in northeastern North Dakota. His reports for the period
show that his trading in the area was principally with the Chippewa, and
that he considered the Red River Valley was Chippewa territory.

10. Following the Louisiana Purchase in l803, the United States
began the exploration of the new territory thus acquired. The first
official expedition into the new country was that of Lewis and Clark
who reached what is now North Dakota in the Fall of l80h. They did not
visit Area.hhS, but spent the winter at Fort Mandan located near the
present town.of Mandan, North.Dakota, some distance to the west of
Area hh§.

In a report to the President, dated April l7, 1805, with reference
to the Indians inhabiting the “Territory of Louisiana? and areas
"adjacent to its northern and western.boundaries5“ Lewis and Clark reported there were approximately 700 Red Lake Chippewas" about the head
of the Mississippi and around Red Lake" who “claim the country about
Red Lake and the Red Lake River as far as the Red River of Lake 1*Iin.n.:i.,pi.a'%g..
beyond which river they contend with the Sioux for territory.“ ?hey also

reported there were 350 Pembina Indians "on the Red.River of Lake Winnipie,

and about the mouth of the Pembina River“ who formerly resided on the

east side of the Mississippi, at Sand Lake, but were induced, by the
Northwest Company, to remove, about two years since, to the river
Pembina. They do not claim the lands on which they hunt.“

In 1805, Zebulon Pike was commissioned by the President to explore
the sources of the Mississippi River. In 1806, Pike ascended the
Mississippi River to Leech Lake in I~i:‘i_m1esota southeast of Area 1115
where he held a council with the Chippewas attended by the "Chiefs
and warriors of this place and of Red Lake." In his report Pike lists
a band of Chippewas who "reside on Red Lake, and hunt in its vicinity

and on Red River ,“ and a band who “reside on the waters of Lower Red

river, near to Lake Winipie, md are the furtherest band of Chippeways."

Pike did not reach Area 1.91:5, however, he did pass through Sicu.'::. country
and he defined "the claims of limits of the Sioux Nation" as commencing
at Prairie du Chien and up the Mississippi River to the "River de
00509811" (Crow River), up that river to its source, then to the source
of the Minnesota River at Lake Traverse and then west. This approximates
the boundary between Sioux and Chippewa territom in Minnesota as subsequently fmed by the August 19, l82§, Prairie du Chien Treaty, which
treaty is considered in a subsequent finding.

ll. In 1811 the Hudson's Bay Company transferred to the Earl of
Selkirk a vast tract of land to the south and west of Lake Winnipeg
extending south along both sides of the Red River to about the parallel
Of 1170 north latitude, which grant included substantially all of fires

M15. The next year a colony of Scotch, English and French

were settled along the Redfiiver as far south as its confluence with

6 '2 S6

the Red Lake River. The first and larger of t..ese settlements was

made at Pembina, North Dakota, near the confluence of the Pembina River
with the Red River. Many of these white settlers took Indian ydves, and
i.n a few years the half:-breeds resulting from these connections amounted
to several thousands. In order to obtain peaceful occupation of.‘ the

lands granted him in 1811, Lord Selkirk entered into an agreement in

1817 with certain “Chiefs and Warriors of the Chippewa or Saulteaux
Nation, and of the Killistino or Cree Nation" whereby the Indians granted.
a tract of land “adjacent to Red River and Assinaboine River, beginning

at the mouth of the Red River and extending along the sane  far as the
Grand Forks at the mouth of Red Lake River , and along Assinaboine River as
far as Muskrat River ," on conditionthatd Lord Selkirk and his successors
make annual payments to the -Indians. That” portion of said tract along
the Red River lying south of the 119th parallel was within the limits

of Area 11115 in the present States of North Dakota and Minnesota.

As previously stated, by the Convention of l8l8 with England, the
149th parallel of north latitude was'fi:.=-zed as the boundary between Canada
and the United States. In 1823 the United States , through Major Long ,
set a marker on the line just a short distance north of Pembina, North
Dakota. is a result, Lord Selki_rk‘s Grant was curtailed at the boundary,
and it appears that Lord Sel1cLrk‘s colony moved north of the boundary,
the annual payments were not made, and the‘Indians continued in occupancy of the area.

12. In 1823, Major Stephen Long made an expedition up the Minnesota

River to Lale Traverse and down the Red River from Lake Traverse entirely

6 258

through Area 1:15 to 'Pembina ‘I-Z’h€Z‘€ he marked the forty-ninth parallel

of north latitude. He then went across the border into Canada, returning east by way of the Lake of the Woods and Rainy Lake to Sault
Ste. Marie. In reporting on the Long expedition, William H. Keating,

a member of the party, described the country of the Chippewas as follows:

From the Sault Ste. Marie by a slightly curved line running
somewhat south of West, to the Chippewa river of Lake Pepin;
thence in a direction west of north, to Spirit Lake Z}7Ei]le
Lac7; and theme to the head of the river I-tile de Cor-beau
Crow Win_g_7; thence to Red River near the Red Fork [possibly
from Crand Forks, 3%. Dal-:.7; theme to the cor-iluence of the
Mouse (or la Souris) and-‘Assinboin rivers; thence to a
point on the Saskatchax-ran, about one hundred and tnecnty miles
above its mouth; thence to the Rivere_de Brochets; thence

to the Rivere de Sang; and thence to Sault de Ste. Marie.

The area thus described as Chippewa territory included the major part of
Afea M15 in Minnesota and the northern portion of the North Dakota section.

In his report Keating also outlined the extent of the Sioux country
which he stated came up to the “Riviera de‘Corbeau (Crow Wing river);
thence up that river to its head near Otter Tail Lake; thence by a
westerly line to Red River, and down thatriver to Pembina; thence by
a southwesterly line to the east bank of the Missouri near the Mandan
villages.“ That part of Area 111:5 in North Dakota is thus also assigned
to the Sioux by Keating. However, he further states that:

The Bois des Sioux is supposed to be the northernmost
limit of the undisputed property of the Sioux on Red
River. Beyond this they never hunt without being prepared for war, as the prairies between this place and
‘the Vild Rice River to the east, the Turtle River to the
west of Red River, form a sort of debatable land, which
both Chipmwas and Dacotas claim, and upon which both
frequently hunt, but always in a state of preparation
for hostilities.

0 259

f"I‘

me Eois des Sioux is south of Royce Area M5 near Breckenridge,
1‘-ii nesota, and the Wild Rice River in Minnesota is liiewise south of
the area, leaving the only area of Sioux-Chippewa contention in Royce
Area M15 in southeastern Dakota between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers.

l3. It was due principally to the frequently recurring territorial disputes of the Sioux and the Chippewa Indians that the United
States in August of 1825 caused to be assembled at Prairie du Chien
the representatives of the Sioux and Chippewa tribes, and of several other
Indian tribes of the northwest country--the Sac and Fox, Iowa, -Finnebago, Menominee--also in conflict with the Sioux, for the purpose of
halting this internecine warfare by establishing recognized boundaries
between the territories of the respective tribes. Duri.ng- the council
spokesmen for both the Chippewa and "Sioux described the areas each
tribe claimed. ‘After extended negotiations, the Sioux and Chippewa
finally agreed upon a partial boundary line between their respective
territories.

Aitreaty ('2 Stat. 292) to which all the tribes and nations present
joined, was concluded on August 19, "1825, which treaty established fixed
boundaries between the Chippewas and the Sioux and similarl}; defined
the boundary lines between the countries of other signatory tribes.

The tribes “agreed with the United States and one another“ (preamble),
to the "line dividing their respective countries“ (Art. 5), the boundaries of which the United States did "agee to and recognme“ (Art. l0}.
"Within the acknowledged limits" of each tribe, no other tribe was to

hunt “without mrmission being first asked and obtained“ (Art. 13).

The line dividing the Chippewa country on the north from the Sioux
country on the south, as fixed in Article 2 of the 1825 treaty, extended
west across'Hisconsin to the point on the.eastern border of Minnesota
called “Standing Cedar,“ and then in a northwesterly direction across
Minnesota to Otter Tail Lake, and down through the middle thereof, and
“thence in a direct line, so as to strike Buffalo river half way from
its source to its mouth, and down the said.river to Red River, thence
descending the Red River to the mouth of Outard or Goose Creek?'which

eniers the Red River from the west. 'West of that point no line was

fixed in the treaty, althvugh during the treaty negotiations there had
been an attempt made by both the Sioux and Chippewa to extend the boundary westward into North Dakota. However, the Pembina Band was not represented at the treaty council. All the lands in Area hh5, except for
that portion thereof'between the Cheyenne and Goose Rivers on the
Daknta side, were located ndrth of the line fixed in the 1825 treaty.
The government»officials believed that to make the 1825 treaty

binding on all Chippewas, it was necessary to obtain the confirmation
of Lake Superior Chippewas not present at the treaty negotiations.
These Chippewas were later assembled.at WFont du Lac of Lake Superior"
where the Treaty of August 5, 1826 (7 Stat. 290) was concluded wherein

they gave full and complete assent to the provisions of the l82§

Prairie du Chien Treaty.

- 6 260

lb.

was consistently recognized by Government officials as the dividing

After the 1825 treaty, the line established by the treaty

boundary between Chippewa lands on the north and Sioux lands on the
south. However, the treaty did not revent further conflicts be ‘ween
the Chippewas and Sioux over the use for hunting purposes of the lands
west of the Red River in Dakota, particularly the lands in that portion
of Area M45 between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers in Dakota. Although
the dividing line west of the Red River was not fixed by the treaty,
the Sioux considered the lands in the Goose.-Cheyenne River area had
been recognized by the treaty as Sioux lands, and after l82§ they continued to hunt in and claim Indian title to said area.

In l836, Laurence Taliaferro, the‘ Sioux Indian Agent at St. Peters,
on the basis of a report made by a Cheyenne River trader, reported as

follows :

Mr. Fr-anier reports that the Chippeways of Red Lake pass
down the Red River & Hunt on the Cheyame, on the lands
of the Sioux. This they do and have done for some three
or four years. I might expect ‘difficulty if the Sioux
should meet them this mdnter. I have fully warned the
Chippewa on the whole extent of the line not to cross
over on the lands of the Sioux. Also instructed ‘the
Sioux to the same effect and purpose. In 18b9, Major Samuel Wood, accompanied by Captain John Pope of the
United States Topographical Engineers, led a military expedition through
Area 11115 to Pembina for the purpose of selecting a site for a military
post on the Red River and to collect information on the Indians in that
region. They proceeded up the Mississippi River to Sauk Rapids located
in the present State of Icéjmnesota, thence west to the great bend of
the Red P-liver and pursued a route to'Penbina parallel trith and distant

‘twenty miles west of the Red River.

‘With respect to the territories of the Sioux and Chippewa; 33307
Woods reported as follows:

Crossing the Mississippi river at Sauk Rapids, about one mile
below the mouth of the 5atab river, we enter the country'be~
longing to the Sioux Indians. The'Watab river is the southern
boundary of the Winnebago country. The C0UD?rY'5l°n8 0“? ?°u?e
to the Shayenne river is claimed by the Sioux, and their riSh3
is acknowledged.by other tribes with the exception of the partion traversed between the two crossings of Red river. [§.€
crossings referred to were south of the Ch€¥€nQ§7° The “?St

of Red river was, and I believe is still claimed by the S1DUX3
but a long series of conflicts between them and the Chippewas,
Crees, &c., have dispossessed the former and the country north
of the Shayenne river is now, and has been for 3 long PeT1°d
held by-the Chippewas, and the Shayenne is tacitly acknowledged
as the boundary between them.

The Chippewas are in possession of the country from Lake
Superior to the Red river, and the Red riyer C0Dn$T73_but
they are divided into many bands that claim and exercise an

. ‘ #9-— V - v
/1 -1‘ 5 AL - _ -indepenaoncy 3. each uvuu4O « » »

Major'Wood also reported that at Pembina he fbund many Indians
“that regard that as their home," and “there were about one hundred and
fifty warriors, uhich would mahe a total of five or six hundred Indians

that claim to be Pembina Indians. They are almost entirely Chippewas-“

He said:

These Indians remain but for a short time about Pembina;'
their great resort is to the west, in the ranges of Pembina
and Turtle mountains, where furs and game are yet abundant;
and east of Red river as far as Lac-des-Roseauxi f0TtW'?T
fifty miles, where Mr. Kittson has a branch of his trading
-establishment. Their reliance for food is principally on
the buffalo, but they get some smaller game; and when these
resources fail, the superabundance of fish supplies them,

W W *. They go to the “Plains” with the half breeds after
buffalo.

As to the Red Lake Band, Major Wood repOTted "I 53“ man? 05 the Red Lake
Indians. They say they have in their band about 150 warriors. They like

the country about Red Lake.“

In his report Iviapjor Wood also included a letter, dated August 20,
l8?_19, he had received from Father Belco rt, a Catholic missionary, who
had “resided in that country for 18 years“ and had been requested to
give “in writing“ his observations regarding that area and the Indian
tribes "inhabiting its,“ as well as the whites or half-«breeds who resided there. In his letter Father Belcourt defined the “district or
department called Pembina“ as "the country or basin which is irrigated
or traversed by the tributaries of the Red river 3 south of the line of
the forty-ninth parallel of latitude. The prairies, rivers , and lakes
which extend to the height of land of the Mississippi, and the ilzmense

plains where feed innumerable herds of bison to the 1-restward, and from

-chich the Chippewas and halfbreeds of this region obtan their subsistence, contain '3»:-ithin their lmits a country about four hundred miles

from north to south; and more than five hundred miles from east to west."
As to the ownership of this country, he stated that “although the Chip-~

pewas have been for ages in possession of this country, tradition teaches
us that it previously belonged to the Sioux." He explained that during
the earlier period: "These plains remained the scene of contention,
nevertheless oftener the residence of the Sioux than of the other tribes,
until that nation was divided into two bodies  % %," the Sioux and the
Assiniboine. "These last then allied themselves mrmanently with the

Crees and Chippewas, and by reason of’ their superior numbers when combined they forced the Sioux to fly nearly to the Cheyenne river, which
is now regarded as the line between these tribes. Although the Crees

and Chippewas were then extremely numerous, they are far from sufficiently

so now to spread over the vast region they temporarily occupye" Father
Belc ourt explained that "the Crees and Assiniboins regard themselves
as equally masters of these lands with the Chipmwas, having acquired

J’. .3-:..

them jointly x-zith the latter, -x- .‘ Nevertheless, the Mouse river
(west of Devil‘s Lake near the Missouri in Dakota) I-?0ul<-'1 appearito be
the true lim, which is never passed by the hunters of the tribe, except perhaps towards its sowrce where it approaches Moose Mountain (in
Canada) which is a point where they are accustomed to concentrate and
for the most part reside."

In 1856, another military expedition under Colonel Smith was

sent to the Red River of the North to locate sites for the establishment

the opposite sides of the Red River; with a-view to require them to
keep withm their own districts of country; to keep peace with the
United States, -1’: -3': -11-“ and to notify all British subjects they could

no longer hunt on American soil. The expedition followed generally the

route of Major Wood in l8)_;9 except that from the south branch of the
Goose River in Dakota it went northeast to Devil's Lale, and then to

Pembina by way of St. Joseph (a"oout3O miles west of Pembina). In reporting on possible sites for a military post, Colonel Smith stated that:

At first view, it might seem that the south shore of
Lake I-iinewaken (Devil's Lam) presents the most eligible
site for a post; for it is between this lake and the
Shayenne river  it '1‘? that the buffalo do most congregate,
and where the hunting parties as well of the Red river
people as of the Indians-“Sioux and Chippewa--are usually
meta

'1'

After givinrr a description of Devil‘s sake, Colonel Smith stated that

C.»

U ‘ - - .:.... .. ..
neither the S'.3_O1‘.‘.3".’. nor Ch;pmwa ov r come here S.LL.1g.-3.‘! or

6 261;.

each fearing the other”

...- , so that when they go in its vicinity it may

always be regarded as a numerous war party." He also reported “crossing
the trail of the annual summer hunting party from the Red River country“
several times and followed it to Devil‘s Lake, and later learned from
inhabitants at St. Joseph who had been with the hunting party that it
included 300 Chippewa warriors . it

15. The Red Lake and Pembina Bands had a few fixed villages  the
Red River Valley and there were settlements around the various trading
posts located in the area. However, most of Royce Prea LE5 was used
for hunting and trapping. The Red Lake and Pembina Indians lived off
of berries, herbs, game and fish which were found in the area. There
were buffalo hunts twice yearly, mainly in the area west of the Red
River. There were many small fur-bearing animals which were trapped
and the pelts traded at the posts located throughout the area. The
petitioners’ ethnologist, _Dr. Stewart, placed trading posts along the
Red River from Pembina to Grand Forks; along the eastern boundary of
Royce Area hl;5 at Red Lake Falls, Thief River Falls and Pine Creek;

and one near the northwestern corner of Royce Area 11345.

Treaties
16. Beginning in I785 and continuing until the policy of the

United States of making treaties with Indian tribes was ended by 
Act of March 3, l87l (16 Stat. 566), Chippewa Indians were parties to
some M; treaties with the United States. Although the names .“Chippewa
Nation“ or "Chippewa Tribe" were used in some of the early treaoies :n::-:-.d.e

with Chippewa Indians, they were never organized as a single political

entity with a central authority to act for all Chippewas, but were

62:’:

can.

Iyided into various bands which in many instances were grouped under
larger divisions or sub—tribes occupying separate and distinct areas
of land in the present States of Ohio, Illinois, Wisconsin, Minnesota,
and North Dakota. After 1822, all responsible officials of the United
States were careful in their dealings with the Chippewa Indians to
summon to council the headmen of all bands known or believed to be in
occupancy of the lands in question.or otherwise interested in matters

to be discussed and not to summon other Indians. (Mole Lake Band of

Chippewa Indians v. The United States, 126 C. Cls. 596, 611, 612)17. Following the Prairie du Chien Treaty of 1825 (referred to in

Finding l3) fixing the recognized boundary line between Chippewa lands

on the n-rah and Sioux lands on the south, the salted Hvuoou dealt uu¢g

with the various Chippewa bands for the lands north of the line. Comincing in 1837 six treaties were concluded by the United States with

Chippewa bands or groups of bands located in Wisconsin, Minnesota and
North Dakota for cessions of their lands north of the Prairie du Chien

line. These treaties are as follows:

(1) The Treaty of July 29, 1837 (7 Stat. 536)'With the
ZMississippi and Lake Superior Chippewas, ceding Royce Area
2&2 in Wisconsin and.Hinnesota. The 1825 Prairie du Chien
Treaty line formed.the southern boundary of this cession.

(2) The Treaty of august 2, 18h? (9 stat. 90h) with the
Chippewa Indians of the Mississippi and Lake Superior,
ceding Royce Tract 268 in Minnesota.“ The south line of
this cession was the l825 Prairie dn Chien Treaty line.

(3) The Treaty or August 21, 18h7 (9 Stat. 908) with
the Pillager Band ceding Royce Tract 269 in Minnesota.
The west line of this cession was also the l82S Prairiei
du Chien Treaty line.

(h) The Treaty of September 30, 185k (10 stat. 1109)

° - .. _ --_ to 7 :3. ~ ~ -~ 11- - ~ with the Chippee_.indiane oi nah» uupericr and the hlSSlSS1pp1

ceding Royce Tract 332 in northe

331', IVE’: 'h?1.oCt0‘]‘ :2 .

.3...--an-¢n_r §J\.uQ

S 266 g

(5) The Treaty of February 22, 1855 (10 Stat. 1165)
with the Hississippi3 Pillaner, and Lake'Hinnebagoshish
Bands of Chippewa Indians ceding Royce Tract 35?, in
north central Minnesota. The western boundary of this
cession was the 182 Prairie du Chien Treaty line, and
the cession also formed part of the southern boundary of
the 1863 treaty in issue here.

(6) The Treaty of October 2, 1853 (13 State 657) with
the Red Lake and Pembina Bands ceding Royce Tract HH5 in
northern Minnesota and northeastern North Dakota. Between
the Wild Rice and Goose Rivers the cession line coincided
with the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty.

Similarly the United States dealt with the Sioux for cessions of

the land lying to the south of the Prairie du Chien line. Those treaties

for lands in Minnesota south of the line were:

(1) The Treaty of September 29, 1837 (7 Stat. 528) with
the Medawakanton Sioux, ceding Royce Area 2h3 in'western
Jisconsin and southeastern Minnesota. The northern bound. ‘ ..,," 34*‘. «no r‘ .4-xv-5  -- ‘I’ . u-u
ary of this cession waS the Prai.1e du Vhlcu ..eee line.

(2) The Treaties of July 23 and August 5, 1851 (10
State 989; 95h) with the Mississippi Sioux ceding Royce
Area 289 in northern Iowa, southern Minnesota and eastern
Dakota. The northern boundary of the Minnesota portion
of this cession, from St. Cloud west to the Red River was

the Prairie du Chien Treaty line.

Treaty Negotiations with the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands rior to 1 3 Treaty

18. The Territory of'Minnesota was organized on March 3, l8h9,
-which included.the area now occupied by eastern North and South Dakota
as well as the present State of Minnesota. Prior to the treaty cession
of October 2, 1863, the United States had, in 1851 and again in 1860,
negotiated with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands for a cession of all or

a portion of their lands along the Red.River in the Territory of Minnesotaa

In the Act of September 30, 1850 (9 Stat. Shh, 5h6), Congress appropriated funds not only for negotiating with the Sioux in the Territory

of Minnesota but also ”for expenses of treating with the Indians and
half-breeds for the extinguishraent of the title to their lands on the
Red River of the North, in the 'i‘erritoI'y of §'iim'1esota.“

In the summer of 1851, Alexander Ramsey, Governor of Minnesota.
Territory and ex officio Superintendent of Indian Affairs for the Territory, negotiated the two treaties with the Sioux on July 23 and {august 5,
1851, providing for the cession of all their land in Minnesota south
of the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty line (Royce Tract 289). Thereafter,
on September 20, 1851, Ramsey negotiated a treaty with "the Chippeways
of Pembina and Red Lair, owning the country in the Red River of the
North“ by the terms of which they ceded and relinquished to the United
States an area of land containing about 5,000,000 acres {largely '5-:ith:2.n
Area M45) located on both sides of the Red River of the North, one portion of which lay along the east -side of the river in Minnesota from the
international boundary south to the Buffalo River, and the other down
the west side of the Red River in Dakota from the Canadian boundary line
as far south as the Goose River. The consideration for the cession as
fixed in the treaty was $230,000, payable 5,330,000 in cash and $10,000
annually for 20 years. Dur:'Lng the treaty negotiations the Indians had
requested that they be paid for their land the sum of $ho,ooo in cash
and $20,000 annually for 20 years. In his letter, dated November 7, 1851,
to the Secretary of the Interior reporting on the treaty, Governor
Ramsey stated that “As that hunting ranges are circumscribed by our
purchasing their land and filling it with settlers, it is plainly a

necessity -31- -3’: ~33 to gradually school the race into different modes of

thought and action -31- -31- ->%.‘‘ He also reported that
hundred Chippewas roam beyond the western boundary of the present
purchase."
The Treaty of September 20, 1851, together with the two Sioux

Treaties Of July 23 and August 5, l8Sl, were submitted to the United
States Senate for ratification. The Sioux treaties were ratified but

the Chippewa treaty was not, apparently on the ground that the country

ceded by the treaty was considered to be too remote to be ceded at that

time.

is

19. In his annual report for 1859, the Commissioner -of Indian
Affairs recommended the negotiation of a treaty with "the Red Lake
Chippewas and the Indians of the Red River of the North, for the extinguishment of their title to the lands which they own in that region,
estimated at some thirteen thousand square miles" in order to provide
"safe transit through the country of those Indians, but which cannot be
given to it while the lands remain theirs."

On February 20, 1860, the Legislature of the State of Minnesota
also memorialized the President of the United States to extinguish by
treaty the “possessory title" of "the Pembina and Red Lake Bands of
Chippewa Indians“ to a portion of the territory occupied by them, which
”embraces large portions of the valley of the Red River of the north,

and a tract of country in the northern part of Minnesota between the

Red River and the Vermillion River, containing about fifteen thousand

square miles.“ By the Act of July 19, 1860, Congress again appropriated
funds for expenses necessary "in holding a council with the Red Lake

and Red River Chippewas in the State of Iviiinnesota for the extinguishment

of their title to lands in that State." In September of 1850, treat)’
commissioners met in council with rewesentatives of the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands, but failed to negotiate a treaty... ‘They asked the Indians
to relinquish title to "all their lands on both sides of the Red River"

for which they finally offered $h.00,000 and a ll5,000 acre reserve to '

the Red Lake Band alone, and apparently offered the Pembina Band

$200,000 for its land, since the treaty commissioners stated in their
report that they had “offered the Indians $600,000 for a cession of all
their land." They reported that the Red Lake Band agreed to cede all
their land, except a reservation large enough to give 80 acres to each
Indian, “but they demanded a million and a half dollars as a consideration,

and nothing could induce them to abate their price.“ The absence of

some of the Indians was given by the commissioners as the reason for the
failure to negotiate a treaty.

20. On April 16, 1862, the Secretary of the Interior requested
Congress to appropriate funds to cover expenses of negotiating a treaty
with the Red Lake and Red River Indians of Minnesota “to provide fora
cession of a portion of their lands, including such part as will be
necessary to give the United States the entire control of the river."

By the Act of July 5, 1862, l2 Stat. 512, 529, Congress made another

r’3~PPT0Priation of $315,000, “for the purpose of negotiating a treaty with
the Chippewas of northern Iv1innesota'and the extinguishing of their title
to the lands in that vicinity.“ On July l9, 1862, treaty commissioners
were appointed and authorized "to negotiate a treaty with the Chippewas

of the Red River in Minnesota, “ and were instructed that “the main object of the negotiation should be to secure to the people of the United

6 270

States the uninterrupted navigation of the Red River of the north. To
effect this object it is important to secure a cession of the lands on
each side of the river as far as the Indian title extends." They were
also advised not to purchase “all the lands to which the Indian.title is
Y33 Unextihiuished, as the settlements will not be likely to extend to
that section of the country for many years."

The Red Lake and Pembina Indians were notified to collect at the
mouth of the Red.Lake River (now Grand Forks, North Dakota) on August 25,
1862, to meet with the Commissioners "for the purpose of treating'with
them for their lands and the right of navigation on the Red River of
the North." The treaty commissioners never reached the treaty grounds,
as they were forced to turn back at St. Cloud, Minnesota, because of
the threat to their supply train caused by what has become known as
"the Sioux uprising of 1862,“ and.so treaty efforts were suspended.

In the meantime, the Red Lake and Pembina Indians had assembled at the
designated treaty grounds, where they waited until they had exhausted‘
their provisions, and then proceeded to seize some British goods which
“was about that time passing through their country.“ At the same time
they stated to the agent in charge of the goods that “their country could
no longer be used as a thoroughfare until they were paid for it; that
they were willing to pay for the goods they had appropriated when they
made a treaty with the United States." This caused the Superintendent
of Indian Affairs for Minnesota to state in his report of November lb,
1862 that: "If there is no treaty made with these Indians at once,

it will be necessary to abandon the lines of transportation, mail

routes, etc., between the United States and the northeastern portion of

Dakota Territory and the Hudson’s Bay Settlement , or to establish thb_

winter forts along the line for protection.“

 

21. In late November of 1862, the Assistant Secretary of the
Interior directed the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Minnesota
to take the necessary steps to secure the attendance at Washington, St.
Paul or some other proper place of "a delegation from the Chippewas of
Red Lake and Pembina capable of treating with the United States for the
extinguishment of their title to lands on the right and left banks of

Red River.“ The Red Lake Band was contacted in December of 1862 and

the chief's asked to come to Washington to negotiate. They refused to

go to Washington stating that “they do not wish to break the understanding ‘they have had with their brothers, the 'i’embina and ‘.I....rt-1...
Mountain Indians--which is not to go away from their lands for the
purpose of making a treaty," but they were willing to make a treaty and
expected to Ireet the Commissioners the next Sumner for that purpose.
After the Red Lake Indians refused to come, efforts to persuade the
Chippewas at Pembina and Turtle Mountain ‘were suspended.

The Treatx of October 2, 1863

22. Under authority of the Act of July 5, 1862, supra, Governor

Alexander Ramsey was again comrrzissioned to negotiate a treaty with the

Red Lake and Pembina Indians. In the letter of instructions from the

Commissioner of Indian affairs on July 211, 1863, Rausey was told that
the main object of the negotiations was to secure to the United States
the uninterrupted navigation of the Red River, so it was important

I!-L

L-O secure a cession of the land on each side of the River as far as

_6272

He was instructed that it was not achrisable to purchase
"all the lands to which the Indian title is yet une3:ting:uished“ as it
was too remote f or early 1-rhite settlement, unless the Indians preferred
to cede all their territory except a reservation 1'.‘ or their use , in which
event the purchase of all their land was authorized if the cession could
re obtained upon reasonable ternzs. As to the consideration it 1-:a.s

>ointed out the unratified Treaty of 1851 provided for $230,000, the
authorization to the unsuccessful l860 treaty cornmissioners was $200,000,
.nd there was no restriction on the 1862 commissioners who failed to reach
he treaty grounds. It was also noted that the Indians “supposed to be

nterested in the land to be treated for, number about 2,000 souls ,“

nd Ramsey was instructed not to base the consideration “on the imaginary

alue of the land, oi’

the acquisition of a right of way but upon the
resent necessities of the weaker and their improvement in the future."
1e determina uiOI'1 of the consideration and other stipulations in the
‘oposed treaty, however, were left to Ramsey"'s judgment.

23. On September 28 , 1863, Governor Ramsey met in council with
Le representatives of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewa
nnesota. After negotiating with the Indians over a mriod of ten days,
e treaty was concluded on October 2, l863, ‘whereby the Red Lake and
mbina Bands did "cedeg sell, and convey to the United States all their

ght, title and interest in and to all the lands now owned or claimed

them in the State of Minnesota and in the Territory of Dakota within

U

, follovzizzg described boundaries," which boundaries have been herein‘ore set forth in Finding: E50. 6 and need not be remated here.

2h. The report of the council proceedings discloses that at the
opening of the council, Ramsey referred to the Sioux uprising and the
punishment being meted out to them for their crimes. He then pointed
out how the country to the south had been rapidly settled by whites, and
that the advance of farming, trading and travel throughout the country
could not be halted by anyone. He said that trade between American
settlements on the south and the British on the ndrth must continue
uninterrupted and for that reason the United States desired to procure
a right of way through the country of the Red.Lahe and Pembina Indians.
Ramsey told the Indians that the United States had no especial desire
to get possession of their lands, and did "not want their lands at all,
if they do not want to part with themt but only eanted “the privilege
of traveling through.their country on steamboats, and on'uagons, unmolested.“ He offered them $20,000 far such right of'way and stated,
"or, if you want to sell your lands and retain.a.reservation for yourselves, say so.“ The Indians having rejected the offer to purchase a
right of way through their lands, Ramsey subitted an offer to purchase
the lands, suggesting they retain reservations. The Indians were not
disposed to cede any of their lands unless they were paid an annuity
which Ramsey estimated would aggregate from "ten to twelve million"
dollars for approximately one-half the area they afterwards relinquished.
However, after being assured there would be no punishment for past offenses
committed by them, the Red Lake and Pembina chiefs were willing to
and fully understood they were ceding that portion of their lands
described in the treaty in return for the_annuities and other considerations provided thereino

6'27-425o Although the area between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers in

North Dakota'was included in the l863 treaty cession, the statements

made to the Indians in council by Governor Ramsey shoe that he questioned

their exclusive rights in that area. He said: “What do they mean by
proposing to sell me a country which does not belong to them? To my
certain knowledge the Sioux are on the Sheyenne more than they area“
When the boundaries of Chippewa lands were under discussion, Ramsey is
quoted in the record as saying that “he always supposed they claimed
up to the English line on this side (Einnesota) of the river and never

knew they clained over to the Shayenne on the other (Dakota)," and

“the treaty of Prairie do Chien in 1825 was produced in proof that the

1-u-.4.-..q...-.;3 a-.q..——qn 1.......&......-., ___ J ‘I. 

“V*““**J Uuvwucu oué S’oux and Chippewa was Goose river,

26. The area ceded to the United States by the aboye Treaty of
0Ct0b€T 3, 1853, with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands embraced approximately 9;79959h0 acres of land.

279 The consideration agreed.to be paid by the United States
under the terms of the l863 treaty was as follows:

(Art. 3) $20,000 per annum for twenty years.

(Arte E) $100,000 to be expended in payment of
damage claims, and debts to traders;

$2000 to be expended for powder, wine,
etco

(Arte 5) $500 to each chief to build a house;
$5000 to build a road.

(Afie 5) Expenses of a “board of visitors" of 2

OT 3 persons to be appointed to supervise
annuity payments.

(Art. 8) 160 acres to be granted in the ceded area to
each adult halfnbreed or mixed blood “related
to Chippewas of Red Lake or Pembina Bands,“ but
no scrip to issue.

(Art. 9) 6hO acres to be set apart in the ceded area for

each of the two chiefs, "Eoose Dung" and "Red
Fear."

As to the consideration for the cession, Governor Ramsey reported
that "the amount agreed upon was not, of course, regulated by any
supposed standard of value applied to the land, though it is believed,
that no territorial acquisitions of equal intrinsic value have been

made from the Indians at so low a rate per acre, or on terms so advantageous to the Government. Terms even more advantageous might have been

_; 5.. ...._. .;. I. nJ‘-uvl-1- -r-¢.'-nu ‘V-II-go-D-.¢-an-hp ‘-D‘; , ‘Lian-hr ‘I-I-hm. ‘VJ , ‘JAR. QJLAHI

established policy of the government in its dealings with these ignorant
Savageso" Ramsey explained that pursuant to his instructions the
annuities were fixed at a rate ‘per capita nearly with those granted to
other bands of Minnesota Chippewas. "He estimated the numbers of Indians
in the Red.Lake Band to be from 800 to 1000 and the Pembinas at hOO to.
600 Indians.

28. The Treaty of October 3, 1863, with the Red Lake and Pembina
Bands was amended and.ratified, as modified by the United States Senate
by resolution of March 1, 186a, 13 Stat. 670. The amendments required
acceptance by the Indians. Prior to the Senate resolution, steps had
been taken to bring to Washington, D. c. the chiefs of the Red Lake and
-embina uamdso After the Indi*ns'reached'Washington, articles modiiying

the 1863 treaty W re prepared in the form of a supplemental treaty with

+ .-.. ,_ ,._.. ._ v 1 4 an 1 0 . q -. q,
«me “ed Lake and Pembina Bands wnich was concluded on Apr1; i2, iaéh,

6 276

and ratified on April 21, 1865,, 3.3 Stat. 689.

treaty, in substance, is as follows:

(Art. 1)

(Art. 2)

(Art. 3)

(5....-L 1.\

(Art. 7)

The Red Lake and Pembina Bands assent to the
provisions of the Treaty of October 2, 1863,
as amended by the Senate on March I, léiéh.

The United States in lieu of the annuities
provided for in Article III of the 132%} treaty,
agrees to pay annually, during the pleasure of
the President, the sum of $310,000 to the Red
Lake Band, and 3335000 to the Pembina Band, which
sums are to be paid to the members of said
bands in equal per capita shares; and provides
for a census to be taken of said bands.

The United States agrees to expend an-wally
for fifteen years, 338000 for the Red Lake Band
and $1000 for the Pembina Band, for the purchase of useful articles for the use of said
Indianso

The United States agrees to fa.n~nis‘n said bands
of Indians for fifteen years, a blackmith, a
physician, a miller and a farmer, and furnish
annually $500 for blacksmith supplies, “.1000
for carpentering, and other purposes.

The United States agrees to furnish said Indians
a saw mill and a run of millstones.

That Artile h of the I863 treaty, as mended, is
again amended and provides that instead of the
$100,000 for damages and debts after an audit

by the Commission approved by the chiefs, the

sum shall be paid =-- $25,000 to the chiefs of the
Red Lake and Pembina Bands to enable than to
purchase provisions and clothing for distribution
to "their people, " and $75,000 for payment of
damage claims and debts to be audited by the
Indian agent and the chiefs.

Modifies Article 8 of the 1863 treaty to provide
that in lieu of granting 160 acres of land to each
male halfmbreed or mixed blood who was related by
blood to the Chippewas of the Red Lake or Pembina.
Bands, scrip was to issue to such of said mixed
blood as should so elect, which would entitle the

I"

The 156-14 supplemental

62

'7
I

holder to a like amount of land, to be located

upon any of the ceded lands: but not elsewhere,

to be accepted by said mixed bloods in lieu of

all future claims for annnitiesa
29. The report of the General.Accounting Office, in evidence as
Defendant‘s Exhibit 8l, shows the consideration paid the Red Lake and
Pembina Bands for the cession of land under the provisions of the
Treat? of October 2, 1863, as modified by the supplemental Treaty of
April 12, 186k, was $609,h80.36. The proof does not show the acreage
of the lands, if any, selected within the ceded area as allotments for
the Chippewa mixedebloods of both bands as provided in.Article L of the
1863 treaty, as modified by Article 7 of the 18611 treaty. Nor is there
proof that the 1280 acres of land within the ceded area were set aside
to the two chiefs as provided under.Artiole 9 of the 1863 treaty.

Indian Occupancy of Lands.Adioining 1863 Cession

30. At the time of the l863 treaty cession, Governor Ramsey recogu

nized that by that treaty the Red Lake and Pembina Bands did not cede all
their lands in Minnesota and North.Dakota but retained lands on both the
teast and*west of the cession. This is shown by his report to the Com:
imissioner of Indian.£ffairs in October of 1863 wherein Ramsey stated that
the“tract ceded by the treaty embraced all the American Valley of the Red
River of the North," and that "on the east of this tract the Red Lake
Indians still reserve a small strip of unceded territory, enclosing the
basin of Red Lake." He also reported that "the Pembina bands, who subsist

by buffalo hunting, also retain for themselves a tract of country claimed

by them, embracing some of the present favorite pastures of that animal

6 278

north and northwest of De.vi3.‘s Lake." This lat'i:.er ‘tract adjoins the 1.863
cession on the northwest.

On the East of the 1863 Cession

 

31. Following the 1863 treaty cession, the Red Lake Indians continued to occupy the unceded lands adjoining the cession on the east
(shown as Royce.Area hhé) which Ramsey reported had been reserved by
them at the time of the treaty. The United States Supreme Court has
held in the cases of“hinnesota v. Hitchcock, 185 U. S. 373 and United

States_v; Holt State Bank, 270 U. 8. H9, that the Red Lake Indians held

   

the Indian right of occupancy or title to the lands retained on the east
of the 1863 treaty cession, even though there was no formal cession from
the United.States, or a formal act setting the land apart as a reservation
for th no In the latter case the Court stated in its opinion that "the
:ffect of what was done was to reserve in a general way for the continued
occupation of'the Indians what remained of their aboriginal territory;
and thus it came to be known.and recognized as a reservation."

On January lh, 1935, the Court of Claims decided the case of the

Chippega Indians of Minnesota v. The United States with the Red Lake Band

of Chippewa Indians of Minnesota as Intervenors, 80 C. Cls. hl0, which

 

held that in 1889, and prior thereto, the Red.Lake Indians had full Indian
title to the land in the Red Lake Reservation, comprising 3,200,000 acres,
to the exclusion of all other Chippewas in Minnesota. The judgment was
affirmed by the Supreme Court in Chippewa Indians v. United States, 301 U.S.

358. This was the land adjoining the 1863 cession on the east.

That portion of the 1863 cession in Minnesota was bounded on the south

by the lands previously ceded to the United States under the treaty of

February 225 1855; 10 Stat. 1165 (Royce Area 357) by the Mississippi
Rnds of Chippewas and the Pi'.LLager and Lake V-Einnibigoshish Bands of
Chippewas;

On the West of the 1863 Cession

 

32. with respect to the lands adjoining the 1863 cession on the
west, two occasions later arose for administrative and congressional
consideration of Indian title of the Pembina Band to that area. The
first was in connection with the agreement of September 20, 1872,

2 Kappa 1057, with the two bands of Sioux Indians, and the other in connection with the claim of the Turtle Mountain Band of Pembina Indians to

the land in North Dakota ultimately ceded by the agreement of October 22,

18923 as modified and co:::.‘.'ir:.1cd ‘:33,-' the Act oi‘ April 21, '.i.9Ui;, 33 Stat...
19h.

By Article II of the Treaty of February 19 , 1867, 15 Stat. 505, the
Sisseton and wahpeton Bands of Sioux ceded to the United States a right
of way for roads, railroads and other purposes across lands in eastern
South and North Dakota which were described as “bounded on the south
and east by the (Sioux) treaty line of 1851, and the Red river of the
North to the mouth of the Goose river; on the north by the Goose river
and a line running from the source thereof by the most westerly point of
Devil‘ s Lake to the Chief Bluff at the head of James river at -3’: -13-.“ Thus,
part of the right of way overlapped the Cheyenne-Goose River area included in the 1863 Chippewa treaty cession in issue here.

By the Act of June 3’, 1872, 7 Stat. 281, Congress directed the

Secretary of the Interior to .exa:nine and report what title or interest

6 280

.74

two Sioux. bands had to any portion oi‘ the land described in article 2,

:5‘ the 1867 treaty, and what compensation, if any, should be paid the
ioux for the extinguish-ment of whatever title they might have to said
ands. Under authority of this Act the Secretary of the Interior ap;ointed a Commission which was instructed to make a full investigation

>f the Indian title to said land and if it found such title to be valid,
;o negotiate for the relinquishment of the same.

The Commission reported on October 3, 1872, that they found "as
raatters of fact, that the Sioux of which the Sisseton and Wahpeton Bands
»'i‘om part, have claimed the country west of the Mississippi and southerly
of Devil‘s Lake, embracing the region described in Article 2 of said
{l867) treaty, as belonging to them; while the Chippewa Indians have

:31

.4.-A.

C, prioroto the tinze oi‘ said treaty, set up a claim to a portion of
x p northern part of the same country.“ The report further recited that
prior to the making of the Treaty of 1867, there did exist grave doubts

as to the extent and validity of the claim of the Sisseton and Wahpeton
Bands to the exclusive occupancy of all the territory bounded by Article II,
but that the United States had by that treaty recognized the Indian title
to this tract of land as being in the two Sioux bands and was thereby
estopped from later denying their title. with the report the Commission
submitted a proposed agreement dated September 20, l872, which it had negotiated with the two Sioux bands providing for the relinquishment to the
United States of their rights in all lands and territory, particularly described in Article 2 of the 1867 treaty, “as well as all lands in the

Territory of Dakota to which they have title or interest." This agreement

was confirmed by Congress on Februam‘-ilh, 1873, 17 Stat. 156.

5 283 E 

On April 23, 3.923, the Court of Claims decided the case of The

Sisseton and Nah .eton Bands of Siour Indians V. The United States,

 

58 C. 0150 302, in which the Court found that the two aforesaid bands
of Sioux had no valid claim or title to the tract of land in the northeastern part of the present State of North Dakota, between Goose River
and De‘vil‘s Lake on the south and the Dominion of Canada on the north,
and between the Red River of the North on the east and Turtle Mountain
on the waste

The eastern half of the tract of land described above anbraces
that portion of Area 14145 lying west of the Red River and north of the
Cheyenne-Goose River area.

33. After the 1863 treaty cession the Penbina Indians continued
to live on the ceded lands and on the lands Governor Ramsey had reported
-were retained by them west of the cession. As a result of increasing
white settlement in the area, some Pembina Indians were removed to the
White Earth Reservation in Minnesota but many remained in North Dakota.

On October 21;, 1881, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs reported
that the tract of land north and northwest of Devil‘s Lake in Dakota
"inhabited and claimed by the Turtle In--Eountain Band of Chippewas" had
never been ceded and that the band‘s claim "to ownership is based upon
continuous possession and occupation by them and their ancestors for
many generations." He referred to the efforts of the Government to remove the Indians to the white Earth Reservation, and of their refusal to

move "lest the abandonment of the country claimed by themmight be looked

upon as a willing relinquishment of their title theretow The Commissioner

6 282

..’- .’..

of Indian Affairs recommended in his report of February lh, 1882, Hthe aforesaid unceded tract of land north and northwest of Devil’s Lake
and west of the l863 treaty cession "should be sold for the benefit of

the Turtle Mountain Indians, and their bretheren now at White Earth Agency,
who should be held and deemed.to be as much entitled to share in the benefits arising from such sale as they, the Turtle Mountain'band.“ He further
stated that, "It seems to me these Indians are justly entitled to the
‘recognition of their clahn on the part of the government to the lands in
‘question, and the files and records abound.in.evidence showing that this

office has long recognized such clann."

In 1882, Congress had under consideration proposed legislation to

"provide for the extinguishment of Indian title of the Turtle Mountain

band of Chippewas to lands claimed by then i.

the Territory of Dakota.

In response to a request by Congress for all available information regarding the claim of the Indians, a report was submitted by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs under date of June 7, 1882, wherein he stated,
among other things, that he had "endeavored to determine, by careful
examination of office records and correspondence, reports of explorations,
‘military and civil, old.maps, etc., the actual merits of the claim set up

'by“the Chippewas to the land in question, andat the same time whether the

6 28

Sioux or.Assiniboines, as claimed, have any title or interest in any portion

of said lands."

by H. S. Tanner from 1823 to l839, on which the Indians of the western
country are noted, I find that the territory west of the Red River and

north and northwest of Devilfs Lake is given to the Chippewas, as well as

- n
I"l“J'€I‘.

their unquestioned locations east of said fter discussing tam:

He said that ”upon the maps of the United States published.

9.9

L

h

two treaties of 1851 and 1863 made with the Red Lake and Pembina Bands
and their retention of the tract of land “north and northwest of Devi1‘s
Lake," he stated that “It is not denied that the Sioux have in years past,
in their war and hunting expeditions, penetrated the country west of Red
River as far north as the British line, and even into the British posses~
'sions. They have frequently sought refuge beyond the boundary line when
pursued by our troops; but that they have occupied the country north of
Devil's Lake, in any sense that would set up a claim to ownership, or that
they ever pretended to claim any portion of said country, does not appeare"
In conclusion, he stated, “I would submit that it has always been understood and held that the lands lying west of the Chippewa cession of 1863
and north and northwest of the line of the Sisseton and Wahpeton Indian
country, as defined in Article II of the treaty with those Indians of
February 19, 1867, have never been ceded to the United States" and that
"of this unceded country the Pembina.Band of Chippewas c1aim.from the
cession line of 1863 to a point west of the Turtle Mountains." It was
suggested by the Commission that if any doubt existed as to the validity
of the claim oi‘ the Chippewas to exclusive occupancy of the territory
claimed, then the bill under consideration.be so amended as to authorize
tthe Commission to be appointed to examine as to the title of the Indians
in the land before entering into negotiations with them;

Thereafter, under authority of the Act of Congress of July 13, 1892,
27 Stat, 139, a Commission was appointed, and on October 22, 1892, this

Commission negotiated an agreement with the Turtle Hountain Band of

Chippewa Indians for a cession and relinquishment of all their rieht,

title, and interest in and to all lands in the State of North
except a tract of land previously set apart for said Indians by Executive
Order of June 3, l88h., In reporting on the agreement to Congress, the
Commission estimated that the Indians had relinquished Indian title to
between eight and ten million acres of land lying north and west of
Devilfs Lake “which is claimed by the Chippewas and their right recognized by neighboring tribes,“ stating that "this Commission is therefore
forced to report that the Turtle Mountain band of Chippewa Indians have
as valid an original Indian title to this entire tract of land as any
Indian tribe had to any tract.“ These lands adjoin the 1863 treaty
cession in Dakota on the northwest.

31;. The Commission, based upon all the evidence and testimony now
in the record, finds that the Red Lake. and Pembina Bands of Chippewa
Indians have established by a preponderance of the evidence that from
a tine ‘prior "to 1800 until ceded by the Treaty of October 2, 1863, they
held Indiantitle through exclusive occupancy and use to all the lands
inliinnesota and North Dakota within the boundaries described in said
treaty as set forth in Finding No. 6, except that portion thereof: lying
between the Cheyenne and Goose Rivers in North Dakota.

35. The Commission finds that it has not been established by substantial evidence that the Red Lake and Pembina Bands held Indian title
to that portion of the October 3, 1863 treaty cession lying between the
Cheyenne and Goose Rivers in North Dakota. The Commission further finds
that the defendant did not recognize Indian title of either the Red Lake

Band or the Pembina Band in that portion of the 1863 treaty cession lying

between the Cheyenne and Goose Rivers in North Dakota.

Value of the Lands

36. The area ceded by the Red Lake and Paahina Bands of Chippewas
under the October 2, 1863 treaty contained 9,799,9hO acres of land in
the present States of'Minnesota and North Dakota, 2,311,550 a$T9S 05
which are in the area between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers in North
Dakota. The remaining 7,h88,280 acres in the ceded area consist" of
3,328,160 acres in North Dakota between the Goose River and the International Boundary, and h,l6S,l2O acres in Minnesota east of the Red
River of the North. The river forms the boundary line between Minnesota
and North Dakota throughout the cession.

The portion of the ceded area to be'valued consisting of the
7,h88,28O acres, embraces the following present day counties: in
Iminnesota, all of Kittson and parts ofiRosean, Marshall, Pennington,

Red Lake, Polk, Clearwater, Norman, and Mahnomen; in North Dakota, all
of Pembina and parts of Cavalier,'Wa1sh, Grand Forks, Nelson, Traill,
and Steele. The excluded area between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers
includes the remainder of Grand.Fbrks, Traill and Steele, and parts of

Nelson, Griggs, Cass, Barnes, Richland, and Ranson.

37¢ In l8h9, all of'the present State oiTMinnesota and that portion
of North and South Dakota east of the Missouri and white Earth Rivers was
organized as the Territory of Minnesota..A Pembina County appears to have

been created within the territory the same year, extending from the Internam

tional Boundary south to the mouth of the Sheyenne River and from the

Mississippi River on the east to the Missouri and White Darth Rivers.

Kinnesota became a state by.Act of'May ll, l8S8. That part of the cession

lying west of the Red River became part of the Dakota territory in l86l

6 286

O\
PO
111)

«g nas'eithin “cabins Count; as organised in 1867 by'£ct of the terrim

_:-*.m."'.
on \-I L:

;:.:-.1 legislatr naps shot-sing Minnesota counties in 1876 and 187?
?et. Ex; 209g“ppc 97.1 and 97.2) place substantially'all of the Minnesota
portion of the session in Pembina and Polk Countieso North Dakota was
adraittedrto ‘the Union by Act of February 22, 1889.
38. The ceded area lies within the Red River Valley which was
'origiI'£:l_ly' formed by glacial Lake Agassiz. The various types of soil,

in the"entire'ceded areag their characteristics and extent are as follows:

   

Classification Basic characteristics Acreage
Fargo Black, heavy, high organic 2,518,372 acres
content
Bearden Dark, mellow loam, richly l,620,llh acres
organic
L~8« Dark, gray and brown, rich, 1g883’G35 acres
organic
Pelan. ‘Various types, sandy, some 662,36 acres
gravel _ Barnes .Loamy'sand, rich in nutrients l,920,llO acres
'Waukon Forested upland, virgin cone 2ll,h6O acres
dition
‘Miscellaneous Alluvial undivided, dune sand, 98h,h88 acres

peat bogs
Five of these classes, Fargo, Bearden, Ulen,'Pelan and Barnes, are alluvial

and within the glacial lake beds They occur generally in belts running

north and south, parallel to the rivers Quality ranges from a deep black

'€W3bo-type soil near the river to a sandy loam farther out. It is generally

good soil which had a heavy original cover of tall prairie grass» That
‘which is not level is gently rolling. gTrees, such as white ash; white elm,

‘bur oak, ironeood, poplar and boxelderg are found mainly along the larger

treams;

Surrounding the ancient glacial lake are soils of the 1'-Iaukon group.
These are light thin soils with some peat, sloughs and sha1_').o=.~: lakes,
covered with a virgin forest composed chiefly of aspen, birch, maple,
oak and elm. The ceded area contained 211,160 acres of this type, mostly
within Polk County in Minnesota and Cavalier County in North Dakota.

The soils of 9814,1188 acres of the Minnesota portion of the cession
are classed as miscellaneous. The largest part is peat, occurring principally in the counties of Roseau, Kittson and Polk.

rainage of the ceded area is carried entirely by the Red River

and its tributaries, which include the Roseau, Snake, Middle, Grand
Morais, Red Lake, Sandhill and Marsh on the east watershed and the
Pembina, Tongue, Park, Forest (Salt), Turtle, Goose, Elm, Rush, Maple
and Sheyenne on the west watershed. The descent of the Red River as it
flows to the north averages less than 5 inches a mile. Because the
land adjoining the river is the flattest belt of the valley, the natural
drainage is very slow and in many places inadequate. The drainage of
the greater part of the northeast section of the cession is rather poor,

with many peat bogs and sloughs scattered through it. The remainder of

the area has better drainage.

39. The climate of the Red River Valley is characterized by long

winters and relatively warm summers. Temperatures average near zero in
January and around 68 degrees in July. Extremes range from over 100
degrees in the summer to below-lsO degrees in the winter.

The average growing season is between .90 and 100 days. The last

killing frost occurs generally during the latter part of May throughout

most oi‘ the area, but in the northern half of the last frost may occur

6 288

during: the early part of June, The earliest frost usually occurs in
We latter part of September.

The mean annual rainfall is about 21 inches. Approximately l6
inches, or 75 per cent, falls during the period from April to September,
inclusive. More than 9 inches of rain comes during May, June and July,
whereas December, January and February have less than 2 inches. The
distribution of precipitation during the year may be such that conditions of either flood or drought are severe enough to injure crops,

t such extremes are not common. Injury from excess moisture is more
common on land near the Red River, while injury by drought more frequently occurs on the sandy soils of the area. Snowfall during the

winter is rather scant, seldom exceeding a foot in depth. Nearly every

E1 ' nun-in -3::--. q-1-H3.--.1v~ J-la: -h--1-5--_-_--P-1-" -9."
9  4‘n‘1“ S¢*u,Cre  Mn-.aJ -'-.4-a. n;-L.a.'\.rJ.a' Uaau I.J4.ILJlI.l.€1.L..i.. 4.0

accompanied by strong winds and often by very low temperature.

140. At the time of the 1863 cession and thereafter, the best
potential use for most of the ceded area was general farming and the
growing of crops. By 1863 it had been established that grain could be
grown in the Red River Valley, as demonstrated around Pembina and at the
Selkirk settlement north of the International Boundary. The prairie land
could be broken and prepared for cultivation without the necessity of
first clearing it of timber. There was available horse-drawn steel farm
equipment such as the plow, disc harrow, seeder, reaper.and thresher,
although much of it was in an early state of development. Subsequent
history has proved the Red River Valley to be agricultural  character,
the predominant crops haying been spring wheat, oats, barley, flax, corn,

hay, Irish potatoes and sugar beets.

None of the ceded area was classed as mineral land, and timber
did not exist in commercial quantities.

By 1863 the ceded area had ceased to be a major buffalo hunting
There were some deer and antelope in and near existing timber.

region.

ter,

Along the watercourses ot

14.1.

beaver, mink and.muskrat could be taken.
For marg'years before 1863 there were three main overland
trails from Pembina across the ceded area to St. Paula. Twoawheeled
oxcarts, capable of carrying up to half a ton, transported quantities

of furs to St. Paul and hauled back supplies. The distance frdm Pebina
to St. Paul was about h6O miles and the oneaway trip took from 30 to 60
days. A road continued on north from Pembina to Fort Gary (now'winnipeg)
in Canada, a distance of'about 90 miles. This St. Paul-Fort Gary route
By 18h3 a regular

‘was reported as having been.used as early as 1825.
cart line had been established for the hauling of freight. In 1851
there were 102 oxcarts reported in operation; by 1858, 600. Thereafter,
trade by oxcart declined. .8
The Red River was navigable for boats of 3 to h foot draught from

Lake'winnipeg in. Canada through the entire ceded area to Fort.Abercrombie,
some hO‘miles south of the cession, except when winter ice or spring floods
prevented it. In the spring and.summer its principal tributaries were
navigable for flat boats for 50 or 60 miles. In 1858 the St. Paul Chamber
of Commerce offered a bonus of $2,000 to the owner of the first steamboat to navigate the Red River. This was won by.Anson Northrup, who in
the Spring Of 1859 succeeded in transporting a steamboat overland to the
Red River.

.After its initial round trip from Fort.Abercrombie to Fort

331?} the boat was tied up until later purchased by the Minnesota Company’

6 290

1

and put in operation as the "Pioneers" There appear to have been two
. .amboats plying the Red River in i863”

Adequate evidence of the amount of cargo hauled by water and land
from through and to the ceded area is not available for the years near
the tnne of the cession. Furs were the principal export from the area.
Some goods were shipped by boat to Georgetown or Fort abercrombie and
then reloaded on oxcarts for the overland haul to St. Paul, and conversely on the return trip. The costs of transportation by the allland route between Pembina and St. Paul were in 1859 $90 to $100 a ton.
The cost per t0n.by the combined river and land route was from $hO to
$55 a ton, exclusive of the charges for handling from steamer to cart.

112. In 1863 there were no railroads in or near the ceded area,

-I-‘L-sq-».-vL -I--'»--.
uuczu L» 1160

but there had oeen railroad aaln and some planning by
“a direction of Congress, General I. I. Stevens in 1853 made preliminary surveys for a northern transcontinental route and recommended a
railroad from St. Paul across Minnesota to the plateau of the Bois des
Sioux at the head.of the Red River Valley, thence westward across North
Dakota following the ridge between the Sheyenne River and Riviera a
Jacques, to the valley of the Mouse River and thence westward across
Montana to the Pacific northwest. This route ultimately became that of
the Northern Pacific Railroad.

By.Act of March 3, l8S7 (ll Stat. 195) Congress granted to the Territony of Minnesota approximately h,SO0,000 acres of land to aid in the cone
struction of various railroads chartered by the territorial legislature.
The grant gave alternate sections of land in a strip six sections wide on

each side o£‘tdne railroad right of way. The legislature issued a total

cf 27 charters, the most inportan of which, in its relation to the
Red River Valley, was that of the Minnesota and Pacific Railroad Company.
This railroad was organized pursuant to the Territorial Act of Iiaroh 3 ,
1857, with authority to construct a road from Stillwater, via St. Paul,
St. Anthony and Minneapolis, to Breckenridge (about 80 niles south of the
ceded area), with a branch running northwesterly from St. Anthony, via
Anoka, St. Cloud and Crow Wing, to St. Vincent on the Red River near
the Canadian border opposite Pembinao The Company was succeeded by the
St. Paul and Pacific Railroad Company and eventually became part of the
Great Northern Railway system,

Railroad planning and construction were delayed by the financial
panic of 1857. It was l862 before the St. Paul and Pacific opened Tm
miles of railroad between St. Paul and St. Anthony. Construction from
St. Anthony toward Breckenridge began in 1861; and was completed in 1873.
A branch line from Breckenridge reached Crookston, near the site of the
1853 ‘treaty negotiations, -around 1876 and St, Vincent by l879, thereby
‘crossing the entire Minnesota portion of the ceded area.

The Northern Pacific received its charter from Congress by Act of
July 2, l86h (.13 Stat. 365) and a land grant of every alternate oddnumbered section to the amount of 10 alternate sections per mile on o.=.=u:;;s:
side of the road where the line passed through states‘ and 20‘lalter:r:,;ro=i,o:=e
sections per mile on each side through the territories, in aid of the
P1‘0P0sed construction of a railroad from Lake Superior through the 
River Valley by way of Fargo, North Dakota to Puget Soz_nd, _After some
difficulty in financing, the company began construction in l87O fror:

Thompson‘s Junction, a short distance west of Du.luth_,

 ‘? 'nhaa.-.--r\-?¢-—¢.h.-¢44A\-r:|...J\./ {J

-6 292

the Red River at Fargo in 1871 and the present site of'Bismarck, North
akota in 1873. It was the first railroad to enter North Dakota and
traversed the southern portion of the ceded area in that state. Construction was thereafter retarded by the panic of 1873, the failure in
1873 of Jay Cooke and Company which was endeavoring to finance the road,
and the subsequent bankruptcy and reorganization of the Northern Pacific.

143.

were good and on a gradual rise coincident with the Civil War. PetiBusiness and economic conditions in the United States in 1863

tioners' Exhibit 209 gives in Figures 16, 17, 18 and 19 the yearly
General Price Level, wholesale Prices, Prices of Farm Products, Cost of

Living, and Money in Circulation from 1850 to 1880. This shows the

1850-1861 period to have been on a low even plane. A slight improvement

occ'a1'-1"-ax‘; in 1862 with a defiixite upswing in 18:33 and a peak in 1863.1 and

1855. The price of farm products began a decline in 1865 and was joined
...y a general decline in all indexes to 1879, when the level was approximately the same as in the 1850's except as to money in circulation.

Interest rates were high during this period, sometimes as high as 211%

per annum out on the frontier.

1:14. At the time of the 1863 cession the general flow of population

in the United States was a continuing one from east to west. Because of
the location of Minnesota and North Dakota in the extreme northern part

of the United States, immigration to these states tended to come from the

east and south through Wisconsin and Iowa. Population concentrated in

the southeastern portion of Minnesota, chiefly around the present cities

go

of hirmeapolis and St. Paul, and moved up the valleys of the Minnesota

and Blue Earth Rivers. In l863 only two places of "settlemezit" were

6 '29

located within the cession--one at Pembina and the other at St. Josepha

As late as l870 four-fifths of the population in Minnesota was concentrated in the southeastern part of the states In 1870 almost six-sevenths
of the total population of Dakota Territory was in the southeastern part
of the territory in the Missouri ‘Ealley. While there tras some intercourse
with Canada and the Selkirk settlers ,; there was not a large amount of
immigration from the north across the International Boundary.

The following figures indicate population trends:

United States 1800 17,089,853
1850 23,191,876
1860 31,010,321
1870 38,sm,898
1880 50,155,783
Iowa 18140 153,112
1850 192,23.
1860 671,913
1870 1,19i:,020
1880 1,628,615
Wisconsin 18110 30,9115
1850 30531391
1860 775,881
1870 1,050,670
1880 1,315,897
Minnesota 1850 6,077
1860 172,023
1870 039,706
1880 780,773
Dakota Territory 1860 11,83?
'7   ' 1870 ll:,181
1880 133,177

Immigration to the United States from foreign countries was compazsvaw
tively low just before the time of the cession in the years l86l and 
and was on an increase in most years thereafter up to 1873.‘ Immigrants from

northem Europe contributed largely to the settlezaent of Hinnesota and

surrounding states.

115. when in l863 the ceded area ‘cecame part of the public domain,
government land policy was well established. By Act of August LL, 1851'.
(10 Stat. 576) Congress had extended the provisions of the pre-emption
laws to the Territory of Minnesota, which then included Dakota Territory, on all unreserved public lands, except mineral lands. The Act
of June 2, 1862 (12 Stat. 1413) further provided for the extension of
the preemption laws to all public lands of the United States, surveyed
or unsurveyed, to which Indian title had been extinguished.

One of the most important land measures enacted by Congress was the
Homestead Act of May 20, l862 (12 Stat. 392). Under its provisions,
any citizen or person who had applied for citizenship, who was head of
a family or twenty-one years of age, and who had never borne arms against

United States or given aid and comfort to its enemies, was allowed,
after January 1, 1863, to enter 160 acres or less of unappropriated public lands subject to preemption at $1.25 per acre, or 80 acres or less
at $2.50 per acre, fter the land had been surveyed. After residing upon
or cultivating the land for a period of five years and upon proof of compliance with the law, the homesteader was entitled to a patent free of
cost except for a nominal filing fee.

After the 1863 cession, an Act of June 8, 1872 (17 Stat. 333),
known as the Soldiers‘ and Sailors‘ Homestead Act, permitted honorably
discharged soldiers and sailors to deduct the time spent in _the military
service from the five year residence requirement. One year‘s residence
The Timber Culture Act of

and cultivation, however, were necessary.

1"laI"Ch 3 , 1873 (17 Stat. 605) out the homesteader‘s residence to three

to
\o
\J L

7-1

5 2%

years if he had under cultivation, for two years, one acre of timber,
1»:ith'trees not less than l2 feet apart, for each 16 acres of such
homestead,

1:6. The State of Minnesota has an area of 53;1?l:9,8lL0 acres. The
first government surveys were made in the southeast corner just west
of the Mississippi River in 1853. By 1855, the first, second and third
guide meridians and the first, second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth and
seventh parallels had been established. In 1857 a survey of the Otter
Tail region, acquired from the Mississippi Chippewas under the Treaty
of February 22, 1855, was begun. By l860 some lines had been run as
far north as the south boundary of the I-Jhite Earth Indian Reservation.
Several maps in evidence .=:‘nm-.7 virtual v no s*.:r'r.':.*:,='s norcth of that ‘ooundary

-—Iv'

in 1865, l866 and 1870.

Surveys were begun in Dakota Territory in l86l in the extreme southeast corner of the present State of South Dakota and were confined to that

corner at the time of the cession in l863.

Surveys within the ceded area began soon after the ratification of
the 1553 treaty, one reason being the provisionsof Article 8 of the
treaty with regard to the selection of allotments by the half-breeds of
the Red Lake and Pembina Bands. By Act of March 2, l867 (111 Stat. 
Congress appropriated $15,000 for surveying public lands of Dakota ‘;[.‘s:=::::;‘*—::“~:iw
‘wry. On August 27, l867, the Surveyor General's Office at Plymouth,
Nebraska, made the following report and request: I

The «$55,000 appropriated by the last Congress for surveys

at and along the Red River of the North is being expended
by lira Iéoses 2;. Armstrong, l‘:e:"2uty Surveyor, pursuant to

3
1

your instructions of the 19th of .£*..pri... last. I am reliably
informed that S-_'-3,000 more wil be r~er.;u.ired to extend the

surveys in that locality sufficiently to meet the present
wants of settlers in that vicinity, and this is rendered
eminently so from the fact that the treaty'of'l8533 by
which the United States became possessed of those lands,
gives to a large amount of the population of that distant
region a quarter section of land, which they have the right
to select in preference to other settlers. Hence it becomes necessary both for the half4breed and other settlers
that these lands. at least so far as they are occupied, be
surveyed at the earliest possible day and the five thousand
dollars asked for will do no more than to accomplish the

desired object.
additional appropriations were made in 1868, 1869 end 1870.

By l87S, about 37,595,000 of the State of Minnesota‘s 53,hh9,8h0
acres had been surveyed.

1:7.

sota was established at St. Croix Falls, Wisconsin, in l8h7.

The first local land office for sale of public lands in MinneThe following year this office was moved to Stillwater'in.Minnesota Territory.
Between 18h? and l8S0 the public lands sold in Minnesota Territory amounted

1 .,l82 acres. During the decade ending in 1358; the V3Ti0uS land Offices

in Minnesota sold about 5,859,000 acres of land. Of this total, aPPP°Xi"
mately h,ll3,000 acres were entered with bounty land warrants and the remainder sold for cash in the amount of $2,335,652- 3M0St 05 the 5a195'WeTe

at the $1.25 per acre minimum. ‘Between 1863 and 1855 theT9'WeTe 9:529
homestead entries covering 1,237,722 acres in Minnesota.

Until the year l87O all of the Dakota side of the ceded area was
within the Vermillion (South Dakota) Land District. In that office on
June 15, l868, one Joe Rollette made the first filing on public lands
in what is now the State of North Dakota by selecting the site of the
old trading post at Pembina.

In December, l870, a United States land

office was opened at Pembina. Up to June l, 1871, 28 filings had been

(0
\O

made in North Dakota, For the year ending June 1, l8'?2, there had been
61 entries, and up to June 1, 1873," a total of.‘ 761; entries on public
lands in Earth Dakote..

348. Rapid settlement of the ceded area took place after the railroads had reached the area. Before that time, the reputation of the
Redlliver Valley was varied. Its description ranged between such extremes as being "among the most fertile tracts of country . ..- . ever
seen" and a "country equal to any in the world" to a land that was sour,
cold, remote and partially uninhabitable.

Much was done by the railroads to promote the settlement and sale
of their lands. This included publicity, furnishing transportation to
inspect the land, and establishing model iams in Minnesota and Dakota...
Since the value of their granted lands was the basic value of a large
amount of the railroad companies‘ securities, it was hoped that these
efforts would aid in the sale of securities.

As one of these promotionschemes, Jay Cooke, the financial agent

of the Northern Pacific Railroad, brought together a party of well known

writers and influential newspaper men from large cities such as New York,

Chicago, Boston, and Springfield to make a trip from St. Paul to and

down the Red River Valley. The group was accompanied by James B. Power,
Deputy State Treasurer of Minnesota from 1861 to 1865, Chief Draughtsman
in the Surveyor-General‘s office for that state from l86S to 1871 and in

the land departments of the Northern ‘Pacific and Great Northern Railroads thereafter. As to their trip in 1870 from Ft, Aberorombie to

Pembina and return, Power wrote:

It was a fine outing, but as an advertising scheme it
did not prove a success, They had not foundtmuch to write
about; of the granted lands and the country directly tributary to the road, they had been over but a few square miles.
The Red River Valley, of'which they had seen the best, was
but a small fraction of the lands the companr had to offer
as security for its bonds. They had been over many miles of
level, unoccupied prairie, with its rich black soil covered
with lu riant grasses, but only at the homes of'some half
a dozen settlers along the banks of the river had they found
any signs of cultivation. They saw small gardens with fine
growing vegetables, but no fields, nothing in the way of
exportable crops, nothing to suggest promise of enough ship:ments to furnish traffic to the road for years to come. They
had been told stories of short summers, of long, terrihxy
cold winters, a climate in.which only the most hardy could
eke out atmodest living; they heard of an unsettled country
to the west of this, reaching to the Rockies, and also of an
unsettled Indian country - altogether, an area so vast that,
even if habitable, it could not be peopled for a century.
Such conditions did not seem to warrant any glowing prophecies
for the success for the new enterprise in railroading. This
was about the conclusion of the party as they talked it over
on their hdmeward journey, they would do their best to Show
appreciation of'the good tin. given them by publishing readable articles about the pleasures of the trip, natural beauty
of the landscape and so on, but doubted the advisability of
making any representations that would encourage settlers to

occupy the lands or capital to invest in the company’s
securities.

.After the nation recovered from the financial panic of 1873, movement

of population into the Red River Valley increased rapidly and reached its
height.in 1883,.

h9.

The plaintiffs introduced in evidence a study of 1,933 Warranty
Deeds recorded in the offices of'county Register of Deeds conveying lands
within the ceded area from the period when the first records were set up
in 1871 through l879, with the exception of Cass County, North Dakota,
in.uhich deeds were abstracted up to.August 3, 1878, and Traill County,
North Dakota, in which deeds were abstracted up to July 10, 1878,

These

transactions were between private parties after the land was originally

\-'}
‘(,3

acquired by homestead, sczript, preeniption, or railroad grant. They
are shown in ‘Petitioners’ ihchibit 239, pp. 159 to 395, and on the map,
Petitioners‘ Exzhibit 210.

These 13.933 sales were divided into three major groups. The first
group consisted of 1, 218 sales of unimproved non-railroad land totaling

229 .760 acres. The description * as being "unimproved“ was used in this

case to mean that no buildings had been erected on the land. Some of

"the land was ‘obviously improved by such things as breaking and plowing,

but it is not possible to determine the extent of such improvements.
Of these sales, 801; covering 157,882 acres were on the Dakota side of 1
the Red River and hlh covering 71,877 acres were on the Minnesota side.
The average price per acre for all 1,218 sales was $3.00. The average
size was 18"! a.cres. These tracts were select in the sense that they
were among the first locations selected by the settlers as settlement
proceeded into the ceded area. Many of then were along or near major
rivers and the railroads. A total of 1,110 sales, or 90%, were in the
six counties oi‘ Panbina; Barnes, Grand Forks, Traill and Cass in North
Dakota, and Polk in Minnesota. A substantial number were in the area
between the Goose River and the Sheyenne River. Nine of the 21 present
day counties wholly or partially within the ceded area had no sales.
About 70% of the transactions were made in the years 1876 to 1879 inclusive.

The second group consisted of 531 sales of unimproved railroad land
at an average price of $4.23 an acre. Practically no consideration was

given to these sales because railroad bonds could be exchanged for land

and there was no way of knowing the worth of the bonds at the time of

the transaction or their cost to the particular individual, making it
possible to determine with accuracy the true consideration for the
various sales.

The third group was 27 sales of improved non-railroad land totaling h,67? acres at an average price of $h.8S an acre. Because of their
limited number, these sales were not considered significant or reliable.

50. Two witnesses testified for the petitioners on the matter of
value. Dr. John.Lee Coulter of Washington, D. 0., is a consulting
economist and statistician who was born and raised on his father's farm
about 5 or 6 miles from East Grand Forks, Minnesota, within the ceded
area. He testified as to the “use value" of the ceded area, a concept

based upon the area's best and greatest potential use as distinguished
from actual use. Using principally censis figures and taking the prc=
9 *tion of wheat as the index, he estinated he “use value" of seven
Minnesota counties at from $h.76 to $5.55 an acre. The same type of
computation could not be made for counties on the North Dakota side of
the Red River because comparable census figures were not available, but
he concluded that land value per acre on the Dakota side was at least
equal to the values of corresponding counties on the Minnesota side.

Dr. Coulter conceded that his "use value" of about $5.00 an acre for the

ceded area was substantially higher than the fair market value.

The other petitioners"witness was'W. D. Davis of Gashland,IMissouri,

who has been in the business of managing and appraising farms. He used
three approaches in determining the fair market value of the ceded area.

in his Summation Approach, he assigned separate values for the various

soil groups as follows:

6 3015

   

   

Soil Group Acreag_e_ P.-V€1‘c?-$5 P91“ 3039
1, Fargo 2nSl85372 $1.75
2. Bear-den 1,620,111; $2.75
3., Ulen 1,883,036 551.50
L. Pelan 662,360 $21.00
5. Barnes 1,920,110 $3eOO
6. waukon 2ll,L:6-O $050
7 . Alluvial lH_. 6-00 32 . 25
8. Dune Sand ‘ 3,390 $0.10
9. Peat 869.196 $0610
Total 95799,9h0 $1.89

It was his judgment that the Summation Approach did not properly reflect
the fair market value of the ceded portion of the Red River Valley’ of the
North as of October 2, 1863, because in the addition together of the 6
values assigned to the various soil groups , a greater value resulted for
the whole than was justified by the i‘ar.:1-.._e._.
In his Capitalization Approach, Mr. Davis computed a theoretical

annual net income for the ceded areaiand used a capitalization rate of
18% in ‘arriving at a value of $365? an acre.

He considered this only as
a higher limit of value that could logically be assigned to the area at
that time.

Mr. Davis termed his Comparative Sales Approach as the most favored
approach to fair market value because, in his judgment, it more adequately

reflected the conditions -affecting the market at the time. Based _;‘~>:e:a.:~tm.

cipally on his study of the 1,933 recorded sales referred to in-.T‘."l.J."1C3-.L':i\.1‘-.“.‘:__.:’;"—__j Léfg,

he fixed the value under this approach at $1.75 an acre. His final 
clusion was that the fair market value of the ceded area was $1.75 an acre

as of October 2, 1863,

-.
‘ha

The average cost of selling and surveying land was considered to 1::-::

from 7.39 cents to 10 ceints per acre.

-6 302

The defendant likewise presented two valuation witnesses

F
‘_ of

Ernest S. Osgood, a Frofess

O

r of History at the University of Minnesota,
and Dr.'William L. Cavert of St. Paul, Minnesota, Director of Research
for the Seventh Farm Credit District. Both witnesses agreed that the
market value of the tract was the proper “yardstick” for measuring its
value.

Dr. Osgood testified as to his conclusions concerning the declining
fur trade in the area, the remoteness of the area from the settled
portions oi‘Minnesota, the difficulties encountered in building railroads
during the period, the lack of good transportation, the difficulties to
be encountered by farmers in this raw prairie country without sufficient
agricultural tools and equipment, the contemporary opinion concerning the
area, the desire to cross the area with roads and railroads not to settle

‘he area but for the purpose of reaching the mining areas to the west,

6 and the difficulties experienced by the railroads in selling its land

grants or otherwise obtaining capital to build in the area. He found all

these factors important in determining the fair:market value of the land

in 1863. He found no sales in any adjacent region which could possibly

serve as a basis of comparison. It was also his opinion that the land

‘was of little value to the Indians and that the Indians had a doubtful

claim to all but a small portion of the land sold. He concluded that the

tract had a market value as of October 2, 1863, of not more than 5 cents
anzacre.

Dr. Cavert, finding that there was no demand in 1863 for land in the
Red River Valley, concluded that the monetary value of the tract was very

small and that, therefore, ‘he amount paid'oy the United States was a fair

VI

and adequate price. He considered many of the factors which Dr... Osgood

found as affecting the ‘value of the land. Ie testified as to low prices i
paid for farm products in 1861 and the high cost of harvestmg grain
products during the l860’s. Dr. Cavert also testified that, it was his
opinion, the valuations placed on the tract by petitioners‘ witnesses
were unrealistic from an investors viewpoint considering the many years
which would be ‘required to sell all of the land, the expenses oi‘ surveys,
taxes and advertising and in View of an existing capitalization rate of
approximately 18%.

S2.

asof October 2, 1863 , was $3,369,726.00, or an average of forty-five

The fair market value of the 7,h88,28O acres of subject lands
cents per acre. The consideration of $609,h80.36 paid to the Red Lake
and Pembina Bands of Chippewas for said lands under the provisions of
the Treaty of October 2, l863, as modified by the supplemental Treaty

of April 12, 18614, was so grossly inadequate as to make the consideration

unconscionable .

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis Jc 0'}-Earr
Associate Comnzissioner

 

Eh. H. Holt _ M H
Associate Commissioner

-6 30h

