BEFORE EH’: INDIAN CLAB-IS CO2-E-EESSION

UPPER CHE-HALIS TRIBE, ET AL., )
Plaintiffs, 3

17., § Docket Noc,2,37 '
TEIEI utmmzn stones, 3
‘ Defencianto ;

Decided: June 25, 1936

FINDI1‘«‘1'3-S pg: FACT

 

The Commission makes the fo11ow:”u.ng findings of fact:

la. The mtition in  case was filed with the IncE.an C]-s.:‘='t_m_s
Connnjssion on Au.€ju.st 8,’ 1551, by the following named plaintiffs:
Ufgper Ch.e¢..alfm Tribe, Lo:-re? Chohalm '1‘:-ibe, Chehalis '1‘.-:‘i'i3e _., Satsop
Tribe, Hunptulip Tribe, Upper Chinook Tribe, Lot-re? Ch:3.noo?;<: 'I‘r.i.be_.,.
Chinook Tribe, Hoquiam Tribe, Clatsop Tioibe, Confederated 'I‘r:'Lbes of
the Cktebelis Reservation and portions and descend:-mts of such t3:’:E.ms
and bendso

The petition was amended by plaintiffs to omit “The Upmr Chinook,
LO‘!~3'€'3.“ Chinook, Chinook and Clatsop ‘l‘ribes“ as plaintiffs and added
“.E?.a.'_5.ph A. Heck, F?an!c F. Pete and I-hrrphy éecena, who are  of
the Chehelie ‘h.°i‘.:;sse and subordinate bends not members of the ConaJ-.

federated Tribes of the Chohalis Reservationo" The pleir:—.t5-f.:i‘_, L-hfz‘

Con_€:‘edez°a.ted lfibes of the Chehalis Reservation is organ:Z.zed and.

recognized by the Secretary of the Interj.o3:'o

2. Plaintiff Indians, together with the ”Clatsop" and "Chinook"

Indians, originally alleged joint and several occwpancy of certain

lands in what is now the State of'Hashington. In their amended petition
plaintiffs apparently allege joint ownership to the following described
land:

BEGINNIEG on the coast of what is now the State of Washington

at a point north of'Gray‘s Harbor, which point is now'called.
Copalis Rock; thence in a northeasterly direction to the head‘waters of the Copalis river in a northeastcrly direction to '
headwaters of the Humptulips river; thence in a general easterly
direction from the head of the Hunptulips river to the head of
the Uynoochee river; and thence in a southeasterly direction
from the headwaters of the Hynoochee river to the headwaters

of the Satsop river; thence in a southeasterly direction following the watershed between the Satsop river and Puget Sound to

the watershed between the Chehalis river and the Deschutes river,
and following the watershed between the Chehalis river and the
Deschutes river to a point east of'what is now the town of
Centralia, where the Chehalis river hends; thence in a south- .
westerly direction, following the watershed between the Newauknm
river and the Cowlitz river to the'Willapa'Hills; thence, following the northern edge of the'Willapa Hills to the Pacific Ocean
at a point now called Graylands, above the northern reach of what
is now called'Willapa Bay.

3. E. L. Crawford, of Salem, Oregon, is the duly authorized attorney
for the Confederated Tribes of the Chehalis Reservation, under contract
duly approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on March 21, 1951.
That E. L. Crawford, on July 5, 1951, made an assignment of interest of
said contract to Garland S. Ferguson, III, and Joseph'M. Creagh,
attorneys of Arlington, Virginia, and that said assignment of interest

was duly approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairso

Historical

 

h. The first white contact made with the Indians of what is now

the State of Washington occurred in 1592 when Juan de Fuca, a Spanish

h30

Captain, reached the Straits named after him. Vancouver in 1792 visited
the area and the Hudson Bay and Northwest Companies soon became active

in the region. Lewis and Clark; in 1806, mention the “Chilts"3 probably

Chehalis Indianso In 1821 Stuart loated the Chehalis along the coast

to miles to the north of the Columbia Rivera John Work, l82h, explored

the area and mentions the "Halloweena" tribe on B1ack:Lake and Black

River. Mofras, l8hh, reported the "Chekilis et Quinayat“ were located

on.Gray's Harbor and the Chehalis river. Hale, who accompanied the

United States Exploring expedition, 1838-l8h2, reported in l8h6 that
"Among the Tsihailish are included the Awaintl and Kwenaiwitl % % who

lived near the coast, thirty or forty miles south of Cape Flatter

%'% to“ Lt. George Mo Colvocoresses in 1852 wrote of visiting part of

the claimed area where he met the “Sachal“ tribe (probably on Black

river)° He stated:

"They are all of the wandering habit and change

-uLD

their residence in search of food, which consists principally of fish

and clans % t %. According to the Chief‘s account, the Sachals are not

more than forty in number, and live chiefly on the camas root and salmon,

which fish'they capture in great quantities in the Rivers Sachal and

\I E!

Q--:$1.
J‘\ l\°

Chickeless

:1:

The next day we arrived at the point where the Sachal

‘N.

and Chickelees unite % % %.

>'.<

who had eneanped three or four miles down the rivero * t On the

:',<

first day out he met some Indians of the Squamish Tribe % %. The
Indians who inhabit the shores of'the Arbor ZEray“s Harbo;7 call theme
selves Chickelees and their number is about 200 % % % Live principally

by fishing

>}<

* * they are much dreaded by their neighbors the Sac als

% n"

>1»:

and Saehayso

About dusk we had a visit from some Chenoohs,

)4 "§.’l'-7.

5.
Territory reported in 18149 that the “Quenoit and Chehaylis tribes live

Joseph Lane, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Oregon

on the Chehaylis river; total number about 300; well disposed, live by

(Def. Ex. 131). In.the report of the Secretary of

hunting and fishing."
War for 1855 is contained the report of 18514 by George Gibbs who was

Secretary of Governor Stevens‘ treaty commission on the Indians of Washington Territory and of the Chinook Indians it is stated that “Of the Lower
Chinooks there are six or seven settlements, most of which consist of

single families. The one on the Chinook tract is the largest, and amounts

to 66. Almost all these are, however, intermingled with the Chihales."

The report further narrates:

As this last named locality (Shoalnater Bay) has only recently

been much knotm, arather more particular notice of it is not
-‘.’- -9- 41%? <.w-nu-4-Pu-s-vav-\ kn‘!-F‘ rs-F‘  '5-vzvvr 7r\c31r:rorv¢3r3_ ff}

8-‘V-0 --F-I'|Ir“-4'---'#o it J-ah-hm:--nu.-n—-. L.-—— ‘I-.f £—‘—-‘J A4 _U

them (Chinoolcs) ; the country on the l:Ti,apah river to the
tribe of that name‘ and the upper end to the Chihalis .93 '3' '39
At present but few Indians remain here, the small-pox having
nearly finished its work during the past year.  '3' 

A11‘? rx-F’ ‘n1 nan

when -u.._... ‘ca--_.-..-.....--..p-...

The I~Ii_'D.opahs   * may be considered as extimt, a few
women only remaining , and these intermarried with the Chinooks
8.D:d Chihali5o

Part of the Chihalis Indians still frequent the bay for fish,
clans and omters, and, with the Chineolecs living there, are
employed by the 1-Jhites in taking the latter for market. '=r‘<'  ‘X’
They have some horses, and thk beach is a favorite race-ground.
The mmber of the tribe on Gray's harbor, and that part of the

river from the Satsop down, is supposed to be one hundred and
fifty, -1’: -)3 -2’:

There are s aid to be several other bands inhabiting the
northern branches of the Chihalis, the ‘-'.-=fhish.1<s.h, Ietynoochees, etc. ,
between *.~:hom and the 's~:h.ites there has been no intercourse whatever, and who here never been included in a estimates For
the present purpose the:; may, mltb. su..f;£'i,cie::.t probability, be
reckoned at three hundred. The Indians of the Upper Chehalis

0 9 In g .
will be considered an connexion ‘wit 1 tt:-so. Ccelits.

h3<

.:v. .3. .3.

The Cowlitz likewise, a onee numerous and powerful tribes
are now insignificant and fast disappearing. The few'bands
remaining are intermingled with those of the Upper Chehaliso
According to the best estimates obtained, the tee united.are
not over one hundred and sixty-five in number, and are

scattered in seven parties between the mouth of the Cowlitz
and the Satsopo (Def. Exo ll8)o

Agent Starling reported in 1852 that the "Coeelits and Chehalis or
Chicalees speak the same language and are much intermixeds" (Defo Exo
122). Spier, Def. Ex. No. 5, page 31, states of the village recorded
as Talal, at Ford's Prairie, as a "Hillapa”, that: "It is quite
possible that this group joined the mixed Chehalis-Conlits peoples
during the first half of the last centuryo“ Gibbs in 1856 prepared a
map of the western part of'Washington Territory in ehich he locates

the "Chihalis” on Gray”s Harbor and south of the harbor along the coast
between Shoa.eater Fay and Gray‘s Harbor; the "Han-nool-chie" are lea
cated near the m uth of the'Eynoochee river; the "Satsupsh” on the
southern part of the Satsop river; the “Satsall“ near the mouth of the
Black river and the Stakstaumish located northwest of the Sknokunchuek
See also the

river and north of the Chehalis river. (Def. Exo l?6)a

following maps shoeing tribelets on the various rivers north of th

I
-.....

O
~...r

Chehalis: Defo Exo l37, p. 56; Def. Ex. lll (Satsop); Def, EX. IO9
(Satsop); Sefo F . lO8 (Satsop, Wynootcheey Khiskah); Defo E30 55

{Gooalis, Oyhut).
6° 0n.March 22, l8Sh, Colonel U. T. Simmons was appointed special
Governor Isaac Stevens of

Indian Agent tor Washington Territory.

'Washington Territory instructed him to make a tour of the various tribes

‘within his district to prepare the Indians for future negotiationso
Simmons was further instructed to "organize small bands, not at present
united, by gathering them into tribes, having reference to their
general affinities, and by procuring the selection of head Chiefs & of
assistant qr lesser types, over the larger existing tribes you will
also direct the appointment of head and sub Chiefs, % * *. To these
respectively you will issue commissions of the forms enclosed, * % %.“
(Def. Ex. 31). Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs Charles E. Mix,
on August 30, 185k, notified Governor Stevens that the latter had
been designated by the President to conduct treaty negotiations wit
the Indian tribes in the Territory of Hashingtono {ix instructed
Stevens to "endeavor to unite the numerous bands, and fragments of
tribes into tribes & provide for the concentration of one or more of
such tribes upon the reservations which may he set apart for their

future homes.” (Def. Ex. 32).

7. In February 1855; Governor Stevens commenced treaty negotiations
at a point on the Chehalis river nigh Upper and Lower Chehalis, Cowlitz,
Lower Chinook, Quinault and Quests Indians. James G. Swan, a settler in
the area, who was present at the negotiations later eroteJZl8§Z7:

"Around the sides of the square were ranged the tents and wigwams of

the Indians, each tribe having a space allotted to it. The Coast
Indians were placed at the loser part of the camp; first the Chenooks,
then the Chehalis, Queniult and Quaitso, Satsop or Satchap, Upper Che»

halis, and Cowlitz. These different tribes had sent representatives

‘Q

to the council and there were present about three nundred and fifty of

them, and the best of feelings prevailed among them all.” (Def. Ex. 12).

Governor Stevens proposed to the Indians that they cede their lands

and move on to a single reservation to be selected for them but the
Indians were adamant for reservations in their respective territories.
The Upper Chehalis wanted their reservation to include hound Prairie
and Smith’s Prairie. The Lower Chehalis desired "three miles above

and below 'Wahnoolchie' for a reserve on the Chihalis.” Yowannus spoke
as head.chief of the Upper Chehalis while Tu-hehuuk spoke as head chief
of the Lower Chehalis, Chahmlat "a sub chief from the North side of
Gray's Harbor" expressed a desire to speak "of his land“ which he
wanted to retain. Tee-whit of "Satsop and Squatsen” wanted part of

his land for a.reserve. Later Anannata, "sub chief Upper Chihalis"
stated he spoke for the "Cowlitz and Satsop too" and that they would
give up all their land for a reserve from "the mouth of Black River
down to the lower end of Smith‘s prairie.” Yowannns stated “He have
finally settled on a place for these five bands, the Cowlita, Upper
Cowlitz, Upper Chehalis, Satsop, and Hountain Indians a remnant of the
Kwalk‘wi o quas).“ Tu-lehauk said ”we give up all our lands to you but
a small piece. we Khinai-utl speak a different language. All those
on this river from Wan ool chie down are willing to go together.”
Makean-hug "Eorth side of Gray’s bay” stated he wanted the Governor U0
look out for those north of the Chehalis and "they ae willing to give
up their lands and go over on the west side with Thule-huh. They have
four rivers on the Edrthern side which they give up.” The Satsop and

Cowlitz expressed a willingness to give up their lands and go on the

reserve asked for by the Upper Chehalis. Mo-te—lis, “a sub chief from
north side of Gray's Harbor” claimed to own a large country on the

north side of Grayis Harbor and stated hexqanted to remain there. Kish—
kok, Coelitz chief, said they were willing to move to the Satsop countny.
Yowannus, Upper Chehalis chief, stated the Governor had given him a

paper "on Er. Ford's recommendation. He gave up all the country that

had belonged to him andcane down to the Satchel, andxranted the place

to extend to a small creek below it, for the five or six bands he had
spoken of." Governor Stevens would not accede to the requests of the
Indians for the reservations they desired and no treaty was consummated.

As the council ended, Governor Stevens reprimanded Tu-leh-uk, of th

Loner Chehalis, for not controlling his Indians who had been drinking

the night before and firing their guns, and tore to pieces the paper which
had been given him to show that the governnent recognized him as chief.
(Def. Ex. 78).

8. James G. Swan in his book "Three Years at Shaoléhater Bay"

(1857) stated that George Gibbs in l8S§ had inquired of him the names of
the coast tribes. Swan said “the names given him by the Indians and by
which the tribes % % % are known" included the "Chenooks", the "Kar~wee—wee,
or Arts-milsh, the name of the Shoal water Bay tribes, which are now nearly
extinct, and are usually considered as Chenooks," the "Che—halis, on Gray's
Harbor and Chehalis River,” the "Copalis, on the Copalis River, eighteen
miles north of Gray's Harbor," and the ”Quoni-ult, at Point Grenville."
Swan narrates of a journey to "Quenuilt country“ which required passing

through the lands of the "Chehalis and Copalis tribes." Swan wrote in

K»;
O

\.

part ”Carcowan and his son Tleyuk, he chiefs of the Chehalis Indians
insisted that, as we would pass through their lands first, they were
entitled to let the horses andcanoes for the whole distance; but th
Copalis said.they had better horses than Carcowan, and.we must take theirs;
* * *." (Def. Ex. 12) Special Indian Agent Ford, western district of
'Washington Territory in his 1857 report wrote that the Upper and Lower
Chehalis tribes were embraeed.wiphin his district. He stated further
that: “The Lower Chihalis consist of the Clickquanmishs Satsop, and
Hanoolchie Bands, as well as the Indians living at Gray's Harbor, which
latter are the Lower Chihalis, properly so called.” Ford reconnended
a t,eaty be made with the Indians in his district and that two resorm
vations be set aside for them.« one upon the coast north of Cra;‘s Harbor
(Def. Ex. 33).

and one on the Chehalis river at the mouth of Black river.

Indian égent H. T. Simmons of'Tashington Territory in his annual report

dated June 30, 1858, also recommended a treaty be made with the Chehalis
Indians and.that it provide for two reserves. Simmons reported that
”Te«la~ek, the head man of the lower or salt water band, refused to sign
or allow his people to sign a treaty when Governor Stevens: some four

years since, attempted to treat with them. Since then, all3'with the
exception of this Teula-ek and some that he influences, have become eager
to sell their land. I have jnst1"eturned from.visiting these Indians.
At Ford Prairie I met and talked with the upper band, they expressed a
willingness to treat, and.specified the land they wanted set apart

reserve." Simmons further stated that “The Indians on the Satsop and at

Gray's Harbor expressed.their good wishes towards the whitess and their

willingness to no on a reserve. I mean all but those who are influenced

by Te-lauek, they will number about one hunoreda” (Defe Ex. 79)e The

S9739

nu-I-may--'

agent in l86O reported he had selected a piece of ground adaptable
to the wants of the Conlitz and Upper Chehalis trihes and upon which he
‘L c*~ r-3"‘ ' w.r’r1‘:, _ 1w_Cl'1. 1 "I d L these Indians nnlle tne rinoox an -oUer

 67).

the Secretary of the Interior with respeet to a proposed reservation
for the Chehalis Indians, The Commissioner stated in part as follows:

w % % It will be seen by Sneerintendent Hale's
July 3, 85 , that the country elei%ed.:g'those Indians is
o o " c t

larje eomnrlsine sore ISSOG sewers Tll“F; t“et L.,'
‘H \-\‘-J I.—l no in. , I —.4.¢. .->-.»J .. AA ‘
never been +T“7i€@ with, tut that the Govern ant has 81“o 0 L1‘ _- __‘ 0 F‘ _:_ ‘. '
Veved the freeter eart of it vitwrr? their eensent an. in

H I 0
their renonstrenees, and the eheieest po_tiens
Ol their lands have been OCCHplTd.t?'t5C'YhliCS vithont
rernneration to then, and without their Consent or having
relinquished their claim or rifht to ito The; have been thus
crowded out and excluded from the use of the lands claimed by
them and those which they heve heretofore .ultiveted for their
support. Thi has caused rneh dissatisfietien and threatens
serious trouble, and they nenifest a determination not to be
forced from what they claim as their eesntrj. After various
propositions mace to them by Superirfendent Hale, looking to
their removal and joint oeeupntien of other Indian reservations,
to all rnieh they strenuously ehjeetedj they expressed a willing»
ness to relinquish all the lands *itherto eleined by then,

provided the? shall not be renewed? and provided that a

L

OD’

SU.J..=_l""
enantitr of land shall he retained by them at the mouth

giver as a reservetieng

('1 on 4- , 9 -_ - n -_
The uenmissioner steted.the reservation Howie eeesist of about six

/ '2 t'‘'‘ _ __
lgaha tee meeretirr of

<.' '

the setting aside sf L322h,63 aeres as 3.?9SCTV?iiC3e

the Interior approved

l0. In.the report of the Secretary of the Interior for 1873 (Def.
Ex. 1?S) with.regard.to the Chehalis reservation it is stated theta.

The Indians for whom this reservation.was set apart,
being parties to no treaty, number at least 600, and con»
sist of the Chehalis, Chinook, Shoal Water Bay, Clatsop,
Hunptolops, Cakoklan, and Cowlitz tribes. The Chehalis
is the largest of these tribal remnants, and reside mostly
on the reservation, which contains about 5000 acres, % % %.

* t % These tribes when first discovered by the white man
were in peaceadhepossession of, and had the just right to,
all the country around Gray's Harbor, and from about ten
miles north of that bay, south sixty miles along the Pacific
coast to the mouth of the Columbia River. The rich valley of
the Chehalis and.all the country south of that valley to the
Pacific; the valley of the Cowlitz and all the country nest
of it to the Pacific; % % % in all nearly two million acres
of land, which our Government, wi hout treaty, purchase, or
contract, or right of any kind, save that'which is governed
by might, took from these weak, powerless barbarians and appropriated to her own use. After years of conplain‘-g, the
protest against the injustice of this wholesale absorption
of their country was so far heeded that in 1860 Superintendent
Geary directed to be set apart to them a tract of about 5,000
acres, (out of a country all justly their oHn,) vhich constin
tutes the present Chehalis reservation. The Ccelitz, Chinook,
Shoalawater Fay, and H.ntolops, have never recognized this re»
servation as their home, and refused to come and reside on it;
nor have they ever consented to receive a present oi’any kind
from Government, fearing it might be construed into a pauaent
for their lands.

a a % Chinoose, chief of the Huntolops, and ahent seventy of
his people arrived on the 11th, % % *. They declined taking
anything, saying that they had.come to talk about their lands;
that they never had taken any goods from the United States,
and that, though they were poor, the; wanted nothing frcm.the
Government but a paper that would enable them to hold their
land.against'white men who were threatening to drive them away
from it. I told them to come to the reservation with their
people, there there was plenty of room and good land for all.
They replies that was not their home; that they had always
lived at the mouth of the Euntolop and Chinocse Rivers; where
their fathers had lived and died from time imnenorial, and they
wished to live and die there; that they did not .nos how to live
away from salt water, where they could always get plenty of

U‘ \.l

fish and.clams. w w In 1879 the Indian Agent for'Nashington Territory in listing Reservations,
Tribes and Bands mentions the Chehalis and Shoa1'Water reservations,

and the Gray's Harbor Band, "situated on.Gray’s Harbor and tributaries,
about 60 miles southwest of Olympia, and consisting of 16h Indian men,
women and children." The agent further reported that "the Chehalis and
Shoal'Hater Bay tribes and the Gray*s Harber band all talk the same

(Def. Ex. 71). Remnants of the Chinook Bands and Lower

language."
Chehalis had a reservation established for them.of 335 acres by Executive
Order of September 22, 1866 (I Kapp. 92h). (See 79 C. Cls. 608).

11. In 1885 Indian Agent Edwin Bells reported that the Chehalis
Indians lived on the reservation on the Chehalis River where the lands
had been.allotted to them in scveralty but there being no way for them
to get patents he recommended that the executive order establishing the
reserve be so changed that the Indians residing thereon be allosed to
take the lands they occupied under the Indian homestead laws. Eells

also reported the folloningizribes or remnants of tribes and population

of each shichcame under the jurisdiotion of the Quinaielt Agency:

1885 1886

Hohs 61 61
Queets 85 85
Quinaielts 102 l0?
Chehalis S S
Oyhnt 3.5’ 36
Hoqniam. 16 16
Humptulips I6 16
Eontesano 16 16
Satsop l2 12
Georgetown 71 69

The Agent stated.that the last seven of the above tribes "have their

villages more or less distant from the reservations and.are widely

scatteredo % % % The Hohs are 25 miles north of the agency, the Georeem

L3

towns 50 miles south, and the Satsops E3 miles southeast of the agency§

\.l
.5J\

* *0" (Def. Exhibits 73, ?h; see also Def. Exhibits 76, 1733s Bells
reported in l889 that the Indians on the Chehalis reservation had.reu
ceived patents for their allotments. (Def. Ex. 75). In 190? the Secretary of the Interior caused an investigation to be made by the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs into the claims of the Chehalis tribeo The Commissioner
reported in part: "There is no evidence on file in the office that any

of the Indians belonging to the four bandsJ4including Chinook band§7
specified in the act of June 21, 1906, are now living, except the Chehalis, for whom a reservation has been set asideo If it be true that

some of their descendants are alive, they have married and internarried
with other bands until it would be impossible to determine with what

tr°be they affiliated in l8Sl." The Court of Claims found (Finding XXVI

 

in Dunanish, et al. v. United States, 79 C. Clso S309 ESL; 555, that
by Executive Order of Octoter 1, 1886 (I Kapp. 903); 3;7§3o63 acres of
the Chehalis reservation were restored to the public domain for In‘ian
homestead entry and h?l acres set aside for school purposes and that
thirty-six of the Indians on the reservation made homestead selections
covering all the land not reserved for school purposes.

Ethnological

 

12° Ho Se in Handbook of inerican Indians Bureau of American
.9

 

L

thnology, Bulletin 30, Part 2, includes the Chehalis group as part of

the Salishan family. Under "Coast Eialects” he lists the ”Chehalis

  

groun, embracing six dialects, which show considerable variationo fhese

‘-“H.

"name southward to Columbia r." (Def. Ex. 6h).

are the Quinault and Quaitso of N. W. Washington; the Hunptulips of
the N. Part of’Grays Harbor; the Lower Chehalis of Grays Harbor and
Shoalwater bay; the Satsop e. and n.e. of Grays Harbor; the Upper

Chehalis e. of Shoalwater bay; and the Conlitz on the river of that

“Chehalis“ according
to Hodge is: (BAE 30, page 2A1)

A.collective name for several Salishan tribes on Chehalistr.
and its affluents, and on Grays harbor,'Wash. Gibbs states
that it belongs strictly to a village at the entrance of
Grays harbor and signified ‘sand.’ There were 5 principal
villages on the river, and 7 on the H. and 8 on the s. side
of the bay: there were only a few villages on the n. end of
Shoalwater Bay. By many writers they are divided into Upper
Chehalis or Kuaiailk (q.v.), dwelling above Satsop r. and
the Lower Chehalis from that point down. The following subdivisions are mentioned, some of which were single villages,
while others probably embraced people living in several:
Chiklisilkh, Gloquallnm, Hoquiam, Hooshkal, Hunptulips,
Kishkallen, KliIr;r1irr1, Kl1.unai'tnms , Koalolrt, hie }:omi_n, Nooachhummilh, Ncohoovltch, Nookalthn, Kooeiatsks, Nooskoh, Satsop,'Henatohi,'Uhiskah. The Satsop speak a dialect disu
tinct from the others. In l806 Lewis and Clark assigned to
them a population of 700 in 38 l dges. In l90h there were
1h? Chehalis and 21 Humptulips under the Puyallup school
superintendent,'Uash.

Of the Lower Chehalis, Hodge wrote that the name is a collective term for
Salish tribes on the lower Chehalis river and its tributaries as well

as those about Gray's Harbor and the north end of Shoalwater Bay, Washington. Included within.this collective term, according to the writer, were
the Satsop, Wenatchi, Humptulip, and other small tribes. The handbook
states: "According to Ford (Ind. Aff. Rep. 1857, 3h13 1858) the term
is properly restricted to the Grays Harbor Indians, and Gibbs confines
it to those about the n. end of Shoalwater bay.” (B.A.E. 30, page 766).

The Upper Chehalis, Called Kwaiailk in the Handbook? were a Salishan body‘

on the upper course of the Chehalis river above the Satsop river and on
the Cowlitz,'Hashington and in "1855, according to Gibbs, they numbered

216, but were becoming analgamated.nith tie Cowlits." (B.A.E. 30, page

 o

Swanton, “The Indian Tribes of North America," Bureau of American
Ethnology, Bulletin lhS, (1952), states that ”Chehalis", meaning sand,
"was the name derived originally'aocording to Gibbs (1877), from a'village

at the entrance of Grays Harboro” Suanton states further that the Chen

halis'were intimately related to the Humptulips, Wynochees and auinalt
and that they were located on the “lower course of Chehalis Rivers especially on the south side, and on the south side of Grays Bay. In later

times the Chohalis oeoapiad territory to and abont'Nillapa :Shoaleater7

Bay that had formerly been held by the Chinooko" Snanton lists thirteen

villages for the Chehalis listing seven as being “earlier in territory

occupied by the Chinook" and six of the named villages are not within

+’oe

L’; .'.

the territory now claimed by plaintiffs. According to Snanton

village at rord‘s Prairie on the Chehalis River near Centralia was "far

130 in 1936 the University of Hashineton ruhl°cations in Anthrou

pology (V019 69 Ho. 1) published a study of “The Quinault Indians" by

ft

Ronald L. Olson. In speaking of the neighbors or the Quinault, Olsen

*1

stated that “The poples of the southern part or the Puget Sound region

‘were not wholly strangers, for the Quireult had intimate centacts'with

the several Shehalis tribes who occupied the territory between Grays

Harbor and the southern.extrenity of Puget Soundo” Olson found that the

II

tribe nearest to the Quinault on the south was the Popalis who “occupied

the coast from the limits of Quinault territory‘to the entrance to Grays
Harbor and a portion of North Bay within the harbor. In addition they
seem.to have claimed.the valley of the Ccpalis river. The largest village
‘was Noushal, now called Oyhut after the Chinook jargon name." According
to Olson, the Humptulips lived to the east of the Copalis tribe and held
the north shore of Grays Harbor from "somewhere near the middle of North
Bay eastward probably to Junction City. They had several villages on the
Humptulips river and perhaps claimed.the whole valley. They may have
held the valley of the Hoqniam.river as well, though the Hoquiam.may have
regarded themselves as a.distinct group." To the east of the Humptulips
lived the Wynoochee and Satsop tribes according to Olson who fhrther
stated: "It seems probable, however, that these minor tribes to the
south and east of the Quinanlt are but subdivisions of Lower Chehalis.
The lack of interest in tribal units and the particularism of the village
units (i.e., family groups) make it difficult to determine tribal affiliation with any exactness." Olson states that the "tsahe'ls (Chehalis)
tribe [the Lower Chehalis according to Spie§7 seems to have occupied the
district between the Chehalis river and the'Willapa river. They had
villages on the northern arms of Shoalwater bay as well as along the
southern shores of Grays Harbor." (Def. Ex. 52).

1h. Dr. Leslie Spier in 1936 had published a study entitled "Tribal
Distribution in'Hashington" (Def. Ex. 5) in'ehich he reviews the ethnological material on.the Indians of that state, ‘Eith respect to the

Chehalis Indians he wrote:

It is reasonably certain that Loser Chehalis should be
separated from Upper Chehalis. 'Hhat Swan wrote would seem at
first glance to imply no distinction (simply ”Che~ha~lis, on
Gray's Harbor and Chehalis River"), but we must bear in mind
that he was enumerating only the coastal tribes, hence this
must refer to the Lower Chehalis aloneo

However, there is another question whether the tribelets
north of loner Chehalis River are to be included with Loner
Chehalis. Earlier writers do include them, but Curtis and
Olson express a clear conviction that the grouping is artiu
ficial. Curtis, in fact, states that the name Chehalis was
extended by the Indians following white example, until it
came to include the people from'Westport “along the south
shore of Grays harbor, up Chehalis river to dynoochee river,
and on'Hhiskal river at the head of the bay.” Gibbs uses the
term in its extended sense, writing in 1856: "The Laser
Tsihalis, or those from the mouth of the Satsop down, including the villages on the Thishkah and'Wanulchi.z§}noocheg7,
and the few on Shoalrater Baypzgillapa Harbo:7, numbered int
all 2l?o...¢ There were formerly five principal villages
of the tribe on the [Eh.hali§7 river, seven on the north,
and eight on the south side of the bay Zevidently Gray’s
Harbor , and even within the recollection of American settlers
the population was very considerableo"

OQ

Spier then quotes A ent Ford (see Finding 8) and continues “It seems preferable then to map the trihelets north of the river separately from

Lower Chehalis propero” Spier stated it seemed advisable to map the

Humptulips,‘Nynoochee and Satsop, as distinct entities and cites Olson
(see Finding 13) and also Haeberlin and Gunther who wrote: “The Satsep,
sometimes regarded as a distinct tribe, are a band of Nisqually who
lived on Satsep Creek and intermarried with the Chehalis and Skykomish
% % 3'" ‘W; F. Tolmie in.writing to George Gibbs in 185E of a census
of the tribes living on the western inlets of Puget Sound states that

~ v§hG

the census of the "Nisquallies” includes “some scattered families lib -r

81),

-J

on the grand or mound Prairie," Of the Up or Chehalis,

' States.

 

Upper Chehalisiiiwaiailk, Stak-ta~mish (Stag-tube, “inland people") hu~so-lupsh, Ksu—teh-ni7o A distinction was
made between Loner and.Upper Chehalis by early writers which
it would be well to follow. Gibbs writes of the Upper Chehalis: “Their territory included generally all that drained
ty'the Tsihalis above the mouth of the Satsop," evidently
excepting the southwestern headwaters on which were the
Knalhiokwa. Harley writes: “The Staktomish inhabit the
country between Hisqually and Cowlits, and the headwaters of
Chehaylis river."

A division the Cloquallum, residing on the creek of this

‘ name above the Satsop River, were perhaps the Clickquamish

of Ford (185?) and by him assigned to the Lower Chehalis.

Gibbs (1856) also wrote: "A few miles to the north lies Gray Harbor

$7 it

-‘’-n g. — an an
“ C‘ I'\ o

_This also is in the country of the Tsihalis Indians who extended
up the river to the Satsop, where they were met by bands to whom.the name
of Upper Tsihalis is collectively given." (Def. Ex. 6).

15.

writes that she spent two sunmers nith the Upper Chehalis and Cowlitz

In ”Folk»Tales of the Coast Salish" (l93h) Thelma Adamson
Indians studying their folkrtales one year and the general culture of
the Upper Chehalis who were then living on the Chehalis reservation at
Oaksville,'Washington, the next year. According to Miss Adenson "The
Upper Chehalis call themselves Q'Uaya'sl. Approximately, their territory formerly extended along the Chehalis River from Chehalis to a
little west of Oakville. This territory embraced Oakville and Rochester
Prairies, large parts of Nina and Grand Hound Prairies, besides various
smaller prairies." Kiss Adanson further reported that one group of
Coalitz lived along the Hewaukum.River (which is just within.the area
now claimed by the {3heh.alis} .

(See also Def. Ex. l5l, transcr

hearings in Docket Io. 2l8,

   

Indian.aitnesses for petitioner therein testified that the

Cowlits occupied the Newaukum River Valleyizlro 13, lg and that the

SkDokumchuck:River was the boundary line between the Nisqually and

the Cowlitz ii‘:-., 20, 557. (See also Pl.  1 in Docket no, 218),

Miss Adamson also stated that she had made a small collection of

wynoochee and Satsop tales during a short visit to Montesano,'Washington, from informants living there and her Humptulip tales were obtained

iron a.“Hunptulip - Grays Harbor" woman living on the Upper Chehali

reservation and.who was married to an Upper Chehalis Indian (Def. Eng 55)»
16. Edward S. Curtis, in "The Horth American Indian" (1913),

reported with respect to the Lower Chehalis as follows: (Def. EX: h?)

The name Tshels, whence the Anglicised Chehalis, was applied

nu. .

by the natives to Point hanson, the projection of land at the

.3 - 'southern side of the entrance to Grays harbor, at wnich place,
near the site of‘?estpcrt,'Nashington, was a principal settlem
ment of the Lower Chehalis. From here the country along the
south shore of Grays harbor, up Chehalis river to'Hynoochee
river, and on Hhishkal river at the head of the bay, was occuu
pied by villages whose inhabitants used a common dialect, very
similar to that of the Shoaleater Bay people and to that of the
Quinaulto There formerly was no collective designation for these
bands, but, influenced by the white men's usage of the'word
Chehalis, the natives have adopted the term.Cht'shels, that is,
People of the Sandy Place. * % * Their activities were almost
altogether concerned.eith obtaining a livelihood from the seas

In describing the territory occupied by the Quinanlt tribes, Curtis states
it extended.along the coast from Hoquiam.river to the Quests river and
that “In the three settlements on the north shore of Grays harbor an
Hoqiamhb Humtulips, and Qiyaannhl (Demons point), a as well as in Kpels
(Copalis) on the coast, the language possessed a difference noticeable

to the Quinault proper. The variation however is negligible." it would

appear that Curtis includes the Hoquiazz, ‘rim-::ptu].ip and Copslis Indians

among the "Quinault tribes." In Dockets hos. 155 and 2&2, the Quileute

and Quinaliet cases before this Commission, Dr. Verne F. Ray, a recognized authority on the tribes of the northwest, testified for plaintiffs

therein (Tr. Sh) that the group generally referred to as Quinaielt, including the Queets and Copalis, constituted an Indian tribe; that the
Copalis'were a subdivision of the Quinaielt Tribe (Tr. 55); that it is
entirely possible that the Quinaielt Tribe included the people of the
Humptulips drainage and also the peoples of the Hoquiam and Whishkah
rivers alth ugh there was an uncertainty about this affiliation and so
their territory was not included in the Quinaielt claim (Tr. 55); that
the Quinaielt had a camp site at Damon's Point at Grays Harbor occupied
at times in the course of exploiting the resources of Grays Harbor
(Tr. 1L6); that the “peninsula or arm" on the north side of Grays Harbor
‘was Quinaielt territ ry within area claimed by the Chehalis herein),
Gr. lh8); that "if the Humptulips were a separate tribe, then we would
have a portion of Grays Harbor that they could use, or joint usage of

A Grays Harbor, and also we have the loser Chehalis on the south side of
Grays Harbor and they certainly used Grays Harbor" (Tr. lh9); that
fragmentary data suggests the Satsop were a tribe (Tr. 150) (Def. Ex.
1&6). Plaintiffs’ witness herein, Dr. Taylor, testified (Tr. 298

that there is now no living Satsop lncia .

Village Autoncmv

Q

‘.1

 

1? 0  t“:l O U.

on

h.sose a*iters have referred to Indians residin on
the ”3hehalis Tribe” or the "Lower Ch halis

Tribe” and the “Upper Chehalis Tribe,” they have done so on the

arbitrany basis of geographical location and not on a determination
that said Indians constituted a political unit, or units, or a land»
using entity, or entities. According to the best ethnologies concerning
this area, the_village actually functioned as the largest social grouping,
andxqas the only political and landausing unit. The village, thusg was
the only entity in this area.which could be designated a tribe.

18. Leslie. Spier in his "Tribal Distritution in Washington" (1936)
(Def. Ex. 5); had this observation to make with respect to the political
organization of the Indians in northwestern'Washington:

n a e The early historical literature contains an er~oneous
nunher of references to tribes, local groups, and the territories they occupied. Group names are legion; names appear
once and.vanish from the literature; variations of a name occur
uhich may or may not pertain to a single people; dialect and
local groups are cited equally as "tribes"; and so endlessly.

a a no

It seems unnecessary to become involved in the definition
of a tribe. In western'Washington the villages appear to here
been autonomous in a political sense but differentiated only
slightly in culture. Local groups of this kind have been
marshalled by dialect both by the natives and by ethnographersg
who forthwith refer to the dialect groups as tribes. Further,
present day informants have great difficulty in answering the
apparently simple question, to what tribe or tribelet do they
belong. This is because the majority combine in their immediate
ancestry affiliation with a number of local groups. That this
is not at all a recent phenomenon is evidenced by the early
accounts, which record the pride displayed in studied inter»
marriage with other peoples, especially in the aristocratic
classes. The upshot is that some of us have solved the dilemma
‘by describing these poples in somewhat arbitrary groups: groups
having some degree of community of speech, contiguous territory?
and.a name commonly used in the sense of a tribal designation.

Dr. Ruth Underhill in her "Indians of the Pacific Northwest“ wrote in

‘I

part that: "The Northwesterner had no idea of belo, inc to a large group,

”'“'‘LJ

6

‘J.

nith;?ellow citizens he had never seen. His country was his village of

plank houses, where he knew every person and was related to most of them.
% % * Then what of the powerful ‘tribes’ of which history has so much
to say? ihostly, they existed in the imagination of the whites. Ex~
plorers found a number of people in a river drainage all speaking the
same language and they called them a tribe, assuming that they had one
chief and one government, as so many tribes did in the Old World. Those
names, often the name of the river itself, have come down to us and many
are used in these pages. However, that is only for convenience." (Def..
Ex. 7).

19. Gabriel Franohere‘s "Narrative to the Northwest Coast of
America" (l8ll—l8lh) was published in l85h. Franchere in writing of the
Chinook Indians stated their politics were a simple affair with each
village haz'ng its chief who did not seen to exercise a great authority

over his ”fellon—citizens." Eranchere noted that “as all the villages
form so many independent sovereignties, differences sometimes arise,
whether between the chiefs or the tribes." (Def. Ex. l72). Dr. Verne F.
Ray, in his “Loner Chinook Ethnographic Notes" (1938), quotes Franchere
and states that his own informants "affirmed the existence of village
autonomy” [Enong the Chinooks, neighhors of the Chehali§7. Ray stated
further that his informants pointed out that able and well-liked or
greatly feared.chiefs “often exerted a wider influence % % %, though

!.‘.C“'

this extended power was strictly unollicial.” Ray added, however, that
"Such power of course must not he confused.with political control, since
it was of no signifZcan,e in.village internal affairs." (Def. Ex. 38).

Ray in "The Historical Position of the Lower Chinook in the Eative

Culture of the Northwest" wrote that "On the coast from Alaska through
California, and east to the Rocky Mountains, the village was the basic

political unit with very few exceptions. Villages were strictly antonom

mous and the chief‘s power was limited to the village that he representedo”

(Der. Exo 1&1; see also Def. Ex, 16). "With respect to the Conlitz

0

Indians, also neighbors of the Chehalis, Curtis in "The North American

Indian" (l9l3) wrote: "Allied by speech and by proximity, the people of

these villages were not politically united by a tribal organisation.”
Curtis also states “The tribal organization of the coast Salish was very

loose, Indeed it frequently was quite lacking, each small community

necessities of'war and subsistence or as the social instinct demanded.

(Def. Ex. h?)e The Coast Salish, according to Harian'N, Smith (Indians

of the Urban Horthnest, 19h?) had no political organization through which

they could band together for protection. "deighhoring villages did sometimes function as a single economic unit within thich exchange of goods
regularly took place," according to Kiss Smith, but she added: "Yet

polit'cal autonomy was rigidly maintained, % %-%.”

Population

 

200 Lewis and Clarkrin 1806 reported the ”Chilts" to have a popuu
lation of 700 (Def. Ex. 3h); the Clamoitonish, (on the south side of

Gray‘s Harbor?) 260, (see hodge‘s Handbook Vol. I, p, 715); the Potashees,
north of the Clamoitomish, numbered 200 souls (see Handbook, Vol.

Do 293), and the Pailsk, apparentxy the Copalis River Indians, at 200

J.

souls (see Handbook, Vol. I, p. 3&3).

h 323

there were lh00 "Chihleesh" Indians forty miles north of the Columbia
river. (Def. E-:c.‘l30). Farnham in 1839 reported 700 "Chikelis and
Puget‘s Sound" Indians. (Def. Ex. 83, p. 99). Hale reported as of l8h0
that the "Tshihailish," including the "Kwaiantl” and "Keenaiwitl" Indians
had a population of 2,000. (Def. Ex. éi, p. 212). D1}. w. F. Tolmie

who took a census in l8hh found: “Stah»ta—mish % % % 20? % % % living
on Cowlitz Prairie between Chute river and Naeakum." (A census of Inr
dian bands "on Pugets Sound and the Inlets, Chehalis River, etc. Feby.
l8Sh," accompanying the above census does not include the Staktaimish).
(Def. Ex. 81, pp. 12-13). In l8Sh, Gibbs estimated l00 Chehalis located at Gray's Harbor and the Lower Chehalis river; he also estimated
200 on the northern forks, Chehalis river and the Cowlitz and Upper
Chehalis whom he reported to be located on the Cowlitz river and the
Chehalis above the Satsop river to number 165. Of this group he
stated "the two have become altogether intermixed." (Def. Ex. llb).
At the time of the treaty negotiations of l8S§ with the Chehalis and
other Indians a census taken showed 217 "Lower Chehalis” and 216
"Upper Chehalis." (Def. Ex. 72). Dr. Herbert G. Taylor, Jr., anthro~
pologist, expert witness for plaintiff, estimated that the Chehalis

numbered "around l,S00 to 2,000 people, possibly even more" in aboriginal tires prior to the "great smallpox epidemics of the l8l0‘s and

the so-called intermittent fever epidemics of 1829 and 1830.” (Tr. 77-78).

Location of ?illages

 

214 The exact location.of the villages in the claimed area in.which

the Indians were living at the time of the allegcd.taking of their lands

is not ascertainable from theeavidence. Apparently in the early l850‘s

there were villages at or near the mouths of the Humptulip, Hoquiam,
'Wynoochee and Satsop rivers'where village-tribes of the same names
resided, a village of the Upper Chehalis near Porter'Hashington, at
Ford's Prairie, and a village or villages of the Lower Chehalis at

Gray's Harbor probably near Eestport on the south side of the harbor
(according to the rough draft of the council notes in 1855 there were

82 Lower Chehalis proper and 120 on the "north side” of the harbor which
probably would include the Satsop, Humptulip,'Wynoochee and Hoquiam.river

The °”fioulty in attempting to locate the residences of the

Indians).
Indians in the claimed area during the period involved is further complim
cated by the movement of the Chehalismspeaking people into the Shoa-m
‘water Chillipa) Bay area and into the Willipa Hills section south of the
lands new claimed.by the plaintiffs. Dr. Taylor, plaintiffs‘ ethnologist,
testified.that in the early" art of the 19th century the Shoalwater
Chinooks were virtually destroyed and the'Willipa Indians seared to have
been.destroyed by smallpox, intermittent fever, and other "blessings of
civilizationo" As a result “The Chehalis moved into areas formerly
occupied.hy the'Uillapa and the Shoaleater Bay Chinooks." Taylor testified “The area around'Hillapa and Shoalwater Bay eas occupied by the
Chehalis between l82O and 1850 or '60. The area of the'Hillipa Hills
was occupied at that same time." (Tr. 95, 96; see also Pet. Ex. l2 m
Taylor's Map w broken.shading showing movement)e Dru Taylor also testiw
fied that seven villages are recorded for the Chehalis Indians in this

“.1.

territory'which'sas prior Chinook country and thab ”Inferentially there

h 325

were more, but we only have the names of these seven." (Tr. 200). In

the case of The Chinook Tribe and Bands of Indians v. The United States,
Docket No. 23L,, before this Commission, Dr. Taylor testified (Tr. 65,

69 therein) that "in the period between 1800 and 1850 the Lower Chehalis

moved into the Chinook area after the Chinook died out." In that case

Taylor further testified to a movement of the Upper Chehalis into the
Cowlitz area. Plaintiffs’ expert further testified in the Chinook case

that he did not include the area into which the Chehalis expanded as

Chehalis territory for two reasons: "Firstly, because the base year

1800 seemed a much better year to use than 1850, before the white man

began to work his will on the Indian. Secondly, because the tribal

groups themselves maintained the tradition of those belonging to the
previous owners." (Tr. 69-70, therein). Pr. Verne F. Bay in his "Lower
Chinook Ethnographic Hotes" also noted this movement and wrote that

"Before 1850, when the Chinook numbers were already thinning, Chehalis

began to drift into the northern bay region. This resulted in a great

confusion among early writers as to what people held this territory.

But Chinook chiefs continned.to represent the various villages and to
the native mind it remai ed Chinook territory without question."

Land Use and Sustenance

The natives

22. The region appears to have been one of abundance.

obtained.their daily needs mostly from.the sea and.rivers, fish and shellmai

fish being the . ‘n source of food. Of the Lower Chehalis, Curtis wrote

that "Their activities were almost altogether conoerned.with obtaining

h 32(

a livelihood from.the sea." This diet, of course, was supplemented.by

roots and berries but these were close at hand and easily obtainable

by the villagers. Venison was the principal

Hunting was not important.

flesh food according to Curtis who also added: "Generally the tribes

living close to the shoreline were indifferent hunters, the ease with

which sustenance could be drawn from the sea and the rivers bei
sufficient to prevent them from engaging extensively in the more
arduous pursuit of land game." The Upper Chehalis, Curtis points out,
living in the vicin‘ty of the foothills, however, became excellent
hunters. (Defe Exe b7). Potatoes seem to have been raised by the
Indians in this area even prior to 1850. There is evidence of common
use of parts of the claimed area by Indians living outside the area (see
Findings 1;, 5, lb, 15, 16). In any event the Indians of the claiJ:r:ed
area depended mostly on marine life for sustenance and this in turn
resulted in sparse use of other portions of the region not close to their
villages.

23. The Commission, based upon the foregoing findings of fact
and all the evidence of'record, concludes that within the area claimed
by plaintiffs there was aboriginally a number of autonomous villages,
or tribelets, which were known as the Copalis Tribe, the Hunptulip
Satsop Tribe, the Lower Chehalis (proper) Tribe, the Sachal
Staktanishczgpper Chehaln§7 Tribe and possibly other village
The Commission further finds

tribes on the Hoquiam and dyncchee rivers.

that there is no evidence that aboriginally and pri r to 1855 there was

'1ands within the

a.mergcr of the village-tribes in the claimed area into either a "Chehalis
Tribe” or into two tribes —- the "Lower Chehalis” and the "Upper Chehalis."
2h. The Commission further finds, based upon the findings of fact
herein.made and the record as a.whole, that these village~tribes whose
main source of subsistence was fish and shellfish were making but limited
use, if any, in 1855 of the larger area now claimed, except in the ima
mediate vicinity of their villages which areas of exclusive use and
occupancy are not shown and that the claimed area aboriginally supported
three or four times as many Indians as may have been located therein in
1855. The movement of Chehalis Indians into the Shoalwater Bay and Willapa
Hills regions between l820-1850 also limited the use and occupancy being

made of the claimed area, The Commission finds also that other Indians

"1

from without the area contended for by'pl i

ainuiffs CibhCT used and occupied

area or claim parts of said area, (Findings h, 5, lb, 15,
16) and that the Upper Chehalis were by 1855 intermixed'with the Cowlitz
and Hisqually Indians and the Lower Chehalis proper were becoming intermingled.with the remnants of the Chinook Indians. A

25. The Commission finds that there is no substantial evidence that

plaintiffs are the successors in interest of the village—tribes mentioned

in Finding 23. The proof does not show that Indians from the Satsop,

Wrnoochee

I

Humptulip, , Lo:-rer Chehalis (proper), Sachal, or Upper

Chehalis tribes were removed to the Chenalis reservation. The proof does
not show from.what predecessor tribes or bands "The Confederated Tribes

of the Chehalis Reservation” were organized or formed. There is proof

\

that Chehalis Indians were upon the Chehalis reservation but there is
also substantial proof that the Humptulip tribe refused to go on the
reservation, that the Crraj-;‘s Harbor Band (undon‘otedl-3; Lower Chehalis)
did not go on the reservation and also that the Satsop (of whom there
is testiinorxgf that there are none livim today) were livim off the reservation and under the jtrrisdiction of the Quinaielt agency.

Chief Corezzis sioner

Louis J . 0'1‘-Iarr
Associate Cogrmissioner

   

1*-.7; . IL, Holt

1:1:-—

Associate Co:mi.ssioner

   

