1 Ind. c1. Comm. 546 . ’ 545

5

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TEE CREEK NATION,

Petitioner,
Iv. Docket No. 21.

THE UNITED STATES,e

\~..ui"h-‘"5--J\g.a¥‘~q..uJ\..p"h.pf‘~nuJ‘\...nf

Defendant.

\

H _JEE-4 335
IOPINION or COMMISSION

PER cuazgm. On January 5, 1951, a group of Creek Indians,

designated as the "Perdido Friendly Creek Indian Band of Alabama

_ and.Northnest Florida," filed a motion in the above-entitled cause

for leave so iile a y:

ition of intervention, which accompanied
the motion. -Thereafter, and on.April #, 1951, the same petitioners,
who will hearafter be referred to as the Perdido Band, filed an
amended motion accompanied.by another, considerably changed petition

of intervention, and a hearing was had on the amended motion and the

petition attached thereto, on.April 18, 1951.

The Perdido Band, according to the statements contained in the
amended motion and the petition accompanying it, is composed of
descendants of members of the Creek Nation of Indians who remained
in Alabama, Georgia and.North Florida under the treaties of January h,
1826 and March 2%, 1832, between the United States and the Creek ‘
Nation, ‘Neither the petitioner, the Creek Nation, nor defendant

denies these statements.

'1 Ind. C1. Comm. 546 _ — 547

$23

E16 petition of intervention also states that enrollment in
the Pelfdido Band is limited to those Indians who are descendants
of members of the original Greek Nation, and this allegation is

not qussti oned.

5
J’

The Perdido Band is not asking for an award independently of .

that sought in the above case; on the contrary, they are supporting

the pending claim. What they are demanding is that they and all

other descendants of members of the original Greek Nation be recognized as having the right to participate in anyaward that might be
made in the above case even" though they are not enrolled as members

Of the petitioner, Greek Nation, as now coast-it1.:L..«ecL-,

without going into the history of the Creels Nation in much
detail, it may be stated that this ‘tribe was. one of the larger’
Indiantribes and originally occupied a large territory in Georgia,
Alabamaand F1orida.-- On January 21+, 1826, 7 Stat. 286, the Creek .
Nation concluded a treaty with the United States by which it ceded
an area of its domain located in Georgia and lying on the east side

Of the Chatahoochee river. A portion of the tribe wished to move

' W93‘? Of the liississippi river and the treaty provided (Art. 6) for

a “deputati on of five persons‘ to select a country west of the”
river as a. home for that part of the Creek Nation desiring to move
west. The country was selected and the selection confirmed by

treaty, as will be shown later. Treaty of Febr. 114-, 1833, 7 Stat.
1417.

la 4.3‘:-NLE-0‘

u. 3 ..

mse:-en 21;, 1832, 7 Stat. 366,_'ey' treaty of that date, the
Greeks ceded_°a1l their land, East of the_M18S18Si_'ppi river“ to the

United States. This treaty contained this provision (Art. XII);

  Jame United States are desirous that the Greeks
, should remove to the country west of the Mississippi,

- and Join their countrymen there; and for this purpose
it is agreed, that as fast as the Greeks are prepared
to emigrate, they shall he removed at the expense of
the United States, and shall receive subsistence while
upon the journey, and for one year after their arrival
at their new homes--Provided however, that this article

shall not be construed so as to compel any Creel: Indian
to emigrate, ‘out they shall be free to go or stay, as A

t Z please.‘ Italics added .

Article 11 thereof required the Umlted States to survey the ceded

a.rea._e.nd allowed "ninety principal chiefs of the Creek tribe _to

7 select one sectionueach, and every other head of a Greek family to

select one halfsection each, which tracts shall be reserved from
sale for their use-for a term of five years, unless sooner disposed

of ‘by them.“ _Provisions were also made for takings census of the

persons making selections and for making selection of twenty sections

for the ‘benefit of orphan children of the Greeks. ticle III authorized the sale of the selections, and Article IV provided;
hit the end of five years, all the Greeks entitled.

to these selections, and desirous of remaining, shall
receive patents therefor in fee simple, from the United

States.“

Article XII of this treaty quoted above discloses the desire of the

United States to move all Creeks nest of the Mississippi river, and

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 546 - 549
.. 1; ..L

as an inducement to move, agreed to pay the expenses of removal,
provide subsistence during removal and for a year after their are
rival test. However, such removal was not compulsory as to individual Creeks, for the article, as shown above, contained the
proviso hthatpthie article shall not be construed‘ so as to" comoel
any Greek Indian to emigrate, but they shall be free to go or stay,

as they please."

rhe treaty of Febr. -11:, 1833, 7 stat. 1417; confirmed the

selectioncf land authorized by the_1s26 treaty, (Art. VIII) , and

Article III thereof provided_-for a patent in fee simple to be issued
‘to the "'iOreek1Hation." {Article IV made it unmistakably clear-that
the land ceded under this treaty in what is‘ hetfoklahema was -for the

benefit andsusewofh the entire Creek people, ‘for it provided;

_  _,'It is hereby mutuallyunderstood and agreed between
 the°ipa.rties to this treaty, that the land assigned to’ the
Muskogee Indians, by the second article thereof, shall be
‘taken and considered the property of the whole Huskogee
‘. or Greek nation, as well of those now residing upon the
‘ ‘land, as the great body of said nation who still remain on
the east side of the Mississippi: and it is also understood
“and agreed that the Seminole Indians of F1oride,'whose removal to this country is provided for by their treaty with
the U. S. dated may 9th, 1832, shall also have a permanent
and comfortable home on the lands hereby set apart as the
country of the Greek nation: and they (the Seminoles) will
hereafter be considered a constituent part of said nation,
but are to be located on some part of the Cree}: country by
themselves--which location will be selected for them by
the commissioners who have signed these articles of agreement or convention.“ (II Kapp. 390).

The 1826 treaty did not, at least by its terms, contemplate a

removal of the entire tribe seat, but the 1832 treaty discloses a

'1. ~s.-:. _-. ..-.: in .3 

., 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 546 I  ‘ 550

‘K.

-54.

purpose torecognize tho's_e'who-migrated to the west- as the main
governing. body of the tribe since provision was made for enabling
individual chiefs and heads of families wishing to do so to remain I
east and select-_ tracts in their aboriginal land which was reserved
for that purpose in said. treaty of 183é.i_ iihis purpose was confirmed
by the treatycf 1833,_which was made with the Greek Nation at Fort
Gibson in Indian Territory, and in which the territory coded by the
United States was assigned to the whole Muslrogee or Greek Natl on those residing east and those residing west of the Mississippi.

X Thereafter, all dealings of the Federal Government were made with

the Greeks in Oklahoma, and we find no treaties, contracts or other

tI‘8.-neactions with those members of the tribe who remained east_,jor

that dei‘endant.ever recognized those remaining east as the Creek

a jhation.‘

b _There are other instances by which the United States‘ recognized‘
the tribal government oi‘ the Greeks in Oklahoma, notably the not of 1
April 26, 1906, 31% Stat. 13?, section 28 of which “continued in ‘full

_force and effect for all purposes, anthorizedby law‘? thecreek.

. tribal government. We are of the opinion the petitioner in this case

has the exclusive right to prosecutethe claim here asserted, In
fact, the Perdido Band does not really question the right of petitioner to maintain the action, for, as before stated, it asked that

the members of the Creek Nation be awarded the amount prayed for,

it insisting, however, that the award be for the benefit of all Creel:

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 546   ' , 551
¢."—»". 6 3‘

descendants and not confined to; those enrolled under. the various

agreements with the creek Nation, confirmed by Acts of Congress.

This Commission decided in the Loyal Greek case, Docket No. 14,
and the ‘Eastern Cherokee case, Docket No. 21%, that an Pidentifiable .
group,” under the Indian Claims Commission Act, must have a common
claim, and theta common suit for individual claims does not create L

an identifiable group. It is plain from the statements in the

‘ amended motion and the allegations of the petition accompanying it

that the Perdido Band has no common claim, a.nd is therefore not an

‘identifiable group“ under said Acts.

Furthermore, the Perdido Band is in rea.'Lity,.asking us to .de-}

termine the individual Indians who may participate-in any award that

may be made. They pray in their petition that the members of the
Perdido Band be declared entitled to share in the recovery or that

a Oommiasi on be created to make a roll of the living descendants of
the original Greek Nation in order to determine who shall be entitled
to share in any recovery. Counsel for applicants mistake the powers
of the." Indian Glaimscommission. The Act authorizes us to determine
claims of" Indian tribes, bands or identifiable groups; We have not
power to determine the membership of the grmnas who may successfully
prosecute their claims, for that is an administrative function over

which we have no_.i tontrhl.

.. .. q..n_.'. -.‘br

-;.e:..

l Ind. C1. Comm. 546
.. 7 .;
For the reasons stated above, the amended motion of the Perdido

Band must be denied.

The Commission now has under advisement for decision only the

issue of fact and-law relating to the petitioner's right to recover.

, (Sec. 22( ) of Rules of Procedure). Ordinarily, we would postpone

the determinati on of the anended motion of the Perdido Band until
after we,_had_ determined that issue,  for fear longer delay might
cause embarrassment to the Band because of the expiration of. the
timed forufiling claims on August 13,_1951, we concluded an earlier

determination of the amended motion proper.

Dated this nth day of June, 1951.

552

