7 Ind. CI. Com. 6T5 ; 708

BVFORB THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE SAC AND FOX TRIBE OF INDIANS
OF OKLAHOMA, THE SAC AND FOX
TRIBE OF MISSOURI and SAC AND
FOX TRIBE OF THE MISSISSIPPI IN
IOWA, and DON WHISTLER, et al.,
and COLUMBUS KEAHNA, appearing
as the representatives of and
on the relation of the CON—
FEDERATED OR.UNITED TRIBBS OF
SAC AND FOX INDIANS and as
representatives and on behalf
of all of the MEMBERS thereof,

Petitioners,

vs. Docket No. 83

THE UNITED snares or .A}ERICA,

\./\_J\.J\_./\/N./\~./\~—/\—/\_/\u/%~/\_/N../\_/\_J\./\.J\./\./

Defendant.
Decided: June 12, 1959
Appearances:

George B. Pletsch, Attorney for
The Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians
of Oklahoma;

Stanford Clinton, Attorney for ‘
The Sac and Fox Tribe of

Missouri;

Lawrence C. Mills, Attorney for
The Sac and Fox Tribe of the
Mississippi in Iowa;

Louis L. Rochmes and Margaret H.
McDowell, t

ttorneys for Petitioners

Curtis C. Shears, with whom.was
Mr. Assistant ttorney General
Perry N. Horton,

ttorneys for Defendant

OPINION gg ;§.:_ com-nsslox

WITT, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6'35 709

up

On November 3, l80h, the United States concluded a treaty of cession
at St. Louis, Missouri, with certain chiefs of Sac and Fox Nation in which
the latter tribes ceded and relinquished forever to the United States all
their right, title and interest to a vast area of land officially designated as Royce Cession SO (7 Stat. 8h). Royce Cession SO embraces lands
lying adjacent to, and.bordering both sides of the Mississippi River;$/
They are located generally in southwestern'Wisconsin, in practically all
of the Illinois Territory northwest of the Illinois River, and in a sizeable portion of northeastern Missouri situated between the Mississippi
and Missouri Rivers.

The petitioner, Sac and Fox Nation, or Confederated Sac and Fox and
its constituent bands, as the representative of and successor in inter-est to those menbers of the Sac and Fox Tribes who negotiated the l80h
treaty, seeks additional compensation for its ceded interest within
Cession 50, which claimed area includes all of Cession 50 west of the
Mississippi River and all east of the Mississippi River except for a
large section in northeast Illinois. Petitioner contends that, at the
time defendant acquired the lands in Cession 50, it had either a recognized or reservation title to the claimed area, or it held a perfected
Indian title through exclusive use and occupancy.

The Commission on previous occasions has passed favorably upon the}
legal capacity of the petitioner to present and maintain claims of similar
nature under the Indian Claims Commission Act; and in the instant case we

find no reason to reach a different result. In addition we find that the

1/ Commission's Finding 3.

S

710

Sac and Fox Eation, as presently constituted, is the proper representative
of and successor in interest to those members of the Sac and Fox tribes
who'ceded their interest to the United States under the l80h %ac and

2
Fox Treaty:-/

In making the above finding that the defendant acquired all of

petitioner’s interest, whatever it may be, in Cession 50 under the l80h.

t'Treaty, the Commission is of course upholding the validity of this instrument. The Commission is well aware of the stipulation entered into between
the parties on May ll, 1953, with respect to the validity per se of the

130k treatyaé/F We think the stipulation is ineffective in this regard and

not binding on the Commission; the reason being that any question concerning

,the validity of a properly executed treaty is not open for ordinary judicial

inquiry under any law or statute, or as regards the Commission under any of
the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act. A treaty is fundamentally a political act initiated.by Executive action in negotiating its
terms, and then followed by Congressional approval.through Senatorial concurrence or ratificationa£/ It is the latter act of ratification that imparts legal effect to treaty and makes it together_with the Constitution

hand all laws made in pursuance thereof the supreme law of the land. A

properly executed treaty is binding on the courts,'and only its interpretation and not=its validity is open for judicial inquiry. (An exception not pertinent here lies when there is a conflict between a treaty

‘§/ Commission‘s Finding 5 - ". . . that the treaty of l80h of itself has no
validity but . . . that the treaty set forth in paragraph 20 of the defendant’s answer validated said treaty of l80h . . .“

_§/ Article 2, Section 2 - U. S. Constitution - . . . He (President) shall
have Power, by and with the Advice and Consent of the Senate, to make
Treaties, provided two thirds of the Senators present concur.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 '*_ _ , r 711

provision and constitutional rights and guarantees). There are numerous
cases in support of this view, some of_which are cited in the Commission's
Finding h.-Petitioner’s chief complaint against the validity of the l80h Treaty
is centered around the claim that the Sec and Fox chiefs who negotiated

the cession lack authority to convey the_tribal interests in Cession S0

or else they were subjected to undue influence and duress by the defendant

6 in procuring their signatures to the document._ In any event similar contentions with respect to the execution of other treaties have been rejected

~vby'the courts. Appropos to the instant case is the opinion of the Supreme

.Court in the case of Fellows v. Blacksmith, Cl857),.lS L. Ed. 68h, 685, in

which the following is stated:

J:”An objection was taken, on the argument, to the validity of
the Treaty, on the ground that the Tonawanda band of the Seneca
Indians were not represented by the chiefs and head men of they
band in the negotiations and execution of it. But the answer to

F this is, that the Treaty, after executed and ratified by the
proper authorities of the government becomes the supreme law of
"the_land, and the Courts.can no more go behind it for the purpose
of annulling its effect and operation than they can behind an Act

..,of Congress.” ‘ i

This Commission, as do the courts, considers all treaties as_valid
-and binding even though the Commission may at times look behind a treaty ,
to consider the circumstances under which it was accomplished. But this
is only for the limited purpose of determining whether a cause of action
has been spelled out under_Section 2 of our hot, and if we should find
that a treaty has.been executed under such circumstances, such a finding

5/

has no effect on the actual validity of the treaty;“ Congress alone has

 
  

l0 9 Sec. “. ._. (3) claims which would result if treaties
. . . were revised on the ground of fraud, duress, unconscionable
consideration, etc. .“ ' ‘

 

 End. Cl. Corn. 675’ ’ I 713

the authority to abrogate or invalidate a treaty in whole or in part,
and as far as this Comnission can determine Congress has taken no steps
to invalidate the Sac and Fox Treaty of l80h.i It is therefore the
Commission's view that the l80h Sac and Fox.Treaty is a valid treaty,
and on the effective date of that treaty, which is the "date of taking“
in this case, the Sac and Fox Nation ceded its interests in Cession 50
to the defendant. ‘A

‘we now reach the qnestion of petitioner's claim of “recognized title”
to the claimed area. According to the petitioner recognition of Sac and
Fox interest in the subject lands was accorded by the United States under
the provisions of the Fort Harmar Treaty of January 9, 1789 (7 5tat- 28)
and/or the Greenville Treaty of 1795 (7 5tat- H9)The Fort Harmar Treaty of January 9, 1789 H35 Concluded Vith Six
Indian tribes, the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pottavatomie and

Sac tribes; Just four years before the United States had concluded a

i'treaty'at Fort McIntosh with the first four tribes by'which certain

boundary lines were established between the United States and the aforenentioned Indian tribescé/’ According to Article I of the Fort Harmer
Treaty its avowed purpose was “to renew and confirmall the engagements-W
they (the Wyandots, Delawares, Ottawas, and ChipP€V35) had made ”ith

the United States of America, at the before mentioned treaty (Fort
° 7/

McIntosh), except so far as are altered by these presents.”' ‘There

then follows a renewal and reaffirmation of the former boundary lines

_ tat. l - Jan. I, 17 S: "Articles of a treaty concluded at Fort
M‘Intosh, the twenty-first day of January, one thousand seven hundred
and eighty five, . . . and the Sachems and Warriors of Wiand0t: D913“
Ware, Chippawa and Ottawa Nations of the other."

.Z/ Commission's Finding 8(a).

.,;_Ivv

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 575 713
5/

plus a cession of lands to the United States bf the “said tribes”.Not until the Fourteenth Article of the treaty is there any mention of
the Sac Tribe, andlthen. in that article both the Sac and Pottavzatomie
nations are taken into the protection of the United States and peace
established with them. Included in the same article is language making
applicable all provisions of the Treaty to the Sac and Pottowatomie
nations “so far as they apply to these nations.”2/
Even considering the language of the Ft. Harmar Treaty most favorably to the petitioner, we are convinced that those articles in the treaty,

namely Articles I through IV, which might lend some support to petitioner's

contention, do not apply to Sac Nation. Indeed Sac participation in the

_ Fort Harmar Treaty was relatively minor when viewed in light of the overall purpose of the said treaty. It amounted to little more than a mutual
exchange of peaceful intentions with the defendant. ‘No land cessions
were taken, reservations created or boundaries fixed. Therefore, the
Commission rejects petitioner's claim of recognized title to the claimed
area by virtue of the provisions of the 1789 Ft. Harmar Treaty.

‘With respect to the l79S Greenville_Treaty petitioner claims recognition of title thereunder even in the role of a nonparticipating
tribe. ‘While the argument is rather unique in support of this position,
the Commission finds it is without merit, and concludes that the peti-.
tioner, not being a party to the Greenville Treatp, has no standing upon which it may seek its benefits in this case. t is our view that the
clear and unmistakable language of the Greenville Treaty evidences an

57 Commission's Finding Efbi.

13/ Commission‘s Finding 8(c).

7 Ind. C1. Com. 675 71h

intent by the United States to be obligated only to the signatory tribes.
If this Commission should strain treaty language and award a recognized
title to the petitioner, it would unduly penalize the signatory tribes,
who, while receiving the treaty benefits, also accepted its accompanying
burdens. I

Petitioner also suggests that under our decision in the Miami case,l9/

 

this Commission “reserved and did not pass upon the question of whether
the United States by the Treaty of Greenville recognized the title of

tribes to lands in the Northwest_Territory‘which were not signatories to

11/
_ the TT3atY3""" Petitioner then cites page 221 of our opinion in Docket
.  ,,12' ,
253 19 3UPP0Tt of this pTOpOSltlOn;—"/ ‘we think petitioner has misread

the language contained therein. What the Commission had reference to

was a possible future'conflict between the recognized title holdings of‘
the signatory tribes to the Greenville Treaty and the aboriginal_rights
of the non-signatory tribes within the same general area. What the Commission actually determined in the Miami case is adequately set out in

the Commission=s Finding 6 therein:

"6. By Articles IV and V of the Greenville Treaty, the
United States recognized the title of each of the tribal
signatories to the territory each had a right to, which
t"”’tFne rl'i__ted_States relinquished by Article Iv . . ." _1__§_/

107 The Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, et al., v. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 180.
ll/ §etitioner‘s Brief, p. E

‘E2/ 5 Ind. Cl. Com. 180, 221 - “It must be remembered that the General
(Wayne) was dealing with groups of hostile Indians whose territorial
rights were unknown and could not be ascertained, so he fixed overall
boundaries within which the signatory tribes would be protected as to
the separate lands each had E—§ight"toT_#SEEh arrangement would not
seem to change or affect the aboriginal rights.of non—signatory tribes
within the Northwest terI'itor 
when needed for its determination arises." (Emphasis supplied.)

}2/ 5 Ind. Cl. Com. l80,ilE8.

7 Ind. c1. Com. o7; 715

The Commission therefore rejects petitioner's proposition that the
1795 Treaty of Greenville extended to the Sac and Fox Nation, a nonsignatory tribe, the benefits of a recognized title to the claimed area
within Royce Cession 50.

‘We now turn our attention to the difficult problem involving petitioner's contention of aboriginal title to the claimed area.i Because
of the early l80h “date of taking” the documentary evidence is meager.
with this in mind the Commission took upon itself the took of reexamining the documentary evidence and testimony in the Sac and Fox_i
cases involving adjoining areas, principally Dockets 158, 153, and 135,
with the hope that such an effort would prove helpful in filling in the

overall picture of Sac and Fox tribal movement and activity, beginning

 

around 1730 when the two tribes became closely affiliated, up until the
l80h Treaty; T

It was during the period of the French§Fox Indian tar, from about
-1712 to-1735 that the dac and Fox tribes formed their close alliance.
'Both tribes were then situated around the Green Bay and Fox River areal
in Wisconsin. The Fox tribe had been in control of the Fox¥Wisconsin
River portage and the French in their attempt to extend their trade
routes westward had repeatedly clashed with these Indians.i The continued friction between them precipitated an all out war marked by‘
'bitter and bloody fighting. French superiority in men and material
finally overcame the stubborn Indian resistance and Foxes were forced
to retreat sout.uestward down the'%isconsin River toward the Mississippi

j River. At the same time the Sac Tribe of Indians had become sympathetically

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 5 716

involved with the Fox cause, and in like manner was forced to retreat in

a body from the French pursuers. Both tribes in a concerted effort reached
the Mississippi River together and, crossing over into Iowa; sought re‘fuge along the'Wapsinipicon and Des Moines River. The year was about

1735 and, according to Dr. Anthony'Wallace, who testified as an expert

in behalf of the petitioner, the Sac Tribe” established its famous village

near the mouth of Rock Hirer in Illinois approximately three miles from

the Mississippi River. Dr. Wallace also testified that, with the cessation of hostilities with the French, large segments of the Sac tribe
began to drift back into northern Illinois and Wisconsin where they established village sites along the'Wisconsin River and even further north.

Around l76h the Sac tribe returned to its Rock River village and

"continued to occupy it up until l8dh and for some years thereafter.

About the same time the Fox Indians were establishing an important villagegsite_west of the Mississippi near Dubuque, Iowa. There they set

about developing the rich lead deposits which were concentrated in this

I area as well as on the east side of the Mississippi River near the present

to§nofGalena,'Illinois.'

Before 1765 thelllinois confederacy, consisting of the Eahohia,
Kaskaskia, Michigamea, Hbingwena, Peoria, and Tanaroa tribes of Indians
controlled the greater part of Cession 50 east of the hississippi. The
Illinois were almost constantly harassed by the tribes from the north and
this everincreasing pressure, coupled to their new found attachment to
the white man’s vices, decreasedtheir numbers to an alarming extent and

resulted in their withdrawal southward down the Illinois River toward the

4“"“t'$’:

 

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 675 " L 717

Mississippi River and into the area around Kaskaskia, Illinois. As the
Illinois retreated southward the northern tribes moved into their country.
Of these tribes, besides the Sac and Foxes, who for the most part concen—
trated in the northwest portion around the Rock River area, could be
counted principally the Kickapoo, Pottawatomie, and Winnebago.

On the west side of the Mississippi River the Iowa tribe of Indians
by I765 had moved eastward from their village sites near the present city
of Council Bluffs, Iowa, and established a principal village on the Des
Moines River near the present site of Selma, Iowa. A second important
Iowa village was located on the Iowa River, while two other Iowa villages,
as of l80h, were reported on the east side of the Mississippi River
within the claimed area. ‘With the arrival of the Iowa Nation into
eastern Iowa, the Sac and Fox tribes drew closer to it, and both groups
began to share the usage of a large portion of Eastern Iowa adjacent to
the Mississippi River. Both nations frequently hunted together, and
each extended their hunting excursions west, south and southwest into
Iowa, Hissouri and over toward the banks of the Missouri River.

fW,By'l8OO,the_greater part of Sac and Iox tribal activity was west
of the Hississippi."With the exception of the principalsac village on _
the Rock River, there were no other Sac and Fox villages of any significance east of the Mississippi River prior to l80h. Besides the Fox village
near the lead mines at Dubuque, Iowa, other Sac and Fox villages west of
the Mississippi during the period in question were reported at the mouth‘

of the Turkey River above Dubuque, and at the mouths of the Iowa and Des

Moines Rivers.

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 675 710

Apart from subsistence hunting, which was conducted within close
proximity of the village sites, the principal Sac and Fox hunting grounds
at the beginning of the l9th century lay west of the Mississippi River in
Iowa and eastern Missouri and across to the Missouri River. From the
latter part of the 1790's until the l80h Treaty bitter and continuous
fighting raged between the Osages and the Sac and Fox for control of the
adjacent hunting areas north of the-Missouri river.

This brief outline of Sac and Fox movement through the claimed areas
east and west of the Mississippi touches only upon the highlights, the full

pdevelopment of which the Commission has set out in considerable detail

i in_Findings 13 through 20. Nevertheless it does give some insight to

the extent of the movement and actual use of the claimed area upon which

: ;the Sac apd Fox seek to impress an Indian title. 'We stress actual use,

.g for this Commission had occasion.in.its recent decision, in the Northern

Paiutegcase, to-reaffirm the principle of “actual exclusive use and

1h/

occupancy? as a prime element in perfecting Indian title.-—' In that

3

 

a case we stated: ,

llrsirirm*”Any,determination of Indian title to an area of land must

be based on affirmative evidence establishing actual exclusive

s,_use and occupancy of the area from time immemorial. Constructive
possession is not sufficient to establish Indian title. The law
in this regard is clear and well settled.” (citing cases). ‘;§/

Looking now at the Sac and Fox picture in Cession 50 east of the.
Mississippi at the time of the 180k Treaty, the Commission finds the Sac
and Fox Nation had perfected Indian title to the northeast portion of the

‘Eh? The Northern Paiute Nation, et al., v. United tates, 7 Ind. Cl.

Com. 322.
)_1_§/ ibid, p,.b,O9,

 

7 End. Cl. Com. 6?S 710

/

‘l

claimed area, which would include those sections delineated as Areas "B"
and “C”, and a small portion of area “D” on the petitioner's exhibit L09.
A more accurate description of the bounded area is set out in Commission‘s
Finding 2l(a). Actual exclusive control from time immemorial to sustain
Indian title was demonstrated to the Commission‘s satisfaction; the
evidence sh wing a long history of traditional Sac and Fox land use within
the Rock River and Wisconsin River area, the early and prolonged existence
of the famous Sac village near the mouth of the Rock River, the adjacent
Sac and Fox villages at Dubuque, Iowa, and on the'wisconsin River, as well
as the history of Indian lead mining activities at nearby Dubuque and
around the Galena area in Jo Davies County; Illinois.

As to the balance of the claimed area lying between the Mississippi

River and the Illinois River which coincides with the rest of Area "D“

5as shown on petitioner's Exhibit HO9, the Commission is unable to sustain

petitioner's claim of Indian title thereto. The evidence failed affirma_ Id
tively to show actual and exclusive use and occupancy over this vast area.

.Reports of the extent and frequency‘of Sac and Fox hunting prior to l80h

dare vague to say the least. The eastward extent of Sac and Fox hunting

efforts was particularly conjectural. No Sac and Fox village of any
Significance can be located within this region prior to l80h.i Subsistence hunting alone as conductad:witl'n the close proximity of villages
could not support a claim for this entire area. Expert testimony in be~~
half of Sac and Fox claims of exclusive occupancy and possession cannot be
tied to any independent affirmative evidence in the record. Reports of the

extent other tribes hunting within this area are as reliable as Sac and

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6'?'5 I 720

Fox versions, and those accounts of Sac and For hunting therein subsequent

16/

to l80h are only consistent with privileges reserved under the 180k Treaty;-"

H1

The Iowa Nation had at least two villages within the claimed area. From al

the evidence in this case, the Commission pictures this area in l80b as one

of nonexclusive use, subject to the conflicting claims and usages of
neighboring tribes, and that this condition was created by the withdrawal
of the Illinois tribes below the Illinois River.

As to those lands within the boundaries of Cession 50 west of the
Mississippi River in eastern Missouri, which are shown as Area "A" on petitioner's exhibit hO9, the Commission finds that as of the effective date
of the l80h Treaty, the Sac and Fox had perfected Indian title to all of
that area north of Cuivre River, a more accurate description of which is
set out in the Commission's Finding 2l(b).

While the Sac and Fox had no village sites within this area at the ~

ghtime of the l80h Treaty, the evidence reflects consistent Sac and Fox

L ,hunting activity for many years prior thereto. In addition, the reports

..Of Sac and Fox fighting to keep the Osage Indians confined to the Missouri

- -..-..

ywgiver demonstrates Sac and Fox tribal efforts to maintain its exclusive

possession of these hunting grounds.

Having reached a determination of the title question in petitioner's
favor as to those areas set out in the Commission's Finding 21, judgment
shall be reserved until proof is offered relative to the consideration
Paid for the ceded lands, the total acreage of the area involved, and
the value of the same as of the dateftitle passed to the defendant.

Edgar E . Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

‘  Mo 
Associate Commissioner

 

'l57_E3mmi§§i3HTs_Finding 6.

T

