7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 219

BEFORE THE IEIDIAN CIAIMS CO1-MISSION

MOH1’-WE TRIBE OF HIDIANS of Arizona,
California, and Nevada; and

ROBERT JED-IECI?-TS, FRANCES STILLNAN,
GEORGE WILSON, HAL O. DAVIDSON,
CYRUS W. FIELDS , ARTHUR C-O‘r_7.T;\IAT.':".E‘,I:\I,
and HARWOOD JEIGKINS, members of

)

)

)

D

)

)

Tribal Council, )
)
Claimants, %

v_ % Docket No. 295

UNITED sures 01-“ AMERICA, )
)
)

Defendant.

Ti-IE 1‘~’EOH!-H.753 I'i~IDIA?~L3 who are members
of the Colorado River Indian Tribes;
and J91? GOULD, EJCREVEAEI SCOTT and
MIEIRRITT L!-£‘COI~I, as representatives
of such group,

Docket No. 283

UNITED sures, (CONSOLIDATED)

)
)
3
)
)
)
Petitioners, %
)
)
)
Defendant. )

Decided: March 19, 1959

FI3*IDI1\:GS gg FACT

1. (a) Dockets 295 and 283 were consolidated by the Commission
during the trial of Docket 283 (Tr. 20)(b) Petitiorgrs in Docket 295 are the Mohave Tribe of Indians
and named individual members of the Tribal Council on behalf of the

Mohave Tribe, and for themselves, arxi for all persons similarly 

as members of said tribe of Indians. These petitioners are of the

219

7 Ind. 01. Com. 219 22C

so-called Needles group of Mohave Indians living on or near the reservation
in the Mohave valley set aside by Executive Orders of August 22, 18903
December 1, 1910 and February 2, 1911.
(c) Petitioners in Docket 283 are The Mohave Indians who are

members of The Colorado River Indian Tribes and named individual members
alleged to be Mohave Indians. The Colorado River Indian Reservation

‘was established by Act of Congress approved by the President on March 3,
1865 (13 Stat. 559). The Mohave Indians on.this reservation are sometimes referred to as the Parker group.

(d) The Mohave Tribe of Indians is an identifiable tribe of American

Indians. The petitioners in Dockets 283 and 295 are identifiable groups
of Mohave Indians.‘ Petitioners in Dockets 283 and 295 have the capacity

to present the claim.of the hohave Tribe set forth in the petitions in

u

said dockets.
2. Petitioners in Docket 295 in the petition filed on August 103
‘I951, alleged Indian title in the Mohave Tribe of Indians to the follow»

ing described lands:

All of the iohave Valley of the Colorado River, extending
north to the Black Canyon in said river, extending south to
the Mohave hountains; extending east to the highest crest of
the Black:Mountains, to the Buck Mountains and to the Mohave
Mountains; and.extending west to the Sacramento Mountains, the
Dead Mountains, and to the Newberry Mountains.

All of the lands on both banks of the Colorado River extendihg from the midstream of said river back on either side of said.
river to the crest of mountains bordering on.said portion of said
river, and extending north to the Eohave Valley in said river.
and extending south to a point below what is now known as and
called the city of Blythe, in the County of Riverside, State of
California.

7 Ind. Clo Corn. 219 221 o i“

All of that part of what is now known as the Mohave Desert
in the State of California, extending east to the lands above
described located on the Colorado River, extending south
to the Whipple Mountains, the Turtle Mountains, the Granite
Mountains, the Eagle Mountains, the little San Bernardino
Mountains, the San Bernardino Mountains; extending west to
the San Gabriel and Tehachapi Mountains; and extending north
as far as the Granite, Soda Lake, Providence and New York
Mountains, including the valley now known as Paiute Valley
extending north into the State of Nevada.

3. Petitioners in Docket 283 (amended) set forth the following description of the lands claimed to have been exclusively used and occupied
by the Mohave Tribe (Amended Petition, paragraph 12):

From time immemorial down through the periods of Spanish
and then Mexican sovereignties and finally at and after the
time (18118) when the United States, hereinafter called Defendant, acquired the area from Mexico, Petitioner (who in
these claims based on aboriginal ownership of land shall include its I-‘Iohave Predecessors) to the exclusion of all others
used, enjoyed, occupied, possessed, claimed and omd in the
accustomed Indian manner an area about 200 miles long and lOO
miles wide in and adjacent to the valley of the Colorado River.
Such area included on both sides of the river all the river
bottom and irrigable areas and all those areas on which gravity
and water from the river could be brought to grow food and crops.
It also included the mesa and higher lands extending back not
less than 25 miles on both sides. The northern or upstream
limit of the area was approximately the Black Canyon below
Hoover Dam, where Petitioner‘s ancestral neighbors were the
Walapais on the East and the Paiutes on the West; and the
southern or down—stream limit was approximately half way between the present locations of Blythe, California, and Yuma,
Arizona, where Petitioner's ancestral neighbors were mostly
Yumas. '

L. The Mohave Indians are of the Yuman linguistic family. They call
themselves Hamaldiava. Throughout recorded history they have been referred
to as Jam-a--jab, Amacava, Pznacabo and other similar words. The Yuman lin-=
guistic family includes the Quechan (Ymna , Kania, Cocopa, I-Earicopa,

Halchidhoma, Diegueno, lrfalapai, Kohuana and E-Iavasupai.

7 Ind. Clo Com. 219 222

P5

So (a) A general description or the valleys along the Colorado River
is helpful in follow-Ijrlg tie contacts made width the Mohave and other Indians
in historic times.. The Mohave Valley is located along the Colorado River
between Mohave City upstream and Topock, .'rizona3 downstream. The valey
runs north arxi south.. The valley is. bounded on the east by the Black
Mountains. On the west it is bounded by the Hem-zberry, the Dead and the
Sacramento Mountains, and on the south by the Mohave I-Iountains. Upstream
from the I~I.ohave Valley is Cotton:-rood VaJ.lpe.:/G Doxmstrean from the Iiohave
Valley is the Ch.emehuevi Valley which his bouzned by the Chemehuevi I-Eoun-==
tains in the north and the Whipple Mountains in the south.;, The next valley
south, or downstream, is the "Great Colorado Valley," so named by Lieutenant
Ives, running from about Parker, Arizona to near Picachos California and i11~=clndes some smaller valleys such as Cibola Valley and the Palo Verde Valleys
(b) Other areas not included in the above description of the valleys

of the Colorado I‘f.iver but which are ':~:ithin the area claimed by the Mohave
Indians and mentioned in historical records should also be generally described herein. They include the I-Eohave Desert extending from the Colorado
River west to the Sierra Dlevada range, and the Mohave River Valley which
river flows from Cajon Pass in a northerly direction with its term_'_nus ct
Soda Lake. The lands claimed to have been exclusively in the possession

of the 1-lohave T:ribe are located in what are no:-: the States of California?
Arizona and Nevadao

6. Spanish explorers, officials add missionaries '§}ere the first
white men to contact the Mohave Indiansc, Onates in l6C*h~—l6CS, met

Mohave Indians on the Colorado 1-"Liver either in the Mohave Valley or

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219

near Bill'Williams Fork. Farther downstream he encountered more members

of this tribe whom he called Amacavas probably in the Great Colorado

Valley. Padre Francisco Carces visited the Halchidhoma in the Great

Colorado Valley in l77h. Carces called the Halchidhoma Tribe by the

name of Jalchedunes. In l776, Carces with a Mohave guide went up the

Colorado River starting from the confluence of the Gila. Somewhere near

the present day Picacho he met 80 Mohaves whom he called Jamajabs who

were on their way to visit the Yumas. Traveling on Garces kept to the

west side of the river to skirt the Halchidhoma who were at war with the

Mohave. Somewhere near the west side of the Whipple Mountains Garces

met L0 Chemehnevi Indians whom he called Chemebet. These Indians told

Garces they were friends of the Hohave. Garces reported the Chemehuevi

inhabited the territory between the Beneme Indians and the Colorado River

as far north as the Yuta (Ute) Nation. Garces a few days later crossed

the Mohave range and arrived in Mohave Valley which.he stated contained

atnut 2000 people. The Spanish Padre later followed the Mohave Trade

Route to the Pacific Coast. Along the way he met four Mohave returning

from.a trading expedition. ‘Near Marl Springs he reported the Beneme nation

began. Later Garces met five more Mohave on the trail coming from San

Gabriel. On his return trip on the trade route from the Pacific Coast to

the Colorado River, Garces mentions visiting several Chemebet (Che:abnrv5F

rancherias. The trade route commenced just above Needles, Californin_

'3

then west over through some springs in the Paiute Range; then to Mohave

IRiver and along this river to Victorville and then through Cajon Pass

223

7 Incl. Cl. Com. 219

while a branch out off to the northwest through Tehachapi Pass and the
San Joaquin Valley (Pet. Ex. 1, Docket 283, pp. 2-L1; Def. Exhibits 2-25.,
h, I:--A, 14-5).
7. Early in the l9th century the Mohave were visited by James

Pattie and Jedediah Smith and other American trappers, fur traders and
mountain men.

In 1826, Pattie left the Yuxnalndians and went up the

Colorado from the Gila confluence on the east side of the river. In the

Great Colorado Valley he found the Halchidhoma (whom he cdled CocomareCOPPEJI‘). Three days from this meeting while continuing upstream Pattie
arrived at a Mohave village, probably somewhere between present day
Parker and Poston, where a fight was had with the Mohave who had demanded
compensation for beaver taken in their territory. Pattie and his men con-»
tinued upstream vhere they were attacked again four days later, most
probably in the Mohave Valley. In l826, Jedidiah Smith and his men also
visited the Mohave, whom he called “Am::ruchabas" and whom he found living
in the Mohave Valley. Smith came downstream into the Mohave country and
spent some 15 days with the tribe. Smith then was guided across the
Mohave trade route to the Pacific Coast by two runaway Indians from the
Spanish Missions, who were imprisoned when they reached the Mission

San Gabriel by the officials in charge there. In the summer of 1827,
Smith again visited the Mohave but was attacked by them and a number of
his men were killed by the Indians. Smith and his party struck out
across the Mohave Desert and followed the trade route to the coast,
W:1:‘i_le on the 1'-Iohave River eight miles upstream journeying west, Smith
this river he reached

encountered two Paiute lodges. Near the head of

22b.

7 Ind. Cl. Com, 219

a few lodges of a Shoshonean people called Serranos. (Pet. Ex. P3 DOORS?
295, Pet. Ex. 1, Docket 283, pp. 511-57; Def. Exhibits 5, 5.4, 6, 6-2., 7)..
8. In the spring of l8hh, John C. Fremont uasrreturning from an
overland exploration of California. "remont sought and found the Spanish

Trail which he knew would lead him to the latitude of Great Salt Lake
and the overland route east. This Spanish Trail followed the Mohave
River for some distance and while traveling northeastwardly along this
stream or its bed, Fremont met a party of six Indians. The Indians were
armed with bows of unusual length and carried gourds of water. One of
the Indians spoke Spanish and he told Fremont that they were Mohave Indians. The speaker was formerly a mission Indian, probably a Serrano,
or Vanyume, who had returned to the mountains after the breaking up of
the missions uhere he had been found by the Mohave. This Indian spoke
of the leader of his party as his master and stated'they lived on the
Colorado but that formerly a portion of them lived on the Mohave River.

9. In the fall of 1851 Captain Sitgreaves of the United States
Engineers led a party from New Mexico west to the Colorado. This party
crossed the Black Mountains into the northern end of Mohave Valley where
they found the Mohave Indians. When the Indians became hostile, Sitgreaves
‘moved out of the Mohave Valley through Mohave canyon and down the ?s}:wi
River. Somewhere in the Great Colorado Valley near Parker they met 2 lggye
'but:recently located, settlement of Indians who represented themselvsm t:
be Yumas. A little further downstream these Indians later attacked
Sitgreaves‘ party but were repulsed by the soldiers. For the remainder of
the trip to Fort Yuma no Indians were encountered tut signal firse

seen (Def. Ex. 9-A; Pet. Ex. 1: Docket 283, pp. 68-76).

225

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l9 ’ 226

10. Sitgreaves’ trip to the Colorado (Finding 9) points up the disappearance from the Great Colorado Valley of the Halohidhoma Indians, a

Yuman tribe, who were reported living there by Garces in 1776 and Pattie

in 1826 (Finding 7). In about the year 1828, the Mohave drove the
Halchidhoma from the Colorado River. The Halchidhoma fled eastward

across the desert to escape the Yuma who were advancing upstream from

_ the south. The Halchidhoma took refuge with the Maricopa Indians. The

Kohuana, another Yuman tribe, living on the river just above the Halchidhoma were not attacked by the Mohave. After expelling the Halchidhoma, the
Mohave remained in the Great Colorado Valley for the winter to stop any

Halchidhoma returnwand then.went back to Mohave Valley taking the small

Kohuana tribe with them by compulsion. The Kohuana remained in the Mohave
Valley for five years before being permitted to leave (Pet. Ex. 1, Dkt.
283, pp. ho-L3).

ll. Lieutenant A. W. Whipple, on a Government exploration and survey journey to the'West Coast, reached the Colorado River from the east
by the Bill'Williams Fork. This party in l85h then went up the Colorado,
saw several Mohaves above the Fork5 and continued on until they found some
200 Chemehuevi in.their valley with their villages mostly on the west banks
They proceeded through Mohave Canyon into the Mohave Valley where Mohave
were living and who furnished two guides, Iriteba and Cairook, to guide

Jthem across the desert. Hhipple‘s party left the Mohave Valley by Paiute

Q9

'Wash and struck into the desert toward the lower Mohave River, and up this
to Cajon Pass and San Bernardino. On this part of the journey thirty miles

1
L

from the Colorado River they reached “a pretty rivulet, vhici watered a

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219

small valley that had been converted by the mountain Pai-utes into a

luxurious garden." While in the Chemehuevi Valley the chief or headman of the Chemehuevi sketched a map of the tribes on the Colorado
River. Upstream from the Gila confluence this map showed the Yuma on
the east side most of the way from the Gila River to the Bill Williams
Fork and on the west side opposite the mouth of the Gila; the Chemehuevi
on the west side above Bill Williams Fork; above them the Mohave
(1-‘~.-rrzac-ha-ves) on the east side more or less opposite what is Paiute
Wash; and on both sides of the V53:-gin River are shown the Paiutes.
Another map sketched on the ground in l8h9 by a ‘Inna chief and copied
by Whipple showed from the mouth of the Gila upstream the following
tribes: the Yuma around the mouth of the Gila; then the Yavapai above
the Yuma (Kroeber states these were the western ‘favapai "who occasionally
gathered seed from the Yuma and planted on the east bank above and below

Picacho”); the Yuma again in the Great Colorado Valley; then above them

in the same valley and before reaching the Bill Williams Fork the Mohave

and then.the Chemehuevi. Above the B111 Williams Fork:are the Mohave; .
then the Ca-haul-chitz, the Kohoadje Paiute of Virgin River and located
too far down on the Colorado, according to Kroeber (Pet. Ex. 1, Docket
283, pp. 26-27); then the Mat-hat-e-vatch (“Northerners"); next the
Walapai arxi the Cheznehuevi as the uppermost tribe. (Def. Exhibits 8 ,
1o, 12, l2-A)

12. Ca) Another exploratory expedition went up the’ Colorado River

by steamboat in 1858, under the command of Lieutenant J. C. Iveso

In the.

227

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219

Great Colorado Valley, Ives reported that “the Yuma cultivate the better
portion . . . . the Iumas have been constantly encountered since we have
been in this valley." Near the Big Maria and Moon Mountains, Ives wrote,
“A small party belonging to a tribe called the Chemehuevis came into camp

this evening. They live in the valley adjoining that which we are now

traversing.“ On reaching the head of the Great Colorado Valley, near
Parker, Ives stated that “The Yumas are no longer seen. Our sharp

witted friends, the Chemehuevis, seem to have exclusive possession of
the upper end of the valley."
Fork two Mohave Indians were seen by the expedition. In the Chemehuevi
Valley, Ives visited and traded with the Chemehuevi tribe and then proceeded through the Mohave canyon to the Mohave Valley where he traded

for provisions with the Mohave Indians. Ives reported that the "Mohaves
preserve constant friendly relations with'the Chemehuevi and Yumas, and

were allied with the latter in the attack upon the Pimas and Maricopas,

last September." Ives further reported “It is somewhat remarkable that
these Indians [Eohavé7 should thrive so well upon the diet to which they
are compelled to adhere. There is no game in the valley. The fish are
scarce and of inferior quality. They subsist almost exclusively upon

beans and corn, with occasional water-melons and pumpkins, and are probably
as fine a race, physically, as there is in existence." After leaving the
Mohave Valley the steamer proceeded to Cottonwood Valley.upstream.which
Ives reported to be inhabited by “a few scattered Mojave families." ter
heading upstream from Cottonwood Valley toward Black Canyon, Ives reported

his guide Iribeta had become uneasy and had warned Ives that "bad Pai-utes”

Somewhere near the mouth of the Bill Williams

228

7 Ind. C1. Com. 219  229

were prowling about. Ives continued by steamer to the head of Black Canyon
and then by skiff through the canyon to its foot. Ives then turned back
and returned to Mohave Valley where he split his force and with his party
struck eastward across the Black Hountairls. (Pet. Exhibits G, G-l, C--2,
Docket 2953 Pet. Ex. 1, Docket 283, pp. 30-311; Def. Exhibits 16, 16-2.)
(b) Another exploration of the upper Colorado was made in January

1858 prior to Ives‘ journey by Lieutenant J. L. White who went up the
Colorado River by steamer. White‘s account is general and not as detailed as Ives’ report. Some 35 miles up river from Fort Yuma, *£h.ite
reported a canyon 32 miles in length and here he stated the "country of
the Yamapaia or .="~.paches, begins, next is a valley extending for 1115 mQ_es;
   The lower part of this valley is occupied by Yumas, on both sides;
the Chimmex-raywas on the West and the Apaches on the East. In the upper
part, the Mohaves take the place of the Apaches." White further reported
"These statements I have from Mr. Weaver, who trapped on this river and
its tributaries, many years ago.“ White stated the "Chimmeway*was" occupied
Chemehuevi Valley and the Mohave "dmost exclusively occupied” the Mohave
Valley and that "The country of the Hualyopais begins in the upper part

of this valley.“ With regad to Cottonwood Valley, lfhite reported "Two
families of Mohaves inhabit the loafer part on the ‘rfest. Above them are
Chisrrmewaywas, and above those are the Cohualch. Opposite to these are the
Hualyopais." (Pet. Ex. §-Billings, pp. 97--05; Def. Ex. lh, 114-13., 273 and
33; Tr. 101, 102, Docket 283) V

13. Followirg the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (E3 Stat. 922) in l8’h8 .

O

by which Cal1’_fornia was ceded to the United States large numbers of  2 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219

from the east and mid-east began the long overland journey to California.
One of the emigrant routes took the travelers over the Colorado River at
the Gila junction. Because of Indian hostilities, Fbrt Yuma was established at this point in 1851 and re-occupied in 1852 by Major Samuel P.
Heintzelman. Peaceful relations were eventually restored within the next
few years with.the Yuma tribe and the Cocopah Indians who were located
downstream toward the mouth of the Colorado. In 1858 and 1859, during
the period of the so~ca11ed ”Mormon'War“ the Mormon leaders in Utah,
through their friends the Las Vegas band of Southern Paiute, sought to
tighten their relations with the Mohave and enlist their aid and support.
This, in the judgment of the officials of the United States, made more
than necessary the opening of the river navigation in that direction.
Doubtless this hastened the commencing of contact with the Mohave Tribe
by officers and officials of the United States, commencing with the explorations of white and Ives in 1858 (Finding 12) and culminating in the
military actions of Colonel William H. Hoffman and Major L. A. Armistead
in January, April and August of 1859. (Pet. EX. 5-Billings, Docket 295).
lb. The threat of Mormon influence on the Mohave; the attacks on

emigrant wagons crossing the Colorado at or near Eea1e’s Crossing in the
Mohave Valley in 1858 attributed to the Mohave Indians; and the hostility
shown by the Mohave to Colonel Hoffman and his escort who were on a recon»
noisance in January 1859 of Mohave country, seeking a site for a military
Dost near Beale’s Crossing, all were factors in the sending of a sizeable

military force into Mohave country. This military force of close to 600

men proceeded upstream from Fort Yuma to the Mohave Valley from where

230

7 Ind. '31. Com. 219 , 231

Colonel Hoffman, on April 21:, 1859, reported the Mohave had agreed to his
terms that they should offer no opposition to the establishmentlof posts
and roads in and through their country by the United States and that the
property and lives of whites traveling through their country must be secure.
Colonel Hoffman also demanded hostages which were turned over to the military force. Colonel Hoffman soon left Camp Colorado as Fort Mohave in
Mohave country was first called and crossed the Mohave trade route to

the coast. Major L. A. Jlrmistead remained at the post on the Colorado
with part of the command. Ebccept for some trouble with the Mohave about
the first of August 1859, which was settled by Major Armistead, the Mohave
abided by the terms set down by Colonel Hoffman (Pet. Ex. L, Docket 295;
Def. Ex- 25; Pet. E. 5-Billings, Docket 295).

15. Following the Colorado River Expedition of 1859 under Colonel
Hoffman the Mohave Indians for the most part continued to reside in their
ancestral home. In 1863 Arizona Territory was established (12 Stat. ébb.)
and Charles 9. Poston was named Superintendent for the territory. After a
council with the chiefs of the Mohave, Yavapai, Walapai and Chemehuevi in
l86h, Poston recommended that a reservation on the Colorado River in the
Great Colorado Valley from Halfway Bend to Corner Rock of some 75,000 acres
be set aside for the Colorado River tribes and funds be made ava£Lable for
an irrigating canal. The reservation was established by the Act of March 33
1855 (13 Stat. 559). In 1870, General ‘rlheaton reported only Iviohave Indians
on the Colorado River Indian Reservation, numbering abdut 500 people. The

General further reported that “Iretaba the principal Chief and most of the

Indians, I found discontented and ready to leave as soon as the wheat s’

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 232

get ripe in the upper valley, they say that, that country never did belong
to them, and that no Indians ever did get a subsistence in that bottom,
the land is all alkali, many localities being as white as Soda Lake.
Iretaba who has been connected with the work since its inception says that
it will take two more years to furnish the ditch, and that then they could
not expect to raise as much as they do in this valley Zgohave Vallqg7,

and that he is unable to keep the Indians there.“ General Wheaten

further reported over 3000 Kohaves in Mohave Dalley which "has always

been their home, they do not wish to leave it   -x-.*= (Def. Ex. 21).

The Fort Mohave Reservation was transferred in l890 to the Indian service for a school. Additional lands were added to the Fort Mohave Indian Reservation by Executive Orders of December I, l9l0, and February'2,
1911 "for the use and occupation of the Fort Mohave and such other

Indians as the Secretary of the Interior may see fit to settle thereon.

* *'*." (Def. Ex. b3, p. 730; Pet. Ex. 0-L, and 0-5, Docket 295).

16. Doctor Alfred L. Kroeber, a qualified anthropologist, former
head of the Department of Anthropology at the University of California,
appeared as a witness for the petitioner in Docket 283. Doctor Kroeber
also prepared a report which is petitioners’ Exhibit 1 in the same Docket
283. This witness also prepared a map, petitioners‘ Exhibit 283-2, which
shows tribal distribution and boundaries as determined by him, on the
Colorado River north of the Gila confluence. Doctor_£roeber testified
he commenced his study of the Mohave Indians in l900. This witness

testified that the Mohave were a tribe in the orthodox sense of the

vord.and.vere farmers primarily. In addition to farming, for subsistence

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219

on the bottom lands of the Colorado River the Mohave, according to Kroeber,

depended secondarily on the mesquite bean and on fishing., The Mohave Valley and the immediate foothills beyond it had littleggame and the Mohave,

the witness said, hunted remarkably little for an Indian tribe. Kroeber

estimated they obtained 50 to 60 per cent of their existence by farming

and perhaps 25 to 30 per cent was from the mesquite with the remainder

of their subsistence from other sources, mostly fish (Tr. 20-30, Docket

283)

17. Petitioners‘ witness, Doctor Kroeber, in Docket 283 prepared

a nap (Pet. Ex. 283-2) in.order to attempt to show graphically what lands
were exclusively used and occupied in about l8h8 by the Mohave Tribe in

the area claimed by petitioners. On the map, Cottonwood Valley is designated as Area 2-A. Some Mohave lived in this area but they were sort of

an isolated outpost. Area 1 as marked off on the map, Kroeber considers

to be the historic core homeland of the Mohave. This is the Mohave Valley.

233

South of the Mohave Valley, Doctor Kroeber has carved out a triangle-shapedi

section which he has designated.Area 3 which includes lands on both sides

of the Colorado River in.Chemehuevi Valley. Area 3, according to the witness, while traditionally Mohave territory, was infiltrated by Chemehuevi

Indians between 1800 (?)-1850. Area 3, Doctor Kroeber felt belonged to

the Cher-aehuevi because "they felt it was theirs, and the Mohave apparer‘;'i;.,1=t.;..s

recognized if r

o, -espected.their rights to trade the products which they great

 . I.

'-{T
a

with white expeditions, apparently, that passed through Kroeber’s Area

2-B south of the Chemehuevi Valley is a triangular section on the river

north and west from the mouth of Bill Williams Fork. Area h-A on Kron**‘d

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 23h

map is located.along both sides of the Colorado River from.the'Whipple
Mountains and Bill Williams Fork in the north to the Riverside Mountains

in the south. Area b-B, generally speaking, is mapped south of the Riverside Mountains to a point just north of Ehrenberg while Area L-C encompasses the lands south along the river from the Maria Mountains to about
the head of Cihola Valley in the south. Areas 11-A, 11-8 and 14-0 may be

said to be in the Great Colorado Valley. Kroeber was of the opinion

that Areas L-A and h-B were Mohave lands while Area L-C was land of the
Yuma. Area 2-B, according to Kroeber, was Mohave territory. Doctor
Kroeber, when he wrote his report in l9S3 (Pet. Ex. 283-1), stated he
believed the Chemehuevi occupation of lands along the Colorado River was
only by sufferance of the Mohave and that the ”Chemehuevis* occupation

was that of squatters." When Doctor Kroeber testified, however, he favored
Chemehuevi ownership of Area 3 and explained that originally he had thought
“it was 60-ho for the Hbhaves with regard to area 3. I think now 60-40 the
other way." (Tr. 75, Docket 283).

18. iDoctor Harold E. Driver, who was associate professor of anthropology at the University of Indiana, testified as a qualified expert witness for defendant. Doctor Driver agreed with Doctor Kroeber that the
Mohave lands included Area 1 (The Mohave Valley), Area 2-A (Cottonwood
Valley) and the triangular section, Area 2-B. Defendant‘s witness also
agreed with Doctor Kroeber’s views with respect to Area § (Chemehuevi

V3119?) vhich.was felt to belong to the Chemehuevi (Tr. l2l, and 235, in

D0Cket 283). 50 as between Doctors Driver and Kroeber the real diiference

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 235

of opinion as to lands exclusively used and occunied by th Mohave Indians is limited to areas h-A and h-B in the Great Colorado Valley south
of the mouth of the Bill hilliams Fork and north of a line running west and

northwest above Blythe.
l9. The lands in Areas h-A, h—B and h~C on petitioners‘ map, Exhibit l in Docket 283, were at one time the home of the Halchidhoma Tribe.

Their territory in these areas adjoined the Colorado River from.just below the Whipple Mountains and Bill Williams Fork in the north to the

Palo Verde Mountains downstream. As to these lands, Doctor Kroeber testified as follows (Tr. 37-38, Docket 283; an see Tr. S3 and 62-6h).

* * % The Chenehuevi apparently later also infiltrated Areas
ha, - B and — C. But they were not run of’. The hohave and
Yuma, as I have explained yesterday, conquered, around 1828,
this whole tract from the Halchidhoma. Wherever they infiltrated, wherever they could not be run off by the Eohave and
Yuma, they were considered, I think, the legitimate owners an,
started little patches of farms there. There is a string of
them.that has been recorded. None of this has teen published,
‘but I have had access to the notes. For instance, Isabel
Kelly, who made a study of the Paiute in general ending up as
the southermost group with the Chenehuevi -- and they told her
of various places where they had farms. Now, there were also
Yuma farms and settlements, and there were Mohave farms and
settlements. and since the Yuma and Mohave did the conquering
and always claimed the land, the Chenehuevi apparently'never
claimed the territory of h-A, -B or -C by any right or ancient
‘uses. and furthermore, the Chemehuevi confined themselves only
to the west bank. There is no record of any Chenehuevi plane
tation on the east side of the river, and whenever there was
established andzrecognized right of a tribe along this river
or along the Gila, they always bound both sides of the river.
The river was like Main.street. There was the heart of their
territory.

Now, the Chenehuevi sneaked down and filtered in in small
numbers in individual families from the desert and planted
there, but did not go across. They might cross the river
occasionally to hunt in the mountains here, but all the places
they claim.are on the west side only. I think that means they‘

C?

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 236

were latecomers and squatters. So I would give this whole territory to the Yuma and Mohave, and the only question is where to
divide between Yuma and'Mohave.

Doctor Kroeber further testified that the Yumas were living in numbers

"as far up river as to include Area h-a.but mostly h-C in the l8SO‘s (Tr.

6h) but that many of them left Area h—A when Irretiba, the Mohave chief,
and some 7? families of Mohave moved into the area in 1859 from the Hohave Valley to join other Mohave already there. This witness stated theé
modern Mohave have repeatedly told him that “they owned the valley down
to a few miles below LaPas, which is the southern limit here of h-B, and

that is why now I have these -- why I have no hesitation in giving h-A

>3

and h-B to the Mohave % *." (Tr. 66). While Doctor Kroeber makes a
point of the fact that the Chemehuevi lived on the west side only in Areas
h-A, h-B and h—C and only'crossed occasionally to hunt which appears to
influence his opinion as to their rights in these areas it is to be noted
that in Area 3, the Chemehuevi Valley, he was of the opinion that the
Chemehuevi had a better right to the area although the same situation prevailed in that region. Doctor Kroeber testified that he realized this but
reached his conclusion on the basis of the Chemehuevi having been in Area

3 "longer and.somehow the Mohave went a little further in recognizing their
rights in there,'* *‘*." (Tr. 70 - Docket 283).

20. Doctor Kenneth M. tewart, a qualified anthropologist, who was

a professor at Arizona State College, Tempe, Arizona, at that time, testiu
fied for petitioners in Docket 295. In referring to Dodtor Kroeber’s map
(Petitioners‘ Exhibit 2 in Docket 283), Doctor Stewart agreed with Kroeber‘s

findings that Areas 1, 2-A, 2-B, h-A and h—B were Hohave territory. Doctor

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 237

Stewart was of the opinion and so testified, however, that Area 3 (Chenehuevi Valley) and Area. h~C were E-Eohave lands rather than Chemehuevi and
Yuma territory, respectively, as determined by Doctor Kroeber, petitioners‘
witness in Docket 283. Stewart testified he believed the Chemehuevi were
in Chemehuevi Valley (Area 3) and the Yuma in Area LL--C as immigrants and
aliens and had no real claim to these lands (Tr. 119-SO, Docket 295).

This witness believed the Chemehuevi were in Chemehuevi Valley by Mohave
sufferance and that the Mohave could have told them to move out of the
valley (Tr. 75’ and 76}. with respect to Areas L;-A, )_;--B and L;-C, tewart
testified that the Great Colorado Valley in these areas was not continually
inhabited by any tribe between 1828 and 1.859. He also testified that the
movement south by the Chemehuevi into the Great Colorado Vauey and the
movement north of the Yuma into the same region found them there as emigrants and aliens, with the permission and approval of the Mohave although
those tribes lived pretty much wherever they pleased. As to Iiohave ow:-.«'n.er-=
ship of land, Doctor Stewart testified that in his opinion the test of such
ownership, rather than use an occupancy, was the exercise of dominion

over the land by the Hohave (Tr. 139). Doctor Stewart further testified

as to Areas L;-A1, LL-B and b.-C:

C.)
A. I don"t think we can determine it by looking to see

who lives where ‘oecause we have cases of Iviohaves living south
of it where most of them were ‘fumes. We have ‘Iumas living north
of that. He have Chemehuevis scattered around here and there.
I think it is a very complicated situation. I think the fact
that a man lives in a particular part of the Colorado Valley
does not indicate ownership. I think the question would be well, my opinion is I am not quite sure I can put "it in words
in which you asked the question. 1~';y opinion is, that the I-Eohave
conquered this territory. They took the major part in it.
They regarded the territory as theirs. If any intruders came

V 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 238

in which they didn't I-rant they I-zoLLld run them off. When Yavapai
élrretiba7 moved his Iiohaves down most of t .e Yumas went back to
Yuma. I think the important thing there is that the Iéohaves were
in a position to enforce claims to that territory. Anybody they
didn‘ t want there they could move out in other words. And that

to me indicates ownership.

2l. (a) Petitioners in Docket 295 also called as an ezmert witness
Doctor John P. Harrington, a qualified ethnologist, who testified he had
commenced his study of the Mohave in 1907 and continued it intermittently
to the present time. Doctor Harrington testified that in his opinion
Mohave territory, with the Mohave Valley as its center or core, extended
west to take in the Mohave River and Iniohave Desert; that it extended
north to the mouth of Black Canyon on the Colorado River and to the south
to the vicinity of Blythe, or perhaps to the Chocolate Mountains and in
the east it included the watershed of the Colorado River. (Tr. 10-11,
l6, l8, 314, Hearing, Bi_'Llings, May 8 and 9, 1956). Doctor Harrington
testified it was not possible to determine definitely the northern boundary line of Mohave territory except in the vicinity of the Colorado River
nor was it possible to determine how far west the I-Iohave territory extended but that the Mohave did claim the area through which the I-Iohave
trade route (northern) ran although he could not say how far north they claimed
to own. To the south of the trade route they claimed the Mohave Desert,
according to this witness, but he did not think the southern boundary could
be determined but it would be far to the south arri west of Parker. (Tr.
35-37, Billings). Doctor Harrington testified there was another Mohave
'h‘83'.l running west from Blythe across the Colorado Desert but that these

trade routes were used merely to pass through the arid country (Tr. 39141, Billings ) ,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 o . 239

(b) with respect to the Great Colorado Valley, Areas u~a, h~B and
h-C on petitioners’ Exhibit 2 in Docket 283, Doctor Harrington testified
that after the Halchidhoma were forced out in about 1828 a vacuum was
left in that area with the Mohave and.Yuma stopping any other Indians from.
moving into the Great Colorado Valley. This witness testified that he
was of the opinion that the Mohave owned this valley because "they claimed
to own it." The vacuum, Harrington stated, was located from Parker south
for miles. The Yuma, the witness observed, occupied the territory from
the Chocolate Mountains up river to the Blythe Valley but that this
stretch was claimed.by both the Mohave and the Yuma and that it would be
difficult to determine which tribe owned it. North of Blythe and near to
Parker the vacuum area existed which Harrington testified was claimed by
both Mohave and Yuma (Tr. Th-77; Tr. lb?-M8, Bi_'Llings). Later Doctor
Harrington testified that the Yuma north of the Chocolate Hountains were
in the area upstream in the Great Colorado Valley only because such presence was tolerated by the Mohave (Tr. 90-96, Billings). Doctor Harrington further testified that Chemehuevi lived in Areas h-A, h-B and h-C
in the period l800-l8SO (Tr. lSl, Billings).

22. According to Mohave mythology or tradition the Mohave Indians in
ancient times lived in what is now the Mohave Desert west of the Colorado
River (Tr. 60-62; Pet. mjbits 2 and 3, Docket 295). Malcolm J. Rogersgf,
archeologist, in writing of the Indians in the desert, stated that at one
time there was a chain of fresh water lakes in the vicinity of the great
Mohave Sink (Soda Lake) around which the Mohave Indiansvlived for hundreds

of years. Rogers wrote "the Mohaves held this territory more or less

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 2&0

continuously from the tenth to the sixteenth century and probably even
earlier. At the end of this period, they withdrew to join the River Mohaves on the Colorado, forced out undoubtedly by increasing aridity and by
‘warfare with Shoshonean migrants, principally Chemehuevi, from the north.
In l776, Garces, the Spanish missionary and the first European.to cross
the Mohave, found the latter people in possession of the region, undesirable as it was”. Rogers also states that at about the same time Yuman people who were inhabiting the area around Lake Cahuilla which had been
for a period a fresh water lake fed by the Colorado in what is now the
Colorado Desert were compelled to move when the waters of the lake became
undrinkable owing to the concentration of soluble salts and that Lake
Cahuilla is thought to have disappeared completely about lSOO A. D. (Pet.
Ex. l, Billings, Docket 295). These indications of former habitation of
the Mohave Desert together with the Hohave use of the trade routes led
Doctor Stewart to the conclusion that Mohave territory included the desert
region. Doctor Harrington testified that he included the desert area as
Inohave lands on the reported occupation of the Mohave River Sink and that
the fact that the trade route passed through the desert was more or less
incidential (Tr. 156, Billings). Doctor Kroeber testified (Tr, 73, Docket
283) that the desert lands while "sometimes claimed by or att ibuted to
the Mohave" did not in his opinion belong to the Mohave Indians. In Docket 351 before this Commission Doctor Kroeber testified for the Chemehuevi
Tribe and on.a map (Pet. Ex. l in Docket 351) shows a large part of the
Mohave Desert as Chemehuevi territory or Serrano lands.

23. (a) The Commission finds, based on the findings of fact herein

7 Ind. C1. com. 219 2&1

made and thezrecord as a whole, that petitioner the Mohave Tribe, at the
time the lands of said tribe were acquired'by the United States, and for
many years prior thereto, exclusively used and occupied Area l (Mohave
Vhlley,) Area 2-A (CottonwoodQValley) and Area 2-3, as these areas adjoining the Colorado River are delineated on Doctor Kroeber's map, petitioners’
Exhibit 2 in Docket 283. L _ °

(b) The boundary of the lands in.Areas l and 2-A combined commences
in the Black Mountains at Mount Perkirmsin the State of Arizona; thence
southerly along the crest of the Black Mountains; thence to the Buck
Mountains; thence south to Crossman Peak in the Mohave Mountains; thence
northwesterly along the crest of the Mohave Mountains across the Colorado
River to the Sacramento Mountains; thence along the crest of the Sacramento
Mountains to the Dead.Mountains; thence along the crest of said Dead Mountains to Mount Newberry; thence in a northwesterly direction to a point
on Latitude llh degrees, 50 minutes directly east of Searchlight, Nevada;
thence in a direct line northeastwardly to the place of beginning at Mount
Perkins in the Black Mountains.

(C) The boundary of Area 2-B commences at Crossman Peak in the Mohave Mountains; thence in a direct line in a southeasterly direction across
Bill Williams Fork to MineraL Hill; thence in a direct line westwardly to
the northwest corner of Section l9 of Township 3 North of Range 26 East
in the Whipple Mountains in the State of California; thence in a direct
line northeastwardly to the place of beginning at Crossman Peak.

2b. (a) The Commission further finds that the evidence of record does

0 "I

not justiiy finding that the Mohave Tribe exclusively used and occupied

7 Ind. 01. Com. 219 2&2

the Mohave Desert as claimed by petitioners in Docket 295; ‘While the Mohave Indians used the trade route to cross the desert, there is also evie
dence of use or occupancy of parts of the desert by Chemehuevi, aiute,
Serrano, and other Indians during historic and ancient times. The Commission also finds that the Mohave Tribe did not exclusively use and occupy
Areas 3, h-A, h-B or h-C. The Chemehuevi Indians used and occupied Area
3, Chemehuevi'Valley. In Areas h-A, h-B and h-C, Chemehuevi, Yuma, Hohave and possibly'Yavapai.were found during the time prior to the date

of acquisition of the land by the United States.

(b) There is no substantial evidence of record to support petie
tioners‘ motion of April 5, 1957 in Docket 295 to enlarge the area claimed
so as to include large amounts of land both east and west of the Colorado
River (as set forth in petitioners‘ proposed First Amended Petition, filed
May l, 1957). The proposed First Amended Petition does not conform to the

evidence and testimony of record upon which the findings of fact herein.

‘made are based.

25.(a) Nb treaty was ever made between.the United States and the
"Mohave Tribe for the purpose of extinguishing the Indian title in said
tribe to the lands it exclusively used and occupied. The lands found.
herein to have been exclusively used and occupied'by the Mohave were located in what are now the States of California, Nevada and Arizona.

(b) California was admitted to the Union by the Act of September 9,
1850 (9 Stat. n52). On March 3, 1851, the Congress passed (9 Statt 631)
"An Act‘to ascertain and settle the private Land Claims in the State of

California.“ Said act required.all persons ”clainin lands in California

2.)

7 Ind. c1. Corn. 219 2&3

by virtue of any right or title derived from the Spanish or Iiiezxzican government" to present them to a Board of Commissioners created by that act for

confirmation (Sec. 8).

‘I

Section 13 of said act provided: _ W w all lands the claizrs to which
shall not have been presented to the said commissioners within taro years
after the date of this act, shall be deemed, held, and considered as part
of the public domain of the United States;  -31-."

The claim here asserted is for lands aboriginally used and occupied
by the Mohave and was not a claim based upon or by virtue of any right
or title derived from the Spanish or Mexican government, hence was not
required to be presented for coniirzration.

By virtue of the provisions oi‘ Sect ion 13 of he 1851 Act the lands
of.’ the petitioners, described in Finding 23, became part of the public
domain oi‘ the United States on Iiarch 3, 1853.

(c) The Mohave Indian title to lands in Arizona and Nevada found
by this Commission to have been exclusively used and occupied by the
Mohave 'I‘ri7::-e was not extinguished until subsequent to 1853. as set forth
in Finding 15 herein, Superintendent Poston of Arizona Territory held a
council with the chiefs of the I-Zohave and other tr$es in 1861; after
Arizona Tarritory had been separated from Mew Mexico. at this council,
Poston proposed setting up a reservation for the Colorado River T;:d'j_bes..

<5
In 1865, when Poston was Territorial Representative to Congress he stated

that at the council he proposed to the Indians that (Cong. Globe, 38th

Cong,., 2d Sess., March 2, 1865, p. 1320):

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 Zhh

\l

w * % for all the one hundred and twenty thousand square miles,
full of mines and rich enough to pay the public debt of the
United States, they should abandon that Territory and confine
themselves to the elbow in the Colorado river, nor more than

\) \I L!

seventy—fiye thousand acres. w w W

Following the establishment of the Colorado River Reservation by act of
March 3, l86S (13 Stat. 559) many Mohave Indians moved on the reservation and for a number of years only Mohave Indians were found thereon.
In l87C, some 500 Mohave were so settled but the larger group of the
Mohave Indians remained in the Mohave Valley (Finding l5). The setting
aside of the reservation and the acceptance thereof by removal thereto
of many of the Mohave Indians amounted to a relinquishment of lands so
held by Indian title. The United States, therefore, extinguished
Indian title to the lands which the Mohave Indians held by exclusive use

and occupancy in Arizona and Nevada on.March 3, 1865.

/s/ EDGAR. E. tier
_Chief Commissioner

/s/ LOUIS J. ornsaa
Associate Commissioner

/S/ 1-3-1. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

