1 Ind. C1. Coma. 422 - ' 436

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TEE snare on PIUTE INDIANS or
THE roman I-IAI.IIEU.=.1 nnsnnvnrxon,
In onzzoon,

Petitioners,
vs. . Docket No. 17

UNITED STATES OF ISMERICIX,

Defendant.

Mr. 0. B. McConnell, with whom
was Mrs Bernard J, Long,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

Messrsc Ralph A9 Barney and
Leland L. Yost, with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney General

A. Devitt Vanech,
Attorneys for Defendant.

DR 2 9 1950

OPINION'9§ THE COMMISSION

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:'
The petitioners are a group of Snake or Piute Indians who bring

this action to recover the sum of $3,500,000.00, with interest, as

icompensation for the value of certain lands that were included within

the area of the former Malheur Reservation in eastern Oregon, They
also seek an award for the alleged failure of the defendant to properly

care and provide for them, the amount of the award to be determined by

this Commission.

437
l Ind. Cl. Comm. 422

In-I2-H-O

The petitioners base their claimed right to recover for the lands

1 .
in question upon two separately stated claims which are set forth in

Counts I and II in the petition, as amendeds The first claim made in
Count I is that the lands included in the Malheur Reservation were a
part of an area in eastern and southeastern Oregon that was held and
claimed under original Indian title by petitioners‘ ancestors, and was
taken from them by defendant on September 13, 1882 (the date the major
portion of the Malheur Reservation was restored to the public domain)

without their consent or the payment of compensation therefor. A

‘second claim for the same Malheur Reservation lands is made in Count

II, and is based on certain Executive orders which established the
Malheur Reservation, later enlarged it, then diminished and redefined
the reservation area, and finally restored the land to the public
domain. A.third claim in Count II is for the alleged failure of the
defendant to provide homes, food, clothing and education for petitioners
as provided in an unratified treaty dated December 10, 1868.

It is clear from the petition, the petitioners‘ requested nltiu
mate findings, and brief that the land for which they seek eompenn
sation in both Counts I and II is that area of land in the Malheur Reseru
vation described in the Executive order of January 28, 1876. This order
is set forth in finding No. 9. Counsel for petitioners have stated in
the record that the three bands or groups who lived in that particular

country when the Malheur Reservation was established, and were placed »

on the reservation, were those bands under Chiefs We—you~we—wa, E—hi-gant,

. .m-.....a...- -u:'_~~=--1---‘—«--W -*3
1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 5 ‘*3 —

and Owwits.

It appears that after Oregon had been established as a territory
in lS#8, among the first treaties concluded with Indians east of the
Cascade Mountains in Oregon was the one with the Walla Walla, Cayuse
and Umatilla tribes on June 9, 1855 (12 Stat. 9H5) in which they ceded
a tract of land in northeast Oregon and the Umatilla Reservation was
established. On.June 25, 1855 another treaty (12 Stat. 963) was eona
eluded with the Confederated Tribes and Bands of Middle Oregon, coding
to the United States an.area in north_central Oregon, which included
a small part of the lands later included in the Malheur Reservation.
The Klamath Reservation was also established out of this cession,

Later Congress passed the act of March 25, 186M (13 Stat. 37),
under which act the.Presidcnt was authorized to conclude a treaty with
the Klamath and Modoc and Snake Indians in southeastern ‘Oregon. On
October lh, 186M a treaty (16 Stat, 707) was concluded with the Klamath
and Modoc Tribes and Yahooskin Band of Snake Indians in which they
ceded a tract of land in.south central Oregon and northern California,
which tract also contained a small part of the lands later included
in the Malheur Reservation,

0n.August 12, 1865 a treaty (lh Stat. 683) was also concluded with.
the Well-PahaPe Tribe of Snake Indians in which they ceded a tract of
land in east central Oregon. This cession included the western one—
third of the lands in.the Malhcur Reservation, and overlapped in part

both of the prior cessions made by the Confederated Tribes of Middle

...._.L.4.......... - .. _

439

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 __u__

Oregon and the Klamath, Modoc and Yahooskin Band of Snake Indians.
There remained in southeast Oregon a number of other roving bands
or groups of Snake or Piute Indians who were not under any treaty relations with the United States. They had been determinedly hostile
towards the whites from the time Oregon was established as a torriw
tory. In I866 an aggressive campaign was undertaken against these
Indians which resulted in the majority of them surrendering in the

Latter part of 1868 and being collected in camps near the Army posts

in southeast Oregon under military surveillance.

In the fall of 1868 the Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon,
J. W. P. Huntington, made an expedition among the Indians in eastern
Oregon, the chief object of which: as he stated in his report, was "te
visit these subdued Snake Indians and ascertain by personal inspection
their precise condition, and take such measures as were in my power to
secure a continuance of the peace recently inaugeratcd," Superintendent

Euntington visited the various camps of these Snake Indians and on

_Deeember 10, 1868 gathered their leaders together in council at Camp

Harney where he negotiated a treaty with them which was signed by him

on behalf of the United States and on behalf of the Indians by We~youwe-wa, C-aha--nee, E--hi-gent, Po-nee, Chow-wat--na-no, Ow-«its and Tash-e--go,
who were referred to in the treaty as chiefs and headmen representing

the Snake or Shoshone Indians. This treaty as its terms show was intended to be a treaty of peace and amity, with the Indians agreeing to

reside upon such reservations as might thereafter be allotted to them,

1 Ind; 01. Comm. 422 44°

.45....

and the United States agreeing that future provisions would be made

for the permanent location of the Snake Indians and for their education,
food, clothing and for allotment of lands in severalty to them when their
advancement warranted it. The treaty declared it was only preliminary

to a more complete treaty to be made thereafter under the direction and
authority of the Government of the United Stateso This treaty was never
ratified by the Senate of the United States and no other treaty negotiations were ever had with these Indians,

In November, 1869 Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon, H.

B. Meacham, and_Colencl Otis of the'U¢ S¢ Army met in council with the
Indian leaders, which included six of the Snake or Piute chiefs or head»
men who had signed the feregeingiunratified treat", and tried to persuade
them to move to the Klamath Reservation in south central Oregon, but

they would not agree to move.

In March, 1871 Superintendent Meacham recommended to the Coma
missioner of Indian affairs that the area in eastern Oregon located
between the Mznd and hhth parallels of latitude and from the 117th to
the 120th degree of longitude be withdrawn'from sale as public lands,
"with a view of selecting an Indian.reservation, on which to censeliu
date Indians east of the Cascade Mountains in.said Stateaw." The recommendation was approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and by the
Secretary of the Interior and the withdrawal of the lands as recommended
was directed by Executive order dated harch 14, l87l.

After a period of investigation as to the best location for the

lg Ind. C1. Comm. 422 7 441.” 6 reservation, the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs on September M, 1872
wrote a letter to the Secretarv of the Interior enc1osing.a report of

T. B. Odeneal, Superintendent of Indian Affairs in Oregon, dated

August 22, 1872, reciting the action taken by Odeneal relative to the
establishment of a proposed reservation on the headwaters of the Malheur
River in Oregon for the Snake or Piute Indians. The boundaries of the
tract of land selected for the proposed reservation were set forth in

the letters The Secretary of the Interior forwarded the Commissioner's

p letter to the President, recommending that it be carried into effect,

and on September 12, 1872 the President signed an order directing that
said lands that were described in the letter of the Commissioner of

Indian Affairs be set apart as a reservation for the Snake or Piute

Indians.

An.additional area of land was added to the Malheur Reservation
on the northeast by.Executive order of May 15, 1875; however, by Emecutive order of January 28, 1876 the reservation area was redefined
and the greater portion of the land that had been added by the Executive
order of May 15, 1875 was restored to the public domain. It is the
reservation lands as they were described in the January 28, 1875
order for which compensation.is asked by petitioners.

The Malheur Reservation was opened some time in l873 and the
various bands or groups of Indians in southeast Oregon, as well as
some from adjacent areas in Idaho and Nevada, were collected on the

reservation by the defendant. These Indians were classified as Snakes,

l'Ind. c1. Comm. 422 ' ’ '44?

...'f....

Bannocks, and Piutes by the Indian Agent in charge of the reservation.
The June 30, l877 Indian census for the Malheur Reservation lists 759
Indians on the reservation, of which 20H were classified by the Indian
agent as "Snakes" under Chief Egan, who came from the valley of the
Woiser, east of Snake River, and were mixed with Shoshones. The others
were classified as Piutes, which included Chief Winnemucca3s band and
the followers of We~ow~wo~wa, listing them in the census as 150 under
Chief Oits, 288 under Chief Tanwahta, and lhl under Chief Winnemucca.
By February In, 1878 there were 87 Shoshone Indians newly arrived at
the Malheur Agency, making a total population of 8M6 on that date.

In June, 1878 the Bannoch°Har started, and all the Indians belongy
ing to the Malheur Agency left the reservation, and with the exception
of about 100 Piutes known as "Leggins band," the majority of them
joined the Bannocks in their hostilities against the white settlers
and the Army. In the winter of 1878-79 at the close of the war, those
Indians who had taken part in the hostilities, together with Leggins'

band, were removed with their families to the Yakima Reservation in

twashington to reside, The Malheur Reservation was used by the military during the Bannock War, but was re-opened by the Indian Department

in September, 1878, and as efforts of Indian agents to rosettlo the

reservation with Indians in the area were unsuccessful, the agency

was discontinued by direction of the President in December, l880.
Thereafter, by Executive order of September 13, 1882 the greater

portion of the reservation was restored to the public domain, and the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 443
e-I8-0

remainder by Executive orders of May 21, 1883 and March 2, 1889. i

It is contended by petitioners that not only did their ancestors
hold original Indian title to this area of land included in the resern
vation, but that said reservation established by the Executive orders
was for the use and occupancy of petitioners in fulfillment of the
'unratified treaty of 1868 which was made pursuant to the act of Congress
of March 25, 1861;, and that its cancellation by the defendant and re-~

turn to the public domain, without consent of or payment of compensation

to the petitioners was inequitable and unconscionable, and contrary to

fair and honorable dealings with them, and they are entitled to recover
the Y2;LC of 33' $3,§OG,eOG, with interest,

.The petitioners also contend that under the unratified treaty of
December 10, 1868 the defendant became obligated to provide their
ancestors with homes, food, clothing and education, which defendant
failed and neglected to provide, and they are new entitled to damages
because of this failure in an amount to be fixed by the Commission,

The United States defends on several grounds: First, that the
petitioners have failed to establish by the evidence that a particular
tribe, band.or group of Indians aboriginally and exclusively held and
occupied any specific and definable area of land in eastern and seuth~
eastern Oregon, or that the defendant ever recognized petitioners as
exclusive owners and occupants of the lands included in the Malheur

Reservation. Second, that the Executive orders creating and continu~

ing the reservation did not convey to the Snake or Pinto Indians any

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422  . 444
_ 9 _

conpensable interest in said lands, and that under the circumstances
the restoring of these lands to the public domain by Executive order
was not inconsistent with fair and honorable dealings. ‘Third, that
the treaty of December 10, 1868 was unratified, and even if ratified,
the obligations created thereunder were breached by petitioners‘
ancestors and not by the defendant. I

On the issues thus presented, the first question is whether the
petitioners have established their original Indian title to the lands
claimed by them.

Count I. Original Indian Title

The evidence bearing on the question of the aboriginal ownership

of the lands in eastern Oregon is principally documentary, and is

conflicting, particularly as to the origin and prehistoric distribution

of Indians in the area. It appears from.an examination of early reportsand maps that in about 1750 the extreme southeastern section of Oregon
was inhabited by a Shoshonean tribe or band of Indians classified as
Northern Piutes, with the north boundary of their territory being a
line extending from the Snake.River on the east to the Klamath Indian
country on the west, and running just north of the Malheur and Harney
Lakes. The territory just to the north of this was occupied by the
Sahaptin speaking tribes, which would have included the major part of
the Malheur Reservation as it was later established. During the late
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries Snake and Bannock tribes of

Shoshonean Indians from eastern Idaho invaded the Sahaptin tribes and

\ ....- 4.3....-9.. —. . ...v.....

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 ' , 445 L

.-.10....

forced them north and west, although later some of them re—occupied
portions of their original area. There are later reports however that
disagree with this version of the origin and prehistoric distribution
of these Indians, and which classify all of these Indians in east
central and southeast Oregon, at least by l8¥O, as "Northern Piutos."
iThe earliest historic account of white nan‘s contact with these
Indians was a brief reference in the journal of Peter Ogden who made
an expedition down the Silvies Riyer to the Harney and Malhour Lakes
region in 1825, noting that he met a large number of “Snake Indians"
in the area whom he described as "Upper" and "Lower" Snakes, distinguishing the former as warlike and the latter as timid. This disw
tinctien between those in the north of the area and those in the south
appears to have been recognized by others, as those in the north were
Later referred to as "Upper Snakes,” or "Snakes" and "Bannocks,“ and
those bands in the south as "Lower Snakes" or "Northern Piutes," and
as late as l868 they were all referred to collectively as the "Snakes"
and the “Snakes or Shoshone." I
In any event, by l8h8 when Oregon was established as a territory,
this area in east central and southeast Oregon (where the land in
question is located) was inhabited by a number of separate bands or
groups of Shoshonoan Indians, who have been identified by the latest
reports as Northern Piutes, and who were scattered throughout the en—
tire area. They did not have a strong central organization but each

band or group operated more or less independently of the others, having

U

- 446
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422

_ 11 _

its own chief or loader, and being bound together by linguistic ties,
nthe bands maintained a friendly intercourse with each other and with
the adjoining Shoshonean Indians. They did not have permanent villages
or camps but each band or group usually had its favorite wintering site
or sites to which the members returned after the hunting and gathering
seasons. They did not till the soil but were primarily nomadic, with
each band or group ranging over whatever territory as was necessary to
furnish a livelihood. There does not appear to have been any clear
recognition of rigid territorial boundary lines between the territory
of the different bands, or of other tribes or bands of Shoshonean
Indians.

This question of what proof is necessary to establish original
Indian title in land claimed by Indians was before this Commission in
the case of Pawnee Indian'Tribe of Oklahoma vs. United States, Docket
No. 10, decided July 11;, 1950, and we held that original Indian title
could be established only by proof of the Indians’ exclusive occupancy
and use of a definable area of land. The Commission reached this conelusion after an analysis of a number of decided cases in which the
courts have considered this question. United States vso Santa Fe

Railroad 00., 31h ms. 339, 56 In, ed. egg; Choctaw Nation et al.,, vs.

 

The United States, 77 Ct. C159 37?; Wichita Indians et alp, vsc Qhg

‘United States, 89 Ct. Cls. 378; Alcoa Band of Tillamocks vs. United

-—I--:--2-:-.--1-an-2-0-or-uI—n

 

States! 103 ct. (313, 1:333. In the case‘ of the United States vs. Santa

 

_1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 . ‘ 447

._ 12 H

Fe Railroad Co.! supra, the court,.in interpreting what constitutes
"Indian title," said (p. 3H5):

Occupancy necessary to establish aboriginal possession
is a question of fact to be determined as any other question
of fact. If it were established as a fact that the lands in
question were, or were included in, the ancestral home of the
Walapais in the sense that they constituted definable territory occupied exclusively by the Waiapais (as distinguished
from lands wandered over by many tribes), hen the Walapais
had ‘Indian title! which unless extinguished survived the
railroad grant of 1866.

In the instant case the petitioners claim to be descendants of they

a bands of Chiefs We—you—we—wa, Ekhiugant, and Owuits, who they contend

were the bands of Indians that inhabited,'uscd and possessed the lands
when the Malheur Reservation was established in the manner necessary

to establish aboriginal title. We do not believe there is sufficient
evidence in the record to show that any definable area of land in southeast Oregon was exclusively occupied and used by any band or group of
Snake or Piute Indians.

There are a number of general statements in the record by the
Indians themselves as well as Government agents in which they refer to
the territory in southeast Oregon as "Snake country" or sone similar
term, but the only reference to the location of any particular band,
as distinguished from the entire southeastern area of Oregon, was in
the report of Major Otis of the'U, 8. Army in Oregon when he was enumorn
ating the principal bands of non~reservation Indians in the area. He
named "‘.iIc-e.h—*.-Jas" band "as principally roaming on the headwaters of the

Malhour river and.Stein Mountain country,“ but in the same report he

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 ' 448

further stated his contact with them dated only from October, 1867i

hand that the TPiute band of Smoke Indians” were scattered over a

large area in southeast Oregon and that he did not mean that they
occupied the whole of the country but that they ranged through it.
This would identify "wouyouuwas" band as roaming in the vicinity of
the land claimed in this action, and his band was on the reservation
after it was established, but this is not sufficient evidence to
sustain a claim that the area of land in the reservation was eontinuu
ously occupied and used by petitioners‘ ancestors to the exclusion of
other Indian tribes or‘bands who also roamed and hunted in the same
area, and even claimed and ceded portions thereof to the United States,
as was done by the Confedorated Tribes of Middle Oregon, the Yahooskin
Band of Snakes and the Wollpahpe Tribe of Snake Indians.

_The argument is made by counsel for petitioners that Government
officials were fully aware of the fact that petitioner Indians were
the original exclusive occupants of the territory in which the Malheur
Reservation was established, and those officials charged with the duty
of selecting the reservation site recommended its location within this
territory that had at all known times been inhabited and claimed by
these Indians as their own. They contend the Malheur Reservation
which was established by Executive order of the President was spew
cifieally established for these Snake or Piute Indians who were recognized as having inhabited the area so designated for them. We do not

believe that the evidence sustains this contention, In March, 1871

1 Ind. Cl.iCemm. 422 _ ’ V . ' 449

- 1h.“

when Superintendent Meacham recommended an area in southeastern
Oregon be withdrawn from the public domain, his recommendation was
that it be done "with a view of selecting a site for an Indian resern
vatien on which to consolidate Indians east of the Cascade Mountains
in Oregon, excepting these who may select lands in severalty from

the reservation on which they are now located," and when the reseru

vation was established and opened there were Snake or Piuto Indians

pfrom Idaho and Nevada collected and placed on the reservation, as well

as the roving bands of_Indians in southeast Oregon. It is also clear
from the evidence that when the Government officials were selecting a
site for the reservation they were concerned solely with the problem
of choosing an area of land that would be adaptable for reservation
purposes, rather than determining the ownership of land which had
theretofere been considered a part of the public domain. We think
the evidence fails to establish that the Government recognized or
intended to recognize or acknowledge the original Indian title of.
any tribe or band or group of Indians to the lands in the Malheur
Reservation. I
The Commission therefore concludes that the petitioners are not

entitled to recover on their first claim in Count I of the petition
as amended, for the reason that it has not been satisfactorily established by the evidence with.any degree of certainty that any tribe,

band or group of Snake or Piute Indians actually occupied and exclusive«

ly used and possessed any definite portion of the claimed area of land

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 . 450

in 15..

at any time prior to September 13, 1882, the date the major portion
of the Malheur Reservation was restored to the public domain, nor,
was the Indian title of any tribe, band or group of Indians therein
recognized or acknowledged by the defendantg
V comm: II

The two claims in Count II are for the value of the Executive

order reservation lands and damages for the alleged failure of'de~

fondant to comply with the provisions of the unratified treaty of

1868.
The Executive Order Claim
This claim is presented as an alternative claim to recover for

the same land claimed under original Indian title in Count I. It is
petitioners‘ position that should the Commission find that petitioners‘
original Indian title to the lands claimed had not been satisfactorily
established, there is still a moral obligation on the part of the dew
fondant to compensate them for a taking of the reseryation lands, on
account of the reservation having been located in territory_claimcd by’
them, and it being established for their exclusive use and occupancy

in fulfillment of promises made by the defendant in the unratified

a treaty of December 10, 18689

The question of the rights acquired by an Indian tribe in an Era
ecutive order reservation was determined by the United States Supreme

Court in the case of the Sic K Tribe of Indians vs, United tates,

451
l Ind. Cl. Comm. 422

_.16 _

3l6'U.S. 317. In that case it was held that an Indian tribe had no

 

compensable interest in lands that were simply set apart for them by
an Executive order of the President, without congressional authorini
nation and ratification, and that, therefore, they had no claim in

either law or equity for the value of the lands when they were restored to the public domain. In a recent case (l9h9) Hynes vs. Grimes‘

Packing Co., 337 ms, 86, the Supreme Court in discussing the rights

 

' acquired by an Executive order reservation used this language (p. 103):

.An Indian reservation created by Executive Order
of the ?resident conveys no right of use or occupancy
to the beneficiaries beyond the pleasure of Congress
or the President. Such rights may be terminated by the
unilateral action of the United States without legal
liability for compensation in any form even though
Congress has permitted suit on the claim. Sioux Tribe
vs. United States, 316 ms. 317: * -i *

.The decision in the Sioux case would appear to foreclose any
legal or equitable right of recovery by the petitioners on their Executive order claim. We understand, however, from an examination of
the pleadings and brief, that the petitioners, recognizing the effect
of the Sioux;case, take the position that the defendant was under a
moral obligation.to compensate them for a taking of these reservation
lands that were set aside for the use and occupancy of the Pinto and
Snake Indians, and as such claim would be one not recognized by any
existing rule of law or equity, the Commission should therefore

determine it under clause (5) of section 2 of the Indian Claims Com—

mission Act (60 Stat. ions); 25 U.s.c. 70a) which confers jurisdiction

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 452

upon this Commission to determine “claims based upon fair and honoru
able dealings that are not recognized by any existing rule of law or
equity,"

The question then in the alternative claim for the land is whether,
under the facts and circumstances shown, the action of the defendant R
in cancelling the Malhcur Reservation and restoring it to the public
domain, was contrary to “fair and honorable" dealings and therefore
placed the defendant under a moral obligation to compensate the Indians
for these Malheur Reservation landsa

The petitioners argue that the defendant signed a treaty with
their ancestors, and although it was'unratified, yet the Malheur Roseru
vation was initiated in consequence of that treaty and they were established upon this reservation in their own country} but were forcibly
removed therefrom to the Yakima Reservation and the Malheur Reservation
cancelled without their consent and without payment of compensation,i
These are the facts and circumstances which petitioners say constituted
a course of conduct on the part of the United States whichg on the basis
of "fair and honorable" dealings, placed the United States under a moral
obligation to compensate them for the land.

As to the contention that the Melheur Reservation was established
in fulfillment of the provisions of the unratified treaty of December 10,
1868, we are unable to find in the record sufficient evidence to support
the conclusion that by issuing the various Executive orders establishing

the reservation, the Government was fulfilling any express or implied

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 453

treaty obligations.
The treaty of December 10, 1868 never legally bound the Govern»

nent because it was not ratified by the United States Senate, Black 

feet et al Nations vs. United States, 81 Ct. Clms. 101. In that case

 

the Court of Claims, in considering the question of the validity of
an unratified treaty, said (p. 126, 127):

we can find no precedent which would warrant a
departure from the reason for the necessity of formal
ratification of Indian treaties. Indian treaties were
negotiated by duly accredited commissioners of the United
States, and Congress in no legislation pointed out to the
court ever indicated an intent to entrust the finality of
the agreements and surrender the superior right of super»
vision, amendment, and approval, by way of ratification
of the same, until 1871. Until 1871 the Congress refused

,.. -..._..-_. .. ........ 0
‘to expose the Government to the errors of a single person»

and ratification of a treaty to render it obligatory was
uniformly recognized. * * *

We have yet to find a single instance in the whole
course of the relationship between tribal Indians and
the Government where the latter has surrendered, either
in dealings between itself and the tribes or in dealings
-of third parties with the tribes, its sovereign right of
supervision, control, and approval. .All the Indian legislation with.which this court is familiar has either
directly and expressly determined Indian and governmental
rights involved therein or taken the form of agreements
between the parties which became effective after submission
for approval of the tribe and later ratified by Congress.
The doctrine of governmental ratification has been firmly
entrenched during the entire course of the Indian relationu

But even if this treaty of 1868 had been ratified it did not cons
tain any express or implied promise by the defendant to grant these
petitioners the Malheur Reservation lands, In fact, we find nothing

in the unratified treaty of 1868 that can be construed as an obligation

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 I . 454

O-0}_9u-6

on the part of the defendant to grant the petitioners exclusive oceua
pancy rights in any specific area of land, much less the lands for
which this action is breughta

The facts as described by the official correspondence both before
and after the dates of the Executive order of March in, 1371 first
setting aside the large area of public land and the subsequent Ex»
eeutive orders establishing the reservation, indicate that all actions
thereunder treated the reservation land as public land, and the sole
purpose and reason for creating the reservation was to provide a suit»
able location where all the various roving and unsettled bands and
groups of Indians in southeastern Oregon and adjacent areas, includ—
ing those Indians who were parties to the unratified treaty of 1868,
could be consolidated and controlled, It is true that the Malheur

Reservation was designated.in the Executive order creating it as a

- reservation for the “Snake or.Piute Indians," but we believe such

designation was descriptive only, It created no title to the land
but only the right of the Indians to reside thereon during the pleasurwz
of the Government, which right would have undoubtedly continued had
they not left the reservation, See The Crew Nation vs; The United
States! 81 Ct. Clms. 238, 272,

It is reasonable to assume that all the Indians placed on the
Malheur Reservation, including petitioners‘ ancestorsg could have
continued.to reside there had they not on their own initiative elected

to abandom.it in June, 1878 at the outbreak of the Bannock War, and

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 . 455

a-3200-no

with the majority of them under Chiefs Oits am: Egan joining the
hostile Bannoeks in their war against the white settlers and the United States Army. So it was unquestionably the actions of these
"hostile" Piutes in that war that were the cause of their being re—i
moved by the Government to the Yakima Reservation in Washington, and
not permitted to return to the Malheur Reservation.

It must be admitted that the policy adopted by the Government
with reference to keeping the Piutes at Yakima or permitting their
return to the Malheur Reservation is somewhat obscure. However, it
may be said in justification of the course the defendant pursued in
first granting and then rescinding permission for those at Yakima to
return to the Malheur that it was considered unsafe for the Indians
themselves to return to an.area where there was such a strong feeling

* of hostility towards them as existed in the vicinity of the Malheur
Reservation, There were also the reports of the Indian Agent at
Yakima to the effect that many of the Eiutes there, with the eheeption
of Leggins‘ band who claimed not to have taken part in the Bannoek‘War,
had no expectation of returning to the Malheur Reservation, considered
they had forfeited the reservation because of their actions during the
war, and were reconciled to remaining at Yakima permanently. This
attitude seems to have changed when they learned of the efforts being '
made by Chief Winnemucca and daughter, Sarah, to procure their return
to the Malheur, and thereafter the majority of these Piutes appear to

have taken no further interest in remaining at Yakima, and began leaving

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 ’ 455

.421there in groups and drifting back to Nevada and southeastern Oregon.
The record shows that many of them settled on other established

Indian reservations in those areas.

As for those Piutes who were not taken to Yakima and were still
located in the Malheur area, the Government never did rescind the
permission granted them to return and make the Malheur Reservation
their home. The record shows that the Malheur Reservation was re»
mopened in 1878 right after the close of the Bannock War and preparations
were made by the Indian Department for its occupancy by the Indians.
Every effort was made by In ian Agent Reinhardt to persuade these
former Malheur Indians in the area to return and occupy the reseru
vation, but he was unsuccessful, and as a result the Malheur Agency
was discontinued on December 23, 1880s And, although the Malheur
was continued as an Indian reservation.until Septenber l3,‘l882, it
was never occupied by Indians subsequent to June, 1878, the date all
of its Indian occupants abandoned it at the outbreak of the Bannock
War, orua period of four and one half years that the reservation was
available but not occupied by any Indians. This was the situation
with respect to the status of the Malhour Reservation when the Presidentissued the Executive order of September 13, 1882 cancelling the rescrnh
vation and restoring the lands included in the reservation to the public
domain,

‘We have already decided that the petitioners‘ claim of original

Indian title to the lands included_in the Malheur Reservation was not

1 Ind. c1. Com. 422 r 457

u 22..

established by the evidence. And the Executive orders creating the
Malheur Reservation did not vest an exclusive use and occupancy or
possessory title to the reservation lands in those Snake or Piute
Indians who went on the reservation after it was established, but
only a right to reside there. So when the Indians all abandoned the
reservation at the outbreak of the Bannock War, with most of them
Joining the war against the Government, and those Malheur Indians
who had not been in the war refused to return and occupy the reseru
vation, we are of the opinion that under these circumstances the
Government cannot be charged with unfair and dishonorable dealings
when the reservation was cancelled and restored to the public
domain without compensating the Indians for the value of the land.
The Unratified Treaty

We will next consider the right of petitioners to recover
damages for the alleged failure of the United States to carry out
certain obligations created under the unratified treaty of December 10,
1868 with the "Snake or Shoshone Indians." Since the Government was
never legally bound by the treaty of 1868, because it was never ratified by the United States Senate, we will discuss this question from
the standpoint of the position taken by the petitioners in their brief.

The petitioners maintain that although the United States may not
have been legally obligated to comply with the provisions of the unratified treaty, nevertheless it was morally obligated to deal fairly

and honorably with respect to fulfilling the promises made the Indians

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422 '  453

...;33....

in the treaty, within the meaning of clause (5) of section 2 of the
Indian Claims Commission Act, supra. It is contended that the treaty
was entered into at the close of a war in nhich the Indians signing
the treaty had been subjugated and driven from lands claimed by them,
and the promises were made by the defendant to induce them to keep

the peace and they would in turn be furnished a reservation, permanent
homes, food, clothing and assistance towards civilization. hose
promises they claim were not kept by the defendant, and cite the record presented here as showing that the petitioners were established
on the Malheur Reservation, but in consequence of the Bannock War in
1878 they were removed to the Yakima Reser'ation in Washington wherel
they were improperly cared for by the Government and refused permission
to return to their Malheur Reservation, with the result that some of
them left Yakima and went on other reservations to live without tribal
funds or lands, while those who returned to Burns, Oregon in the via
cinity of the former Malheur Reservation were wholly neglected until
recent years,

The Government‘s position is that even if the treaty of 1868 had
been ratified and created obligations upon the United States, the
evidence fails to shew'a breach of these obligations, and insists‘
that the Indians breached.the treaty by their actions, at least those
identified with Chiefs We—you~wah, Egan and Oits.

The evidence shows that prior to the time of the treaty negotiations,

the Government had practically no knowledge with reference to these

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 ' 459

- ah Indians, or of any particular area or areas being occupied by the
various subntribes or bands of these Snake or Shoshone Indians, as
they were named in the treaty. It was known that they had roamed

and hunted in the territory in southeastern Oregon and adjacent areas,
and had been continuously hostile to the whites from the time Oregon
was established as a territory in ISHS.

The treaty was negotiated at the close of an extended war between
these Indians and the United States, and it is quite evident that
Superintendent Huntingtonis main objective in making a treaty at that
time was to establish and continue amicable relations between those
recently hostile Indians and the United States, pending their permanent settlement and civilization. There was_no mention made in the
treaty of any land as belonging to these Indians, nor does there
appear to have been any discussion at that time relative to any land
as being occupied and owned by them. The treaty appears to have been
simply a solution of a troublesome situation, with both the Government
and the Indians making promises designed to be mutually beneficial.

The unratified treaty provided by article 2 that the Snake
Indians acknowledged the doninion of the United States and agreed
thereafter to submit to its authority and obey such laws as might be
enacted for their government. By Article H, the Indians agreed that
they would reside upon such reservation as might be thereafter I
allotted to them and obey the authorities placed over then, with

the United States guaranteeing protection to the Indians in person

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 422 _ 460

and property while upon such reservation. It was provided in Article
5 that future provisions would be made by the Government for the permanent location of the Snake Indians and for their education, government,

food, clothing and for allotments of land in severalty when their adu

vancenent warranted it.

While the Fetitioners rely upon the foregoing provisions of the
treaty as expressing the promises made and not kept by the defendant,
we think the record discloses that subsequent to the negotiation of the
treaty the Government attenpted in good faith to establish these Indians
on reservations, and its efforts were nnsuccessful principally because
of the conduct of the Indians thenselvessi The first attempt to settle
then was made by Superintendent Meacham in November, 1869 when he held
a long council meeting with seven Snake or Piute Chiefs and tried to
persuade them to settle on the Klanath Reservation in southern Oregon,
but five of the Chiefs who had signed the 1868 treaty refused to move
as requested, declaring they wanted to remain in southeast Oregon.

This would be understandable because they were familiar with that area,
and yet when the Malheur Reservation was established in this territory,
they resided on the Malheur and appear to have been getting along satisn
faeterily, but they voluntarily abandoned that reservation in June, 1878
at the beginning of the Bannock War and joined the lanneehs in fighting
against the United States in violation of t.eir promises under the
treaty of 1868. After that war it was the resentment resulting from

the part they had taken in the hostilities and depredatiens against the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422 461

_ 26 whites under the leadership of their Chiefs Egan and Oits, that
caused the Government to remove them to Yakima, Washington and settle
them on that reservation, At Yakima they were provided with the same
care and opportunities of civilization offered on Indian reservations
at that time, and at first they appear to have been satisfied and of
course could have remained at Yakima had they desired to do so, but
they became dissatisfied and began leaving, and by 18814 all of then
had voluntarilv left Yakima to roam through the country, or had
settled on other Indian reservationsc .d large group of them was re»

ceived at the Western Shoshonean or Back Valley Reservation located

f

in Nevada and Idaho, where they were assigned lands, and where the
or their descendants appear to be livingiat the present tine. One

other group entered the Warm Spring reservation in Oregon where they
or their descendants also reside at the present tine. There is a
group of Piutes located near Burns, Oregon which petitioners claim
received the poorest treatment. However, in recent years, it is
admitted, they have been receiving eare‘and assistance from the Government.
The former Malheur Indians who were not taken to Yakima after
the Bannock War could not be persuaded by the Government to return
to the Malheur Reservation to reside and the evidence does not disclose
pwhere they settled and lived after the Malheur Reservation was abandoned.
It is obvious that the petitioners could not expect to receive the

benefits promised under the unratified treaty until they were willing

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 422   _ . 462

....27...

to reside on reservations and obey the authority established for
their government and welfare. It would have called for the use of
force on the part of the Government to have placed these Indians

on the Klamath.Reservation, or to have retained them on the Malheur
or Yakima Reservations, and the Government did-not attempt that
method. It has been held that when the conduct of Indians has been.
such that compliance with treaty obligations becomes impossible or
‘useless, the Government shaild be relieved from liability for failure
to perform. See Sioux Tribe of Indians vs; United States, 8% Ct»

Clms. 15. However, when the petitioners, or their ancestors, finally

 

located on the various reservations in Oregon, Kevada and Idaho, as
the record shows most of them did, there is no evidence that they
have not_rcceived the usual and customary benefits provided by the
Government on Indian roservationso
We do not believe the evidence submitted will sustain the p0~
titieners‘_contention.that the Government did not deal fairly and
honorably with them in its compliance with.any obligations created
‘under the provisions of the unratified treatyo On the contrary,
there is shown to have been persistent efforts on the part of the
Government to locate these Indians on reservations where they would
receive care and support from the Government, and if the Government's
I efforts were not entirely successful, it was due principally to the

conduct of the Indians themselves in not observing the provisions

8 463
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 422

w 28 u

of the'unretified treaty, In our opinion the petitioners have not

established e right to recover on their claim for damages based on
the failure of the Government to comply with the provisions of the
unratified treaty of December 10, 18689

It is the conclusion of the Connission that the petitioners are
not entitled to recover on any of the claims set forth in Counts I

and II of the petition; therefore, the petition is dismissed. It is

so ordered.

Chief Commissioner Witt and Commissioner 0'Merr concur in the

above opinion.

December 29, 1950

