7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 2L5

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLADIS C(I‘~EL"1ISSICN

_HOHAVE TR_T_B'E OF IKDLAIIS of ‘Arizona,
California, and Nevada; and

ROBERT J EE?Kl'i\'."S , FRANCE STAEL1‘-‘IAN,
GEORGE ‘.~."£LSOI~E, HAL O. DAVIDSON,
CYRUS ‘:3. FIELDS , ARTHUR GOEI‘ ‘.~:'.EI].”N,
and FARE-.’OOD J$xT{J"3xIS, members of
Tribal Council,

\

Claimants,

V. Docket No. 295

UNITED STATES OF A1‘v.U-EIRICA,
Defendant.

:13 MOHAVE DIDZLAEIS who are members
of the Colorado River Indian Tribes;
and JAY GOULD, NOI-?l~ZA1\? SCOTT and
MFRRITT IAFOOBE, as representatives
of such group ,

Petitioners ,

Docke t No . 283

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
v. 3
UNITED smsras, )
)

Defendant. (co;:~:s OLID. ran)

Decided: March l9, 1959

Appearances:
Harold Payne 0. M. Wright
Attorney for Claimants Attorney for Petitioners
Docket 130. 295 Docket E0. 283

Ralph A. Barney and Lester
, Reynolds, with whom. was
Mr. Assistant ttorney
General Perrf ‘A-‘I. Horton
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION Q3: Lzg ce~;~11ssIoN

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 21:6
0‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The claim of the Mohave Tribe with respect to lands fomerly held
by said Indians by Indian title was tinelv filed with this Commission
by two separate identifiable groups of I‘-iohave Indians. In Docket 295'
the petitioners are the Mohave Tribe of Indians and named individual.
members of the Tribal Council on behalf of the Mohave Tribe, and for
themselves, and for all persons similarly situated as members of said
tribe. Petitioners in Docket 295 are the Needles group of I-Iohave Indians living on or near the reservation in Mohave Valley, set aside by
Executive Orders of August 22, l890, December 1, l9l0, and February 2,
l9J_l. The petitioners in Docket 283, as amended, are The Mohave Indians
who are members oi‘ The Colorado River Indian Tribes and named indivdual mc-mbers alleged to be ‘Mohave Indians. The original petition in
Docket 283 was amended to present therein solely the claim of the I-iohave
as to aboriginzd title. In Docket 295 all claims were severed except
the first cause of.‘ action pertaining to aboriginal title. Both the
Needles group and the Parker group, as those Mohave on the Colorado
River Reservation are sometimes called, have the capacity‘ U0 present the
claim. of the I-Eohave Tribe.

Since the claims as to aboriginal title set forth in Dockets 283
and 295 included lands in Caliibrnia, said dockets were consolidated for
the purposes of trial with Docket numbers BI and 37 in which cases were
presented the claim. of the "Indians of California" and certain other
docket numbers seeking recovem for the value of lands allegedly held by

aboriginal ownership in the respective petitioners (Order of Commission,

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 21.17

Noveraber l?, 1953). On January 20, 1958, this Commission held that the
petitioners  Dockets 283 and 295 were entitled to present theclairrz

of the iiohave Tribe relating to lands in Califorma and that petitioners
in Dockets 31 and 37 did not have the exclusive right to present clahns
relating to glands in that State (6 Ind. Cl. Cornn. 86). While it was
originally thought by the parties and the Commission (Order of the Commission, Nov. l6, 1956, as amended Nov. 20, 1956) that the hearings ‘on
the Mohave claim would be limited to proof as to aboriginal ownership

to lands in California (as opposed to lands outside California) the
nature of.‘ the proof as to Mohave land holdings necessarily had to include the evidence with respect to the alleged exclusive use and occupancy of the Iviohave Indians of not only lands in California but in Arizona
and Nevada as well. Since petitioners in both Docket 283 and Docket 295
were presenting the c '‘.i':: of the I-Eohave Tribe as to aboriginal lands, the
doc‘.-:ets were consolidated to be prosecuted as a single claim (Tr. 20,
Doc‘.-set 283). t is this claim to aboriginal ownership of the Iviohave Indians to lands in what are now the States of Califorma, Arizona and
Nevada, that is detemined herein.

Following the hearings on the merits  the above cases, petit oners

in Doc}: t 295' filed a motion on April 5, 1957., "for leave to amend peti(D

tion” on the grounds "that the issues raised by said anenctuents were tried
at the hearing of the above matter at the consolidated trial thus far had,

by consent of the parties"; and "that said anendnaents conform to the evidence trhich was offered and received at the trial thus far had, without

objection; -I:- -2- -3-.” On Ray 1, 1957, petitioners were permitted by

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 2&8

Com.mission’s order to file the amended petition and defendant was

granted time to answer or otherwise plead to said amended petition.
Defendant thereupon filed a motion to vacate said Order of hay’ l, 1957
and to disallow or strike the amended petition. Defendant urged among
other grounds in support of.‘ its motion that "the changes and additions
proposed by the amended petition are not confirmed or supported by the
evidence cited by claimants, or any other creditable evidence in the
record." The amended petition set forth the claim on behalf of the
Mohave Indians to large areas of land not included in the original peti- o
ticnl Since the petitioners in Docket 295 urged that this claim to additional land confomed to the evidence, it beca"r:e incumbent upon the
Commission to search the entire record to ascertain the validity of this
contention, and action on dei‘endant‘s motion to disallow or strike the
amended petition was delayed until the Commission could determine the
merits of the whole claim. The Commission has found no substantial
evidence to support petitioners’ claim to the additional large areas contended for in the amended petition. A thorough study‘ of all the evidence,
much of which is set forth in the findings of fact herein made, does not
Support petitioners‘ contention in Docket 295' that such amend-'-rzent would
conform to the evidence.
Briefly, the amended petition would add a large area of land ini‘soutl_west Arizona, extending the claimed boundary eastward from the crests of
the mountains bordering the Colorado River on the east (said crests being

the eastern boundary claimed in the o 'g‘in.c_..'='i petition) to the“ Hassajrampa

*1
H

River "a.lle;r. The southern 'oounda“3r I-rest oi‘ the Colorado River originall;*

7_ Ind. Cl. Com. 219 2h9

claimed would be extended by the amended petition to include the Colorado
Desert area in California. The additional lands sought to be claimed by
the Mohave by the amended petition, east of the Colorado River, would be
added by petitioners in Docket 295' to the area claimed because, according to Mohave mythology; and tradition, the Mohave were in the area for a
period before settling in the Mohave Valley follot-sing their being canpelled to withdraw from the Mohave Desert ue to the changing clinate
and increasing aridity. The Yavapai, according to petitioners, who were
located in historic times in at least a part of this additional area,
"were aliens residing in Mohave territory having no claim to the land."
There is no proof that in historic times, or at or near the time of the
acquisition of these lands by the United States, the I-iohave Indians exclusively used and occupied the ‘additional lands in Arizona, which petiO

tioners would I10’.-I file claim to. Petitioners would add the lands west

on archeological investigations which have been called speculative ‘ogr at
least some authorities that the I-iohave may have inhabited the Colorado
Desert befom increasing aridity made the desert uninhabitable. There is
no evidence to suwort petitioners‘ contention of o*:»rnershi_ in the I=Eo...ave
of the Colorado Desert in historic times.
The Corrmission therefore sustains defendant‘s motion to vacate the

Order of ‘fiav 1, 1957, and to disallow or strike the First Amended Pet'tion, and an order to tL_iS effect is this dar made. It ‘sh

O
C-‘
ll:
D.
U
(D
:3
0
cl
(D
Q.

at this time also that petitioners‘ counsel in Docket 295 further intimate?

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 250

in the briefs submitted that petitioners in said docket should be permitted to amend the petition to also include lands south of the Gila
River and Chocolate Mountains and m the hnperial Valley of Cali“ornia.
Petitioners‘ counsel urges that the petition in Docket 295 "sets forth
a representative action adequate to represent the Mohave and also the
Quechan Yuma? and the Kamia, all of I-.?1'lO1T1 together made up the I-‘iohavean
Inner Group.  -11: a" (Pet. Proposed Finding II (3), p. 32). Said counsel also contends (Clainants‘ First Supplemental Proposed Findings of
Fact and Brief, at page 3):

‘-1' '1' %- These references make very clear why we can see that

the Quechan and the Mohave (Amalchava) are actually one tribe,

and uh‘: in the preparation of the Findings of Fact in this

case it is often necessary’ to go beyond the testimony’ of the

expert witnesses who have appeared herein, and to seek the

answers in the documentary evidence and source material which

appears in the record. Actually there are no overall experts

on the I-Eohave. It is therefore necessarj for the Counsel and

the Commission to function as their own ezrperts.

Although the Quecha_?1 (Yuma) Indians have their own clai-‘:1 pending before the Commission, able counsel for the Mohave would ingeniously substitute the I-Eohave Tribe as the proper party to sue for the Yuma lands.
To do this counsel suggests tiat certain Tf.'uman-speal<;ing tribes, that is,
the Mohave, Quechan, and Kamia were so closely allied th t t err formed
his so-call ed Mohavean Inner Group, which functioned as a unit. while
counsel admits that anthropologists have applied the word "3."o1nans” to
include such Indians as the I~iohave,Q.1echan (Yuma), Kamia, Diegueno,

Cocopa, Naricopa, I-Ialchidhoma, Kohuana, ‘xalapai and Havasupai, he urges

that "i~'1ohavean" would be more appropriate for this linguistic group

”because the Mohave are show.-In by the evidence to have been the most

7 Ind.. Cl. Corn. 219 251

-L

prominent and central and progressive of all these people." These contentions are important not only because they are made with respect to the
lands of the Yuma and Kamia tribes but also are urged as to other lands

claimed in the petition but used and occupied by other Indian tribes.

There is no substantial evidence to support the grandiose conception of

petitioners‘ counsel in Docket 295 as to the existence of a land-holding
enti ty or group known as the so-called Mohavean Inner Group. The documentary evidence, and the testimony of record, are all to the contrary.
The Yuma Tribe and the Kania Tribe, while allies of the I-Eohave, were
separate and distinct entities. These contentions of counsel have been
briefly discussed because they were presented in the briefs submit ted but
no consideration will be given to any further attempt to have rewritten
the ethnological history of these Indian tribes as truly shown by the evidence of record.
he claim of the I-iohave Indians as presented in :)OCn'.'G‘t 295' alleges

that the said Indians aboriginelly owned a vast extent of territory
stretching from the Colorado River and adjoiri -g mountains in the east

to the Sierra Nevada Mountains in the west and from Blaca Cazyon on the
Colorado River dot-znstrean to near the City of Blythe in California. The
lands so claimed include not only the valley lands and adjoin.ir.g raountains
on the Colorado River but also the Mohave Desert. The amount of lands described in the petition in Docket 283 as Mohave territory is less pretentious but includes an area 200 miles long and lOO miles wide in and adjacent to the valley of the Colorado River from approximately Black Canyon

to a point south hali‘-my be'ween Blythe, California, and 'i'u:11a, Arizona.

7 Ind. C1. Com. 219 252

As previously stated, the 'i-Eohave belonged to the Yuman linguistic
family. They have been known as Jam-a-jabs, Aznacavas and other similar
names. The I-iohave Tribe was a tribe in the orthodox sense of t ..e word.
Since reservation days, however, part of the tribe has lived on the
Mohave Reservation and is called the Needles group (petitioners in Docket
295), while a part also has lived on the Colorado River Indian Reservation and is known as the Parker group. Both are identifiable groups
of Mohave Indians.

The Mohave Valley on the Colorado River is the historic core horneland of the I-Iohave Tribe. In or near this valley the Mohave Indians have
been found in nuzzfoers SiI‘.C9 the first white contact by Onate, the Spaniard,
in l60l=,-léOS, and Padre C-arces, the Spanish missionary", in l776. In l826,
James Pattie ah Faaericah trapper and his party were attacked ‘by’ the Mohave
Indians in the Great Colorado Valley, probably sane:-rhere between Parker
and Poston and again a few days later probably in Mohave Valley. Jedidiah
&nith, in l826 and l827, found the Mohave living in large numbers in
Mohave Valley. American officers, such as Sitgreaves in l8§l, '*:.Th.ipple in
18511, and Ives and white in 1858, found large nusfoers of the Mohave Tribe
-in the Mohave Valley.

The Mohave Tribe may be considered pmdominately a sedentar; people.
They were mostly a faxmihg people who planted their farms in the Mohave
Valley, depending on the annual flood of the Colorado River which both
irrigated their fields and fertilized them with a deposit ..of silt. They
raised corn, melons, pu:::.p1~::r;s, bears and other varieties from seed. It

has been estimated the Iichave Indians obtained 50 to 60 per cent of their

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 253

subsistence by farming and perhaps 25 to 30 per cent was from the mesquite
been with the remainder of their food supply fr 111 other sources, mostly,
however, fbh. According to Doctor Alfred L. Kroeber, sometirces called
the dean of Azzxerican anthropologists, petitioners’ expert in Docket 283,
the Mohave hunted rezuaricably little for an Indian tribe. Doctor Kenneth
Stewart, an expert for petitioners in Docket 295, stated the Mohave Tribe
had 20 hunters in a tribe reportedly containing some 2000 to 3000 people.
According to Doctor Kroeber, if the Mohave wandered "it was from curiosity
or I-Ianderlust or because there was a war on,or something of that sort."

The Mohave were also traders and travelled far to the West Coast to trade
for shells and far to the east to obtain ‘goods. These Indians thought
little of traveling hundreds of miles to carry warfare to their energies
or to join their allies the Yuma Tribe in warzfare against enemies oi‘ the
latter.

That the Mohave Tribe had Indian title to Mohave Valley at, and long
prior to, the acquisition of said lands therein by the United States, is
admitted by  authorities on the Mohave Indians. In order to properly
and more readily describe the areas claimed bgr petitioners the C mnission
has found it convenient, in its findings of fact herein, to refer to the
areas 9J_ong the Colorado River as numbered and delineated on. Doctor
Kroeber‘s map, petitioners‘ Exhibit 2 in Docket 283. The Mohave Valley
on said map is Area I, and Indian title in said lands is found to have
been in the Mohave Tribe. Area 2-9. on said map is Cottornrood Valley, and

this defendant‘s expert, Doctor Harold 3‘. Driver, agrees was Mohave land

and it has been so found by this Cozmission, Above the Bill. ‘.~EilJ iar1s Fork’

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 219 25b

is a triang\.l1 ar-shaped area designated Area 2-B *.«:h:1-ch all agree belonged
to the Mohave Indians. On this map are other areas, that is , Area 3
(Chemehuevi Valley) and Areas l:~A, }.*.--B’ and Ls,-C (Great Colorado Va_lle3.r)

with respect to which there is disagreement bet:-Ieen the ethnologists.

Area 3 - Chernehuevi Valley

 

It is not K110‘.-J'I'l when the Chemehuevi Tribe began to use and occupy
the Chemehuevi Valley of the Colorado River. The Chemehuevi, a band of
Southern Paiute Indians, were met as early as 1776 in the Mohave Desert
by Padre C-arces west of the ‘~.’Ihipple1~iountains. According to Doctor
Kroeber, the Chenehuevi Indians infiltrated Cheznehuevi ’Jal_'Le3,- between
l800(?)-l8SO. While at one tine Kroeber believed that the Che:::e‘r.ue'~ri
were but squatters and the land belonged to the I-Iohave, he later said he
felt 60-E0 that the Cheznehuevi had a better claim to it. Doctors Ste:-rart.
and Harrington were of the opinion that the land belonged to the I~1oI:*a'=.re
and that the Chaaehuevi occupied it by su;“i‘erance. Doctor Driver, for
the defendant, agreed with Doctor Kroeber. when the Cheaehuevi reached
the river frcrn the desert is not definitely 1«:no1~rr... No mention of them is
made in the vaJ_le:;' until 1851; when Lieutenant ‘E-. ripple noted some 200
Chemehuevi there, with their villages mostly on the west "oan‘.<.

Petitioners in Dockets 283 and 295 contend that the Chmehuevi Vauey
belonged to the Mohave and that the Chenehuevi were there by sufferance
oi‘ the 1-Iohave or were merely tenants at x«:i_'Ll. Hang: arguments are made,
93P€CiI=‘l1y ‘Ln the proposed findings of fact and brief in D_ocE-cet 295', 
include as Mohave lands areas which were used and occupied by other tribes

on the ground that such use and occupan ' was by pe mission or s‘-.1:”‘i"erance

U

7 Ind. c1. Com. 219 255

of the I-Eohave Tribe. The theorgr is actually one of sovereignty with the
other tribes relegated to the roles of satellites of the allegedly dominant, more powerful Mohave Tribe. It is similar to saying that because one
nation is poi-?el"."‘.‘UJ. the lands of a smaller weal<er nation belong to the
former rather than the latter. It is more logical to say that the Mohave
did not care if a smaller but friendly tribe located on unoccupied lands
adjoiriirzg Mohave territory. As Doctor Kroeber states, the Chemehuevi

felt the valley was theirs and the Mohave apparently recognized their
rights therein. In arr; event, Indian title is based on exclusive use and
occupancy in an Indian tribe. United States v. Santa Fe, Blh U. S. 339,
3145. Far stronger evidence than the mere fact that the I-Iohave claimed
Chemehuevi Valley to be Mohave lands would be needed to agree with petitioners‘ contentions when the lands in cgnestion are used and occupied by
another independent tribe.

Areas 1;-A, L;-B, 13-0; The Great Colorado Valley

In the days of Padre Garces, The Great Colorado Valley, which stretches

along the Colorado River from about Par1<er,,A.rizona , dot-mstream to near
Picacho, Califorrola, was the home of the Halchidhoma Indians, a Yuman tribe.
The Mohave Indians, who had been at war with the Halchidhozna for a number
of years, attacked and defeated them in 3.828. The Halchidhona fled eastward frcxn the river to escape the Yuma, allies of the Mohave, who blocked
their escape do:-mstream. The Mohave are said to have re:z:.ai_ned in the
Great Colorado Valley for the winter to prevent a return of the I-Zalchi-d—

home to the area. Accordirg to the ethnologists, a vacuum existed in the

Great Colorado Val.“ ley from that time until I859. Accor&ng to Doctor

..:.. —--.—.-..j--._.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 256

Harrington, the vacuum stretched for mi...es south of Parker and that although the Yuma occupied the valley up as far as present day Blythe, even
this stretch was claimed by both Yuma and Mohave. Doctor S~gewart testified that he assigned the whole valley (this is, Areas L;-A, 1.;-B, and 14-0)
to the Mohave evenithough it was not continually inhabited by any tribe
between l828 and l8S9, and that Mohave, Chernehuevi. and Yuma were scattered through the valley. Doctor Stewart was of the opinion that the
Mohave owned the land because they conquered it and regarded it as theirs.
Petitioners‘ witness, Doctor Kroeber, was of the opinion that Area }.;-C
was Yuma territory and with this Doctor Driver, for the defendant, agreed.
As to Areas h-A and 13-8, Kroeber testified that although the Chemehuevi
also infiltrated into these areas and Yumas were also found in the region,
he was of the opinion that the lands in the Great Colorado Valley belonged
to the ‘Mohave and Yuma who did the conquering, and it was but a question
of where to divide it between them. As previously stated, he assigned
Area }.'.-C, that is, the lower part of the valley, to the Yuma and then
decided that the I-Iohave owned the middle and head of the valley.

As is more fully set forth in the findings of fact, the expert witnesses agree that the Great Colorado Valley was not exclusively used and
occupied by any one tribe. Petitioners‘ experts contend ‘that the Yumas
and the Chenehuevi in Areas 1;-A and La,-B, especially, were squatters, or
immigrants or aliens. While there is some proof that Mohaves did live in
the G‘eat Colorado Valley even before Irretiba, the Iiovhave Chief, moved
into Area 1;-A in 1859 with 77 families, there is substantial evidence

that Chemehuevi and Yuma Indians were also occupying Areas }_=.—A and 3_=.—E.

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 219 257

For the same reasons previously stated with respect to the Chemehuevi
Valley the contentions of exclusive use and occupancy in the I-iohave
Indians to the Great Colorado Valley cannot be sustained by this Commission.

The Mohave Desert

 

The Fiohave Desert extends west from the Colorado River opposite the
Mohave Valley as far as the Tehachipi, San Gabriel, and San Bernardino
Mountains which we part of the great range generally termed the Sierra
Nevada. In the middle of the Mohave Desert the Mohave River rises in the
San Be'c‘:_}a1‘<iir1o Mountains and flows north and then east terminating in a
sink which gs known as Soda Lake. On the course of this river are located
the modern cities of Victorville and Barstow. Soon after it emerges from
the mountains its water disappears into the ground and only intermittently
or upon seldom occasions of flood does water flow above ground in its bed.
Crossing this desert was a trail or trade route which began just above
Needles in the Mohave Valley, thence across the desert via Paiute Wash,
Paiute Creek (Springs), Cedar Canyon through the Providence Range , Soda
Lake, along the Mohave River Valley to ‘Cajon Pass, and along the Santa
Clara River to the coast.

This large desert area is claimed by the petitioners i'n Docket 295
to have been Mohave territory. Petitioners urge that although this region
has mostly been so arid in the historic period as to be uzainhabitable without artificial assistance except in a very few places along the I-‘lohave

River and the Paiute Wash, it was in recent prehistoric times perhaps dovm

7 Ind. Cl. 219 258

to as late as the early sixteenth century more generally watered and supplied with vegetable and animal life so as to provide subsistence for habitation. Petitioners further contend that during this prehistoric time it
was occupied, according to Mohave mythology and tradition, by the Mohave
Tribe. This occupation, according to petitioners, continued until the
gradually increasing aridity caused the Mohave to withdraw ‘to the Mohave
Valley. This occupation in prehistoric times, according to petitionas,
is corroborated by archeological investigation. Doctor Kroeber, who ap-~
peared as a witness in Docket 283, did not believe that the desert area
was ever Mohave territory but rather aboriginally the Mohave Desert was
Chemehuevi and Vanyume territory. This witness stated that the purported
occupation of the Mohave Desert in prehistoric times by Mohave Indians

as reported  Malcolm Rogers was based on a series or fragments of pottery which Kroeber considered "highest speculative historical reconstruction“ (Tr. 139, 158, Docket 283).

Petitiomrs contend that while the Mohave Indians removed from the
Mohave desert when the changing climate made it undesirable or iztpossible
for habitation.purposes, such withdrawal was voluntary and the lands were
theirs to return to whenever they should again become habitable. According to petitioner, the moving in to the desert lands by the Shoshonean or
the Paiute Cheznehuevi did not change the ownership of the land... Doctor
Kroeber in his report states (Pet. E32. 1, Docket 283), "It is now élc-ar
that the Mohave did not properly ‘own‘ this desert in the parts more remote from the river, since we know that other tribes, desert-adapted,

steadily lived hunted, arxi gathered in its various reaches: the Southern

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 259

Paiute, Chemehuevi, Desert Cahuilla, Mohineyam Serrano, Kawaiisu, Tejon
Kitanemuk. -31- -1': *" While the Mohave used the desert in their travels to the
West Coast, such use is not sufficient to have vested Indian title in the
tribe since that‘ use of the desert was not exclusive. Padre Garces in
historic times found Chemehuevi in the desert arxi stated that the lands

of the Beneme Nation began at a point near Marl Springs- Jedidiah Smith
encountered Paiute lodges in the Mohave River Valley and later a few

lodges of Serrano Indians in 1827. Whipple, too, in 1851;, found Paiutes

‘in the desert. The Mohave Indians made limited use of the Mohave Desert

and such use was not exclusive. The Commission cannot find Indian title
in the Mohave to this region merely because they claimed to own it, especially, when there is evidence of use of the arid area by others. It
is also plain that the fact that in ancient times the Eohave allegedly
lived on what is now the desert is not sufficient to give than Indian
title especially since such occupation is questionable and even if it
were a proven fact the Mohave Irziians did voluntarily abandon the region

because of increasing aridity (cf, Quanaw Tribe v. United States, 128 C.

Cls. lb).

 

Defendant strongly urges several reasons why the Commission should
find that the petitioner Mohave Tribe should not recover from the United
States. Deferrlant contends that under the laws, usages and customs of
either Spain or Mexico, which countries owned and governed the lands hereain clainzed for many years prior to the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, 9 Stat.
922, there were no tribal rights of aboriginal use and dccupancy recognized by those government. Defendant‘s position i_n this respect is that

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 ‘ 260

the petitioner had no greater rights in the lands claimed as against the
United States than they held under the sovereignties of Spain and Mexico.
Defendant devotes a large portion of its brief and findings of fact to a
thorough coverage of the laws, customs and usages respecting land title
and treatment of Indians under Mexican and Spanish sovereignties. It is
unnecessary, however, to dwell on this contention at any length since
the Supreme Court of the United States has long ago decided adversely

to defendant‘s contention that aboriginal rights of the Indians who in»
habited lands in the cession obtained from.Hexico in l8h8 were to be
treated differently by the United States from other Indian lands in

this country. In United States v. Santa Fe Pacific Railroad Co., 31h

U. S. 339, 86 L. ed. 260, at page 269, a landmark case in Indian law,

the Supreme Court stated:

‘Unquestionably it has been the policy of the Federal
Government from the beginning to respect the Indian right
of occupancy, which could only be interfered with.or de-'
termined by the United St2tes.' Crfmer vE'UniEed States,
261 US 219 227, 67IL ed 22, 625, 13 S. t. 3 2. ‘This
policy was,first recognized in Johnson v. H'Intosh, 8 Wheat.
(US) Sh3, S L ed 681, and has been repeatedly reaffirmed.
Worcester v. Georgia, 6 Pet. (US) 515, 8 L ed h83; (and cit. ing other casesg. )Ash:tated in Migghel v. United States,
supra, '9 Pet, US 7 , 9 L ed 29 ,‘ Indian right of occupancy is considered as sacred as the fee simple of the
whites.’ Whatever may have been the rights of the Walanais
‘éneighbors of the Mohave under Spanish law, the Cramer Case
assumed that lands eithin the Hexican Cession were not ex?
cepted from the policy to respect Indian right of occupancy;
Through the Craner Case involved the problem of individual
Indian occupancy, this Court stated that such occupancy was
not to be treated differently from ‘the original nomadic
tribal occupancy.‘ (Q61 US p. 227, o7 L ed 625, b3 s. Ct
3h2). Perhaps the assumption that aboriginal possession
would be respected in the Mexican Cession, was like the
generalizations in Johnson Va H’Intosh, 8 Wheat. (Us) 5&3,

 

 

 

 

l.__'l

7 Ind. C1. Con. 21.9 26

5 L ed 681, supra, not necessary for the narrow holding of

the case. But such generalizations have been so often and

so long repeated as respects land under the prior sovereignty
of the various European nations including Spain, that like
other rules governing titles to property‘(United States v.
Title Ins. 3. 1‘. Co. 265 US 1.72, 1.86, L187, 68 L ed 11.10, 131:,
U4 8 Ct 261) they should now be considered no longer open.
Furthermore treaties negotiated with Indian tribes, wholly or
partially within the Mexican Cession for delimitation of their
occupancy rights or for the settlement arn adjustment of their
boundaries, constitute clear recognition that no different
olic as respects aboriginal possession obtained in this area
than in other areas. Underscoring supplied

      
       

with respect to lands located in California, the defendant urges

that under the Act of I-Iarch 3, l8Sl, 9 Stat. 63]., passed for the pur. pose of ascertaining the public domain in that State and to separate

the lands held under private claims at the date of the 18138 treaty,

"all persons, including Indians, claiming lands under any right derived
either from the Spanish or Mexican governments were required to present
them, together with the evidence thereof, before a board of commissioners
established unier said act;  -2- er? and all lands, claims to which were
not presented within two years of the date oi‘ passage of the act were
deemed to be the public domain of the United States. Defendant contends
that “having failed to establish a paper title to the lands so claimed
derived directly from the Spanish or Mexican governments, and having
failed to prove a formal recognition of any rights ‘in community,‘ the
petitioners have failed to prove any alleged right or title in the said
[51e:z;oeg73.eno upon which a recovery’ could be based." (Def. Req. Fdgs.

2h). _

Under the provisions of the 1851 act relating to lands in California

the board of corrmissioners was required by sections l6 to report to the

Secretary of the terior (l) the tenure by ‘which mission lands were "...;=;_.:_*._a'.‘...._,

7 Ind. C1. Com. 219 262

(2) the tenure by'which lands were held'by civilized Indians; (3) the
tenure by which Indians engaged in agriculture or labor-held lands, and
(h) the tenure by which Pueblo or Ranchero Indians occupied and cultivated lands. The purpose of the 1851 act was to ascertain and settle
private land claims in California, based upon claimed right or title
derived from the Spanish or Mexican Government.‘ The claim made by petitioner herein is based upon aboriginal use and possession which is not a
right or title to land which woLL'Ld be derived from either the Spanish

or Mexican governments. Indian title, which is used synonymously with
aboriginal use and occupancy, is difficult to define in terms of civilized concepts of land tenure. As Governor Cass said in 1827, "The tenure
by which the primitive inhabitants of this continent held their land is

a question of metaphysical speculation rather than one of practical right."
It has long been determined, however, that aboriginal title existed befare and after discovery of America by the Europeans. While the "right

df discovery” gave title, as we know it, to the government making such
discovery against all other European governments it did not "affect the
rights of those already in possession, either as aboriginal occupants,

or as occupants by virtue of discovery made before the memory of man. It
gave the exclusive right to purchase, but did not found.that right on a
denial of the right of the possessor to sell." ‘Worcester v. Georgia, 6
Pet. 55?, 8 L ed h99, h9S. Indian.title, or aboriginal use and occupancy,
is a natural right, as distinguished from a property right; which remains
in Indian tribesuntil extinguished or abandon a. This right of use and
occupancy has been recognized as existing in Indians since the establishment of our Governnent and this policy has been held to apply to lands

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 219 263

acquired in the l8h8 I-iexican Cession in the Santa Fe case, supra. The

 

1851 act made no provision for the ascertainment of lands claired to have
been held by aboriginal possession when the United States acquired the
lands from ilexico.

Defendant cites Barker v. Harvey, I81 U. S. 1181 at p. 1:91, as authority for the proposition that "A claim of an alleged right acqumed before
l8h8 to an area of the lands included in the cession of 18148 by reason
of alleged aboriginal use and occupamyby the ancestors of the petitioners, fs such a claim as contemplated by the statutes above set out
for the purpose of a determination of such claimants as against the

United Stetes.“ Defendant urges that, under the holding of the Barker

 

case, if the petitioners herein did not file a claim under the l8Sl act,
which they did not do, then the failure constituted an abandonment of

their claim. The Barker case involved a claim on the part of Mission

 

Indians claiming a right of permanent occupancy to lands granted to an
individual by the Mexican Government. Since the Indians involved were
Mission iians and the lands were mission lands, the decision of the
Supreme Court correctly held that "If these Indians had any claim founded
on the action of theibiexican government they abandoned them by not presenting them to the comxzzission for consideration, -3% ''I-’-- it." The Barker case is
not authority for holding therefore that Indians who did not hold lands
fitting the categories enumerated under Section l6 of the Act of l8Sl
abandoned their claims to land held by aboriginal possession. The Ba:N<:.;I*
case involved the question of a claim or right to "lands which were subjected by the action of some prior government toaright of permanent

 

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 219 26h
occupancy, -34- i‘ -3?." (cf Crarner v. United States, 261 U. S. 219). Such

a right is one of “private property" according to the Supreme Court in
the Barker case. Indian title has never been considered a property right
in the strict sense of the term. (Tee-hit-ton Indians v. United States,
3h8 U. S. 272.

‘ As to land claimed outside the State of California, defendant contends that the Act of July 22, 1851;, 10 Stat. 3C8, pertaining to the areas
of the 181:8 Cession designated as New Mexico, including the present States
of Nevada ard Arizona, which required a report of.‘ the Surveyor General of
the Territory of New I-lexico as to the origin, nature, character and extent of all claims to lands under the laws, customs and usages of Spain

and Mexico, also contemplated claims based upon alleged rights by rea= son of alleged aboriginal use and occupancy. An examination of this

act shows, as with the l8Sl act, that it involved a study of private
land claims to be made "with a view to oonf bona fide grants, and
give full effect to the treaty of 181:8 between the United States and
Mexico.” For the reasons stated with regard to the 1851 act, the Act
of July 22, l8S}_L, did not apply to alleged claims or rights based on
aboriginal possession. See also Santa Fe case, supra, 86 L ed 266, at p.
271.

While the Act of 1851 did not cover claims to aboriginal possession
as distinguished from claims or rights derived from Spain or I-Eexico, the
United States did consider for all intents and purposes’ that all lands

in California not included in private grants were public lands of the

United States at the end of the tr-so-yea period provided for in said act.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9 265

The result of this treatment of the lands as public lands effected an
extinguishment of Indian.title to lands in California as of March 3, l8S3,
The l8Sh act, pertaining to lands outside California, has been held not

to have extinguished Indian title, Santa Fe case, supra, 86 L ed 271.

The Commission concludes that the petitioners have proven aborigianl
Indian title to have been in the Mohave Tribe to the lands described in
Finding 23(a), (b) and (c), and as delineated as Areas 1, 2-A and 2-8 on
petitioners‘ Exhibit 2 in Docket 283. The Commission further concludes
that the United States acquired the Indian title to those lands in California within the areas described above on March 3, l8S3, and extinguished
the Indian title to the lands within those areas which were in what are
now the States of Nevada and Arizona,on March 3, l865 (cf. United States

Va Santa Fe Pacific 3. Co., 31h U.S. 339).

 

Accordingly, an interlocutory order will be entered herein adjudging the defendant liable for the value of thezlands described in Finding
23(a), (b) and (c) acquired by the United States without payment of
compensation to petitioners, less such offsets, including money or
property'given to or funds expended gratuitously for petitioners, allona
able under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

/s/ LOUIS J. o=1~:_a.‘s2_a
Associate Commissioner
we concur:

.1 _
/s/ EDC-AR . '=.A-IITT
Chief Commissioner

 

/s/ mi. N. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

 

