7 675

BEFORE THE INDIAN CILADIS COM!-EESSION

THE SAC AND FOX TRIBE OF INDIANS
OF OKLAHOMA, TEE sic AND FOX
TRIBE OF MISSOURI and SAC AND
FOX TRIBE OF THE MISSISSIPPI IN
IONA, and DON WHISTLER, et al,
and.COLUNBUS KE’HNA, appearing
as the representatives of and
on the relation of the CONFEDERATED OF UNITED TRIBES OF

L SAC AND FOX INDIANS and as
representatives and on behalf
of all of the MEMBERS thereof.

Petitioners,
vs.

Docket No. 83

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\,/N./\./\_/\.J\.’\-J\~/‘w/\~/\./\./\../\uJ\.J\_J\~.#\../K/\/'

Defendant.n

I Decided: June 12, 1959.

 

FINDINGS OF FACT

7

The commission makes the following Findings of Fact:”
Finding 1. p I I
The Sac and Fox Nation (referred to in the petition as the “Confederated or United Tribes_of Sac and For Indians”) is ¢OEPTi59d_°f th?e9
bands, petitioners herein, the Sao and Fox Trioe of Indians of*Oklahomaf
represented.hy individual petitioner members Ednard Hack, Pauline LeNiSs:
and‘William Newashe; the Sac and Fox Tribe of Missouri, represented'by'
individual petitioner members, Charles w; Fobidoux. John Connell, Dorothy
Gilfillian, Thomas Green, ana Thomas Herrick; and, the Sac and Fox Tribe
of the Mississippi in Iowa, represented.bylindiviéual petitioner nembers,

Kenneth Youngbear, Charles Davenport, Harry Lincoln, Albert Davenport,

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 675 676

Edward Davenport, Percy Bear, and Columbus Keahna. Said petitioner bands
are identifiable groups of anerican Indians and, as representative of the
Sac and Fox Nation and all of its members. are entitled to bring and maintain this action under Section l0 of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Finding 2.

0Said petitioner bands are the successors in interest to the Sac and

Fox.Nation as originally constituted, and the Commission on prior occasions

yhas upheld the capacity of the Sac and Fox Nation through the petitioner

bands to maintain other suits pursuant to the provisions of the Indian
Claims Commission Act. See - Commission's Finding 1, Otoe and Missouria,
et al., v. United States, 5 End. Cl. Com. 316; Commission’s Findings 1, 2,

3, The Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma et al., V. United States,

 

5 Ind. Cl. Com. 36?; Commission's Finding 2, The Iowa Tribe, et al.. v.
United.States, 6 Ind. Cl. Con. #63; Commission's Finding 3, The Iowa Tribes,
et als. v. United States. 7 Ind. Cl. Com. §d.

Finding 2. at
The claimed lands involved.in this proceeding are located partially

 

in'Hisconsin; Illinois, and Missouri and comprise the western and southern“
part.of-that area of land officially designated as Cession 50 of Royce's v
maps'Wisconsin 2, Illinois 1. and Missouri 1, appearing in the 18th Annual
Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, l896-9? Part II. Cession 50 is
‘described as follows in Article 2 of the 1804 Sac and Fox Treaty (7 Stat. 84):

* * * Beginning at a point on the Missouri river opposite
to the mouth of the Gasconade river; thence in a direct
course so as to strike the river Jeffreon at the distance of
thirty miles from its mouth, and down the said Jeffreon to
the Mississippi, thence up the Mississippi to the mouth of
the Ouisconsing River and up the same to a point which shall

"ii 7 End. Cl. Com. 675 ' 677

.be thirty—six miles in a direct line from the mouth of said

river, thence by a direct line to the point where the Fox

river (a branch of the Illinois) leaves the small lake called
Sakaegan, thence down the Fox River to the Illinois river,

and down the same to the Mississippi.

The petitioner, Sac and Fox Nation, makes no claim to a large area

comprising the greater part of the northeastern portion of Cession 50.
(The “claimed area" is shown in "yellow" on Pet. Ex. #09). Finding H.
The Sac and Fox Treaty of November Q, l80# (7 Stat. 8%) was concluded
at St. Louis, Missouri (known then as the district Louisiana) between

Governor William Henry Harrison and certain members and chiefs of the Sac
and Fox Nation. Said treaty'was duly ratified by the Senate on January 25,

1805, and proclaimed by the President on February 21, 1805. The Sac and Fox

 

Treaty of l80h is therefore a valid treaty, and the question of its actual

validity as raised cannot be passed.upon by this Commission under the pro-,
visions of the Indian Claims Commission Act, or any other law or statute.

A treaty is essentially a political act and, if duly ratified by the United
States Senate and.proclaimed by the President, its validity is not a proper
question for judicial inquiny'unless any of its provisions should conflict

with Constitutional rights and guarantees. See - United States v. Brooks,

10 How. #42; Doe ex den Clark v. Braden, 16 How. 635; Fellows v. Blacksmith,

19 How. 366; Leighton v. United States, 161 U. S. 291; Lone Eblf'v. Hitchcock,

18? U. S. 553; U. S. v. Minnesota, 270 U. S. 181; Duwamish, et al., v. United

States, 79 C. Cls. 530, cert. den.; Eastern or Emigrant Cherokees, et al.,

v. United Siates, 88 C. Cls. 452; 27 Am. Jur. Sec. ll.

-._ _j_.¢-_-j.—.qe...-q—.-......._...4—-.--u.--4un—.—- -—

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 578

Em&ma§.

Paragraph 5 of the "Stipulation and Agreement,"_entered into between
the respective parties on May ll, l953, in which the defendant conceded
fthat the treaty of l804 of itself has no validity but contends that the
treaty set forth in paragraph 20 of the defendant's answer validated said
treaty of 1804," is of no force and effect on the guestion of the actual
validity of said treaty and for that purpose shall be disregarded.by the
Commission.

Findina 6.

As of the effective date of the Sac and Fox treaty of l804, all of

petitioner's right, title and interest to the lands described in Article 2

therein and thereafter identified as Royce Cession 50, were ceded and

‘relinquished forever to the United States. In addition, Article 7 of the

treaty provided that:

"As long as the lands which are now ceded to the United
States remain their property, the Indians belonging to the
said tribes, shall enjoy the privilege of living and hunting
upon them."

_ . 
- ,Thereafter under the provisions of the Act of March 3, 1805 (2 Stat.
333) Congress authorized those lands embraced.within Royce Cession 50 to

be thrown open_for sale as public lands. Section 3 of said act provided;

"And be it further enacted, That so much of the tract
. of land lately purchased from the Indian Tribes known'by
the name of Sacs and Foxes, as the President of the United
States shall think expedient and shall direct, shall be
attached to and made part of the district of Kaskaskias,
land shall be offered for sale at that place, under the same
regulations, at the same price and on the same terms, as
other lands lying within the said district.” '

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 575 679

Finding 8.

On January 9, l789 the Fort Harmer treaty (7 Stat. 28) was concluded
with the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa, Chippewa, Pottawatonie, and Sac Nation
of Indians. This treaty had for its prime purpose the confirmation of the
boundary lines and engagements made by the Wyandot, Delaware, Ottawa and

Chippewa under the treaty of January 21, 1785 at Fort Helntosh (7 Stat. l6).
(a) Article I of the Fort Harmer treaty provided in part: I

“Whereas the United States in Congress assembled, did by
their Commissioners George Rogers Clark, Richard Butler, and
Arthur Lee, Esquires, duly appointed for that purpose, at a
treaty holden with the Wiandot, Delaware, Ottawa and Chippewa
nations, at Fort M?Intosh, on the twenty-first day of January;
in the year of our Lord one thousand seven hundred and eighty
five, conclude a peace with the Wyandots, Delawares, Ottawas,

and Chippewas, and take them into their friendship and protection; *r* *

“And whereas the said nations have now agreed to and with
the aforesaid Arthur St. Clair, to renew and confirm all the
engagements they had made with the United States of America,

at the before mentioned treaty, except so far as are altered
by these present. * * *"

(b) The boundary line formerly fixed under the Fort M3Intosh treaty
is now renewed and confirmed under Article II which reads in part:

  "Andy whereas at thebefore mentioned treaty it as "agreed
between the United States and said nations that a boundary
line should be fixed between the lands of those nations and

the territory of the United States; which.boundary is as
follows; viz. * * *

And the said Wyandot,Delaware, Ottawa and.Chippewa Nations,
for and in consideration of the peace then granted to them
by the said United States, and the presents they then received, as well as of a qnantity of goods to the value of
six thousand dollars, how delivered to them'hy the said
Arthur St. Clair, the receipt whereof they do hereby ackn°“19dg9. do by these presents renew and confirm the said
boundary line to the end that the same may remain as a
division line between the lands of the United States of

7 Ind. c1. Com. 675 _ 680

America and the lands of said nations forever. And the
undersigned Indians do hereby in their own names, and

the names of their respective nations and tribes, their

heirs and descendants, for the consideration above mentioned,
release, quitclaim, relinquish and cede to the said United
States, all the land east, south and west o£.the lines above‘""
described, so far as the said Indians formerly claimed the
same; for them the said United States to have and to hold

the same in true and absolute propriety forever.“

(c) Under Article XIV of said treaty the Potawatomie and Sec nations

were taken into protection of the United States.

"The United States of America do also receive into their

friendship and protection, the nations of the Pattiwatimas
and Sacs; and do hereby establish a league of peace and c
amity'between them respectively; and all articles of this
treaty; so far as they apply to these nations, are to be
considered as made and concluded in all, and every part.
expressly with them and each of them.”

(d) On August 12, 1789 there was reported out of comittee to the
Senate the two Fort Harmer treaties of January 9, 1789, with the accompanying committee report which reads in part:

?That the Governor of the‘Western territory. on the 9th
day of January; 1789, at fort Harmer entered into two treaties,
one with the sachems and warriors of the Six Nations, the
Hohawks excepted, the other with the sachems and warriors of
the 1~.’yandot, Delaware ,' Ottawa. Chippewa, Pattawatima, and Sac
Nations; that those treaties'were made in pursuance of the ‘
powers and instructions heretofore given to the said Governor
by the late Congress. and are a confirmation of the treaties
of Fort Stanwix.in October, 178%, and of Ft. McIntosh, in
January l785, and contain a more formal and regular conveyance
to the United States, of the Indian claims to the lands yielded I

to these States by the said treaties of 1784 and 178 .“ * * *
(American State Papers, Vol. IV, p. 5#)

Finding 2.
By the Fort Harmer treaty of January 9. l789 (7 Stat. 28) the

United States did not recognize any_compensable interest or title to

lands in the Northwest Territory owned or claimed by the Sac and Fox

I
I r
“u.-.—/

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 i 681

Nation. As set forth above in the Commission‘s Finding 7, the prime
purpose of the Fort Harmer treaty was a confirmation and renewal of the
boundaries and arrangements made under the Fort McIntosh treaty of
January 2l,.l785 (7 Stat. 16) which was concluded with the Wyandots,
Delawares, Ottawas, and Chippewas. Under the Fort Harmer treaty, the
Sacs (the Fox Indians did not participate) neither ceded lands, reserved
lands, or set forth any claims, but participated under applicable provisions thereof to the extent that they were taken into the protection

of the United States.

Finding 10.
On August 3, l795, at Greenville in the Uorthwest Territory, the

United States concluded a treaty with the following Indian tribes;
"W3'and0tS. Delawares, Shawanoes, Ottawas, Chipewas, Putawatimes. 1'-iiamis,
Eel-river,'Weea's, Kickapoos, Piankashaws, and Kaskaskias." (7 Stat. 49).

As stated in the introductory paragraph of said treaty. its purpose

WES:

“To put an end to a destructive war, to settle all controversies, and to restore harmony and a friendly intercourse
between the said United States and Indian tribes; Anthony
Wayne. major-general, commanding the army of the United States,
and sole commissioner for the good purposes above-mentioned,tt
and the said tribes of Indians, by their Sachems, chiefs, and
warriors, met together at Greenville, the headquarters of the
said army. have agreed.on the following articles, which, when
ratified by the President with the advice and consent of the

Senate of the United States, shall be binding on then and the

said Indian Tribes.“ (Emphasis supplied)

     

(3) Article III of the Greeneville Treaty established a general
b°undaTY line between the Indian tribes. Land cessions of both general

and Particular tracts were taken from the said tribes; Article III

reads in part:

7 Indo C10 Como  

“The general boundary line between the lands of the
United States and the lands of the said Indian tribes,
shall begin etc. * * *"

[Ehere then follows a description of the general boundary
a 11n§_7

0" ' And in consideration of the peace now established;

of the goods formerly received from the United States; of
those now to be delivered, and of the yearly delivery of
goods now stipulated to be made hereafter, and to indemnify
the United States for the injuries and expenses they have
sustained during the war; the said Indian tribes do hereby
cede and relinquish forever, all their claims to the lands
lying eastwardly and southwardly of the general boundary
line now described.

 

[Ehen follows a cession of particular tracts of lands by”,
. the Indians and a cession of passages in certain places&/

(b) Having established peace with these tribes, and having taken
cessions from them, the United States in consideration of the above.
under Article IV of the treaty, relinquished "all other Indian lands"

to them besides making a specific annual allowance in goods to each of
the enumerated tribes. Article IV insofar as pertinent reads as follows:

"In consideration of the peace now established and of
the cessions and relinquishments of lands made in the
preceding article by the said tribes of Indians, and to
manifest the liberality of the United States, as the great
means of rendering this peace strong and perpetual; the
United States relinquish their claims to all other Indian
lands northward of the river Ohio, eastward of the Mississippi. and westward and southward of the Great Lakes and
the waters uniting them, according to the boundary line
agreed on by the United States and the king of Great Britain,
in the treaty of peace made between them in the year 1783. ‘ ' *

And for the same considerations and with the same views as
abve mentioned, the United States new deliver to t§g_§giQ
Indian tribes a quantity of goods to the value of twenty
thousand dollars, the receipt whereof they do hereby acknowledge; and henceforward every year forever the United
States will deliver at some convenient place northward of

the river Ohio, like useful goods, suited to the circumstances

of the Indians, of the value-of nine thousand five hundred
dollars; "‘ "‘ *

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 683

The tribes to which those goods are to be annually delivered and
the proportions in which they are to be delivered, are the
following:

lst. To the'wyandots, the amount of one thousand dollars.

2nd. To the Delawares. the amount of one thousand dollars. 3d. To
the Shawanese, the amount of one thousand dollars. hth. To the
Miamis, the amount of one thousand dollars. 5th. To the Ottawas,
the amount of one thousand dollars. 6th. To the Chippewas, the
amount of one thousand dollars. 7th. To the Putawatimes, the
amount of one thousand dollars. 8th. And to the Kickapoo,'Weea,
Eel-river, Piankeshaw and Kaskaskias tribes, the amount of five
hundred dollars each. C

(c) Article V of the treaty describes the extent of the relinquishment of lands by the United States as made in the preceding article:

'”To prevent any misunderstanding about the Indian lands
relinquished'by the United States in the fourth article, it
is now explicitly declared, that the meaning of that relinquishment is this: :The Indian tribes who have a right
to those lands, are quietly to enjoy them, hunting, planting,
and dwelling thereon so long as they please, without any
molestation from the United States; but when those tribes,
or any of them, shall be disposed to sell their lands. or
any part of them, they are to be sold only to the United
States; and until such sale, the United States will protect
all the said Indian tribes in the quiet enjoyment of their
lands against all citizens of the United States, and against
all other white persons who intrude upon the same. And the
said Indian.tribes again acknowledge themselves to be under
the protection of the said United States and no other power
whatever." ' ' i - ' "’ '

(d) In the case of The Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, 'et al., v. United

§Eé£§3. 5 Ind. Cl. Com. l80, this Commission found that under Articles IV
and V of the Greeneville Treaty,.the United States recognized title to be
in the signatory tribes to those lands to which they were entitled:

"By Articles IV and V of the Greeneville Treaty, the
United States recognized the title of each of the tribal
signatories to the territory each had a right to, which
the United States relinquished.by Article IV. * * *"
(Com. Finding 6, 5 Ind. Cl. Comm. 180, l88).

7 Ind. c1. Com. 575 age,

In its opinion the Commission stated the follozing on this point:
"Manifestly, when the defendant relinquished its claims

to the tribal lands in the Northwest territory and solemnly

agreed that the tribes might enjoy those lands as they

pleased'without molestation from the United States; it was

granting each of the twelve signatory tribes the right of

exclusive permanent occupancy of the lands each respectively

possessed until they'were disposed to sell them." (5 Ind. Cl.
Comm. 180, 213).

Finding ll .
The Sac and Fox Nation was not a party to the 1795 Greenville Treaty.

Contrary to the interpretation adopted'by the petitioner tribe Congress
neither directly nor indirectly extended the Greenville Treaty provisions
to non-participating Indian tribes. The troductory paragraph of the
Greenyille Treaty contains unequivocal language obligating the United
States only to the signatory tribes who in like manner are bound to
observe the treaty proyisions. To reach a different conclusion is to
destroy the contractual nature of the instrument contrary to intent of
the parties and at the same time penalizing the signatory tribes by
awarding'equal treaty benefits to non-participating tribes without the
accompanying burdens and obligations. The petitioner has no standing

under the Greenyille Treaty to ask this Commission for recognition of

its territorial_claims. {See Yuchi §Euchee2 Tribe V. United States,

136 C. Cls. 1-$33).

Finding l2.

As early as l802, responsible government officials as well as the’
Sacs were well aware that the l795 Greenville Treaty conferred no benefits upon the non-participating tribes. ‘In that year Governor'william
Henry Harrison addressed a lengthy communication to the Secretary of

War which reads in.part:

 

7 Ind. Cl. con. 675   685

”The Sacks or Sackees, a considera le nation who reside
between the Illinois river and the Mississippi, were not
included in the treaty of Greenville. They sent deputies
to agree to a cessation of hostilities the spring previous
to the treaty, but by'some accident or other, they mistook
the time, and did not attend the treaty. They are now extremelv desirous to be out on a footing with the other

 

tribes, and receive an annual present, and it appears that
they should. * * *“ (Emphasis supplied).

Governor Harrison then proposed a new treaty be concluded.with Sacks
and other neighboring tribes for certain purposes among them;“ * * * To
extend to the Sack nation.the provisions of the treaty of Greenville."
(Pet. Ex. l0). 1

Findin l .

At the beginning or the 18th Century the Sac and Fox tribes of
Indians were located around the Green Bay and Fox River regions of
‘Wisconsin. The French had.sought to establish trade routes to and
across the Mississippi but found the Fox tribe controlling the Fox»
Wisconsin river portage which was the main route to the Mississippi.
Continued friction between the French and Fox tribe and its allies
finally erupted into bitter warfare beginning around 1712 and lasting
until about 1735. It was during this period that the Sac and Fox, due
to their mutual difficulties with the French, became close allies thereafter and acted in concert as a united body of Indians known as the Sac

and Fox tribe of Indians. (Def. Ex. 85).
Finding lh.
Under the increased pressure of the French and their Indian allies,
the Sac and Fox retreated westward across the.Mississippi River into

Iowa. There they established village sites near the Mississippi River

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 675 68

at various places, such as at the mouth of the Ouisconsin River near
Prairie du Chien, on the'Wapsipinscon River in Iowa, at their most
renowned village near the mouth of the Rock River, and also as far
south as the Des Moines River. After the cessation of hostilities
members of the Sac and Fox Ration began to drift hack across the
Mississippi and return to their old village sites along the Wisconsin
River. I ' ‘

i (a) In their report dated October 7, l83h, Beauharnois and.s
Hocquart recount how the Sac and Fox, after evacuating the Green Baylt
area, were pursued.by the French under Coulon de Villiers. They
sought refuge with the Sioux and Iowas in vain. Thereafter the report
states:

"The last neus that Sieur de Beauharnois has received,
shows that they have Established themselves in a fort on
the_River'Wapsipinikam, two or three days journey'below
the Ouisconsin in the East part of the Mississippi, near
the riviere aux Boeufs where Father Guegnas, a Jesuit
Missionary, and the French were stopped.when they Evacuated
the post among the sioux in 1728.“ (Def. Ex. 85, p. 134).

_ (b) In a report made'by De Noyelles in l835, he states that the
FOX Vere no longer on the‘Eapsipinscon River andthatthevihad‘withdrawn to the Riviera sans fourche (the "river nithout a fork“ ‘which is
the Des Moines). (Def. Ex. 85, p. 140). I L i

(0) Dr. Anthony‘Wallace, petitioners‘ expert witness in this
Case, uhen testif g previously in Docket 158 with reference to the

general movement of the Sac and Fox tribes at the time_of the FrenchIndian wars, stated in partt

6

 7 Ind. c1. Corn. 675 ~ 687

"The Fox and Sac in flight crossed the Eississippi and
took refuge from the French and Indian allies in the state
of Iowa on the Des Moines or going up the Des Moines River,
and also the'Wapsipinicon. This_is recorded in early l730.

'”By about l735 to 1738 the Sac and Fox are reported to
have established a village at Rock River which is the location of the famous Rock River village.

"Apparently from about l737 and 1738 there were some Sac
living in this village. _ I i “However, about l738 the bulk of the.Sac began to drift
back into'Wisconsin and Illinois * * * and they made villages
north of their original locations on the Wisconsin_River.

“By 176% they had returned to their Rock River Village
and also to Dubuque and were there continuogsly'and in
force after that.“ (Emphasis supplied). [Docket 158 transcript, p. 398, 399 (Dr. Wallace__)_7

cu» nu I. 5---as

Testifying in the instant case Dr.'Wa3lace elaborated on the initial '

 

movements of the Sac and Fox into Cession 50.“Well there were some Sac and Fox who had been fighting
over parts of Cession 50 as early as the first decades of
the 18th century in the protracted Fox war, in which the
Fox and their allies were fighting the French and their
allies. The Sac and Fox were defeated in that, and some of
_their villages were in the extreme northeast portion of
Cession 50 at that time. However, that, I think, is an
earlier period than you are referring to. Following the
defeat, the point of emphasis which was about_l735, the Sac
and.Fox or the Fox and most of the Sac moved westward into

‘Wisconsin, the upper part of Cession 50, along the Mississippi and over into Iowa. it

“There was some fluctuation'back and forth for two or
three decades, and by about 1750 or l76O they were pretty
‘well established, certainly, in the northern part of
Cession 50, and.by l80h their settlements and hunting
grounds had drifted down the river to cover a large portion

of Cession 50 and, of course; ether lands outside of Cession
50 in Missouri and Iowa."

Finding l5.

The famous Sac village of Saukinak near the mouth of the Rock

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 675 ' - 533

River in Illinois was established some time in the l730's. It was
abandoned temporarily but in 17613 tr e Sacs returned to the Rock Rivera

where this village was maintained continuously up to date of the" l8OL4treaty of cession and f or some years thereafter. The Rock .FL'1.ver village

was the principalsac village duringffheiperiod in" question" and was the
only existing village of any moment east of the Mississippi that lay
within Cession 50 as of 1801;.

(a)  _ea.rly'reference to Sacs at Rock River is found in a letter
written by Beauharnois‘ at Quebec on September 20, 1741, in which he

reported:

"The [sakes and Renard ch1erg7 said they thoroughly
‘believed all that I had told them but that one party of
their warriors and of their old men was very much alarmed

by the words of the French who came to Chickagon (Chicago)
and to I-Eeolaki (I-Iilwaukee), who had advised them secretly
not to abandon Rock River, saying that if they returned to
La Baye some mischief would be done to them",

and that the sees‘ "who had arrived at the Rock River oh the 16th“ had '
reported that thelllinoiswere going against'"t‘ne Renards at the mouth
of the Ouisconsin." '(E;et. _E:2-E. 275),
(b) 311% eictract frona letter‘ written‘by'D'Abbadie on August lo,

178? states that after the trench: Captain de Bieaujeui had ewacuated the
military post at ll-Iichilmakinaouin 1760 "The ice stopped his passage, and

Q

he was forced to winter at Rock River with the Salcis and Renard savages.”

(Pet. Etc. 276).
Q (C) August Chouteau, writing on the Indian Tribes of North Anerica

circa 1260, recounted how the See and Fox Indians joined together inithe

1700's; how they were f oroed southwestward from around Detroit and Lake

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 675 689

Winnebago; that the moved further down the Wisconsin river; and, after
C.)
participating with other northern tribes in driving out the Illinois:
“The Sacks and Foxes finding these Indians (Illinois)
compelled to leave their country and in no situation to
prosecute the war, left their village on the Owisconsin,
gradually descended the Mississippi, and in 176$ settled

on Rock River, twenty one years after the Pottanatomies

and their allies had settled on the Illinois River.“
(Pet. Ex. 309) .

(d)( Numerous other references to the famous Sac village at Rock

River point to its continued existence from l76h through the treaty of
cession in 1804 and well into the first part of the l9th century; i. e.,
Cruzat‘s report, dated November 15, 1777, of the Indian Tribes who traded
‘with the Spanish at St. Louis e "This.tribe (sacs) is composed of four
hundred warriors * * *. They are located on the shores of the Misisipy
itself at a distance of two hundred leagues from this village * * *.“
(Def. Ex. 69). Excerpt from George Rogers Clark papers, campaigni

against the Sauk and Foxes (1779) "* * * Proceeding up the Mississippi
and the Illinois in boats as far as Peoria, they marched to the Indian
‘villages on Rock River." t(Pet. Ex. 8); letter of 901. Richard Dickson

to Hon. Robert Hamilton, dated July 14, 1793, reviewing the locations

of various Indian Tribes, "At the entrance of this River (Rock River)

the Saques live and have a large Village. (They raise the most corn of
any Indian Nation in this country. The Reynards live betwixt the Saque
Village and the Prairie du Chien. They hunt mostly to the southward.of
the Mississippi." (Def. Ex. 95 . Zebulon Pike, reporting on his journey

UP the Mississippi River in 1805, cited the Sac Rock River village,

"\}
l—~l
"5
13..
0
O
}...J
0
C)
O
:41
(7\
“*0
kn
Ox
*0
C)

4'.‘

" * * * The third on the Riviera De Roche, “bout three miles iron the
entrance * * *." (Def. Ex. 78). Nicholas Boilvin in a letter to the

Secretary of'Nar, dated July 7, l8ll, "* * * I arrived in the heart of

.the nation at the river La Roche this day where the Sacs and Foxes are

assembled to hold a council and to kn w the news I have brought to them
from their American father * * *." (Pet. Ex. 290); Extracts from Life
and Times of Ninian Edwards, written as of l8l2, "From this village to
Rock River it is three miles, and about one and half miles up Rock
River, on the south side, there is a very extensive village of Sacs,

of nearly we hundred lodges; up this river, also about twenty or

thirty miles from the month, there is a considerable Winnebago village."
(Pet. Ex. 292); letter of Lewis Clark to the Secretary of'Ear, June 5,

:

l8l4 - "That part of the Sacks and Renards near the entrance of Rocky
River, supposed to have been hostile to the United States, have requested peace." (Pet. Ex. 302). Schoolcraft, reporting on his journeys
through the northwest regions of the United States in 1820, "On the east

bank of the Mississippi, near the foot of Rock Island, there is a large

.village of Foxes and Sacs." '(Pet. Ex. #18); Thomas Forsyth to McKinney,

kugust 28, 1824, referred to the "Rock River Sauk Village“ as "two miles
Of the Rocky River from its mouth * * * where all affairs appertaining
to the Sauk Nations of Indians are transacted.” (Pet. Ex. 329).
Finding 16.

During the period from I764 to the treaty of cession in 1804, thet
Sac and Fox established other villages along the west side of the
Mississippi and on the Wisconsin River. Some were maintained continu°u31Y up to l80£~while others were abandoned.

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 691

(8) A.principal Sac 'illage was established on th Visconsin
River during the l7hO‘s near the present site of Prairie du Sac. It
continued to be occupied until the close of the Revolution.when it was
abandoned because of increasing pressure from the Chippewa with the
inhabitants removing to the Kississippi;=“Embarking on the Wisconsin
they arrived the next day at the great town of the Sauk, a large well
built village of ninety houses consisting of plank with bark covering.“
[Reuben Gold Thwaites - Def. Ex. 85/.

Jonathan Carver reported on this same village on the Wisconsin
river in his "Travels Through the Interior Parts of North America in
the Years 1766, l767, l768" at page #6:

"On the 8th of October,'we got out canoes into the

Ouisconsin River, which at this place is more than a

hundred yards wide and the next day arrived at the Great

Town of the Saukies. This is the largest and best built

Indian town I ever saw * * *. In their plantations which

lie adjacent to their houses and which are neatly laid

out, they raise great quantities of Indian corn, beans,

melons, etc. * * *." (Def. Ex. 62).

A memorandum.to Sir John Johnson, April l3, l786, setting out the
number and locations of Indian tribes reports on the "Osakies or Sacs
1300 men? as "A nation which inhabited a few years ago the banks of the
River‘wisconsin.but owing to their apprehensions of the Chipiwas and
being rather of a peaceable turn they left their Villages and went a

considerable way down the Hississi pi, where they continue to reside

and mostly pn the Spanish side, this ‘ation'is at present at war with

our’
é

the Sioux_of the plains and the Spaniards are using endeavours to
attach them to their Interests, * * *." [Historical Collections of

the Michi an Pioneer and Historical Society .. Def. ex. 7_6j.

C.’
2

e T

, ind. Cl. Con. 675 i 592

(b) Dr. Anthony Wallace, petitioners‘ expert witness, testified

to the locations of several 3

[U

c and Fox villages lying within and adjacent to the claimed area within Cession 50 as of l80b. Besides the
main Sac Village near the mouth of the Rock River.east of the Mississippi (Tr. 76¢, 765), £w.'Vallace refers to a village east of the Mississippi near the present town of Oquawka, Illinois, near the mouth of
Henderson Creek (Tr. 766). Dr.'Nallace cites Pike's journal as the_
earliest reference to a village in this area which is l805 (Pet. Ex.
360). Pike’s pnly reference to this village is a statement that on
August 2k,il805, having encamped on the east side of the Mississi_pi
River,"* * * Three batteaux from Hichilimackinac stopped at our camp.

we were told that they'were the property of Mr. Hyers Michals. ‘we were
also informed that the largest Sac village'was about 2% miles out on the
prairie; and that the prairie was called halfway from St. Louis to the

O

prairie Des Chains." (Pet. BX. 360, p. 6). A nebulous village is cited
on the east bank of the Mississippi about the mouth of the Des Moines

River. (Tr. 766}. Admittedly the location is uncertain and there is no

substantial evidence pointing to an exact village location. Dr. Wallace

refers to a third Sac village on the east bank of the Mississippi near

Quincy; Illinois, citing Pike in 1805 as the earliest reference (Tr. 768).
Pike's reference is to a camp; “Sundav August l8th. Enbarked early; about
eleven o'clock passed an Indian camp, on the E. side. They fired several
8‘-Ins, but we passed without stopping." (Pet. Ex. 360, pa 3). [Clones 7

edition of The Expeditions of_Zebulon Montgomery Pike, etc., Pet. Ex. 361,

does not mention such a canppf On the west side of the Aississippi.Imu

- - .. — ;"l
Mad‘Wallace pointed out the following village sites: A Sac village at the
head of the Des Moines rapids on the vest bank of the Mississiopi (Tr.
759); giving as an early reference an l804 letter from Amos Stoddar

to Governor Dearborn (Pet. Ex. ll); a Sac village on the west bank of
the Hississippi near the mouth of the Iowa River (Tr. 771) giving as
an early reference a 1797 letter from Howard to Carondelet (Pet. Ex.
253); a Fox village in the neighborhood of Davenport (Tr. TTl);°citing
as an early reference Zebulon Pike in 1805 (Pete Ex. 360); a Sac and
Fox village site at the mouth of the'Wapsipinicon River (Tr. 772, 834),
a Fox village at Dubuque near the Dubuque lead mines (Tr. 773, 83#)
Chouteau in 176% as the earliest referenceCPet. Ex. 30?); ahd finally a
Fox village on the Turkey River (Tr. 7?4, 835).

(c) Other early references to some of the village sites mentioned
by Dr.‘Eallace may be found among the following: the Sac village oh the
Iowa river, letter of May 18, l??? from Louis Tesson Eonore to the Governor of Michelimakinac referring to a "Sequin village on the Iowa River "
(Pet;'Ex.(282); the Sac De Hoines River village, letter of,Howard to
Carondelet dated.June 14, l§97,ireferriag to the Sac and Fox having three
villages in the vicinity of the Des Eoines River (Pet. EEQZBB5, a letter
of April 10, 1806, from.Dearborn to Nicholas Boilvin apoointing the latter
assistant Indian Agent at th “Saque'Village, at the rapids of the Mississippi above the mouth of the River Lemoin * * *" (Pet§LExE;286 ; the Sac
and Fox village on the Eapsipinicon River, the report of Beauharnois,
October 7, 1734 (Def. Ex. 85); the Fox Turkey River village, an extract

from a narrative of the travels of Jean Baptiste Perrault in l783.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 59a‘

Finding l7.

Prior to 1765 those tribes comprising the Illinois confederacy controlled the bulk of cession 50 east of the Mississippi River. However,
increasing pressure from the northern Indian tribes, coupled with internal
decay through the addiction to the vices and debauchery of the'whites,
caused the confederacy to disintegrate. ‘Thereafter the Illinois tribes
were forced to withdrawn southward, their numbers greatly decreased, and
into the vacuum created by their withdrawal came the tribes from the north e
and northeast, among them.were the Sac, Foxes, hinnebagoes; Pottawatomies,
Ottawa: as , Chippewas .

(a) Auguste Chouteau,'whose accounts of the names and locations.of
the early Northnest Indian tribes are considered quite reliable states
that the Illinois confederacy was the undoubted owner of the Illinois lands
until driven out and-southwardly by a combinationof northern Indian tribes.

According to Chouteau‘s notes (l8l6):

“After the tribes of the Mascontins, Miamies, and Peorias
had abandoned their residences in the delightful country which
they had inhabited it remained unoccupied'oy any particular

”.tribe till the year 17b3, when a part of the Pottaeatomies'who
resided near Detroit, together with some bands of Ottawas and
Chippewas removed to it and settled themselves near Chicago;«
and on some parts of the Illinois River and have continued in

the uninterrupted possession thereof to the present time."
(Pet. Ex. 309).

Chouteau tells how the Sec and Fox banded together in the l700's,
and how they were forced to withdraw southwestward under French pressure
from around Detroit and Lake'Winnebago and after participating with the

other northern tribes in forcing ou the Illinois:

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675   ° 695

“The Sacks and Foxes finding these Indians (Illinois)
compelled to leave their country and in no situation to
prosecute the ear, left their village on the Onisconsin
gradually descended the Mississippi, and in 176$ settled
on Rock River, twenty one vears after the Pottawatomies
and their allies had settled on the I linois River.
(Emphasis supplied — Pet. Ex. 309). I

   

Chouteau then states the following proposition relative to the newly
acquired lands in the Illinois Territory.

"No other of the Northern Indians are known to set up
any claim to the lands of the Illinois nation except the
Ottawas, Chippewas, Pottowatomies, Sacks and Foxes; and
if the circumstances above mentioned give them a right to
that country, I can see nothing to prevent the Hurons,
Episinglis, Iroquois, Menominees, and Sioux from hereafter
exhibiting their claims by'right of conquest, the latter
tribe in particular having contributed more than any other
to drive the Illinois Indians off their lands." (Pet. Ex. 309).

In addition Chouteau points out that the Pottowatomies, ttawas and

Chippewas protested the Sac and Fax cession of l804, contending that the

latter had no title to any of the lands along the Illinois River, nor had

they even occupied it.

(b}Pottawatomie presence in the northeastern portion of Cession 50
wasnoted as early as 1763 according to the entriesinthe journalof
“Mr. Hambnrg'sTravels in the Michigan and Illinois Country“ 5 after
commenting on the good hunting grounds along the Illinois River, he
states: I

“The chief Bunting ground of the Pottowaymes is along
this River for about 200 miles down to a Place called
Le Roches (Starved Rock)" * * * (Def. Ex. 67).
Caton, in his "A.Sketch of the Pottawatonies“ published in 1876,

in describing the history of these Indians states:

7 Ind. Cl. Cam. 675 ens

"Northern Illinois was more particularl the oossession
of the Pottawatomies but as before stated 1 have sought in
vain for some satisfactory date to fix this time when they

first settled here. * * *
It#*

"I have the means of approximating the time when theyl
first came into exclusive possession here. That occurred
upon the total extinction of the Illinois which must have
been sometime between l766 and l770." (Def. Ex. 72).

Hodge - (Handbook of American Indians - p. 290) states:

“After the conquest of the Illinois, about l765, they
took possession of the part of the Illinois lying N. E.

of the country seized by the Sauk, Foxes, and Kickapoo:
*##!I '

5.0

(c) The Winnebagoes had extended themselves southwesterly, down
the Rock River where they had established a_village some thirty miles
above the famous Sac village at the mouth of the Rock River.

Cruzat‘s Report of November l5, l777, setting out the Indian tribes

«.1-adage; st. Louis during the Spanishiregime, includes the "Tribe; of

the Pueeiiis (‘E-Jinnebagoes)“ of whom it is stated -7 "The tribe is composed

of one hundred and fifty warriors. The name of the principal chief is

gLepy. They are located one hundred and forty leagues from this village,

abouttwo leagues from the Misisipy on a small rirer called in Roche
(Hook hiver) . . ." (Def. Ex. 69). "This was onlf a portion of the
'Rinnebago tribe, their main village being much farther north near the
present town of Neenah,‘Hisconsin (Def. Ex. 97). Pike, in 1805, locates
the'Hinnebagoes on th ‘Wisconsin River; Rock River, Fox River and at
Green Bay,‘Wisconsin; he states further - "They hunt on the Ouisconsing,
Rock River and on the B. side of the Mississippi, from the Rock river

to Prairie du Chien . . ." (Def. Ex. 78). A.report of tribal locations

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 675 697

in l8l2 from Kinian Edwards shows that - “From this village to Rock
River is three miles, and about one and half miles up Rock River, on
the south side, there is a very extensive village of the Secs, of nearly
two hundred lodges; up this river, also, about twenty or thirty miles
from the month, there is a considerable Hinnebago‘village.“ (Pet. *3.
292). ‘Extracts from the Pioneer History of Illinois (1852) show that
the Winnebagoes or "Fuants" inhabited the country west of Green Bay,
Wisconsin, and that "These Indians occupied a section of the northern
part of Illinois, on Rock River, but their country for the most part lay
north and east of Illinois."‘ (Pet. Ex. 366). 9

(d) Reports from responsible Government officials during the early

1800's reflect the unstable conditions in this area and the number of

tribes which came into Cession 50 after the Illinois Indians were driven

southward.

William Henry Harrison, on March 22, l8l#, wrote to the Secretary
of War:

"The Kickapoos had fixed their principal village at,
Peoria, upon the south bank of the Illinois river, whilst
the Sacs remain masters of the country of the north . . g,

“It is a fact that for many years t.e current of emigration as to the tribes east of the Mississippi has been
from.north to south. This owing to two causes; the diminution of those animals from which the Indians procure
their support; and the pressure of the two great tribes,
the Chippewas and Sioux to the north and west . . . It
has already been observed that the Secs had extended
themselves to the Illinois river, and that the settlement
of the Kickapoos at the PeOrias'was of modern date."

(Pet. Ex. 300).

Ninian Edwards, who was Governor of the territory,'wrote several

letters to the Secretary of'War in l8l5 relative to Indian claims to

7 Ind. c1. Com. 675 698

the Illinois Countmy. On Dec. 1, l8l5, he stated "That coantrj originall
belonged to the lllinois hation, which was composed of the Peoria, Cahokia,
Michigamia, Kackaskia and Tamorwa Tribes . . . The Ottawas who had for their
allies the Chippewas drove off the Peoria Tribe, and claim their country by
right of conquest; and through their courtesy the Pottowatcmics intermixed

with bands of Chippewas and Ottawas have been permitted to occupy it.“

(Pet. Est 307). Then on December 13, l8l$, he again nrote to the Secretary
0 p I i of War relative to Pottowatomie claims “Since my last to sou, I have had a

long conversation with Captain Philips on Indian matters; he informs me

that in his opinion the Pottawatomies will never agree to part with their

land on the Illinois River, for most undoubtedlj, their allies, the Chippeways,
and Ottawas, have a prior right and in my'opinion should the Pottanatomies give
their consent, it will be a bone of contention with the Chippeways and Ottawas

at a future period . . ." (Pet. Ex. 308).

Finding.l8.l
During the latter half of the_l8th Century and on up to the l804 treaty

of cession, the Sac and Fox Nation was establishing itself west of the Missis- .

sippi.g While the great Sac village near the nonth of the Roch Rifer, and the

only significant village east of thelxississippi River during_this period, _.
- . I 9 ..-5&9

remained the prime village site, the majority of Sac and Fox villages, the 7‘

more important tribal hnnting grounds, the bulk of the population as well

_as the greater part of all Sac and Fox movement and tribal activity, lay

west of the Hississippi in laws and down into Missouri. '
(a) According to Chouteau the Fox village at Dubuqne, Iowa. 3 Site

famous for its lead.mines, had been established in 1764. (Pet. Ex. 309).

Q .

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 6?, 699

That the Sac and Fox'were extending themselves southward along the Missis"oi ‘ *h0 "“p'L¢=|"."‘ ‘.3. TC! ‘in: +1‘:  H“-‘ a-~~-\'¢'-?-u ;; ‘H 'L‘ 't"!“'.$‘ul\ 't"" d. O’
s_,pi t_-realtc- -5 -- _cc--d _n Cally Spahisn reports of the -1 cs -a ing
at St. Louis. Francisco Cruzat’s report of Nov. l5, l777, states the locations of the Sac and Fox tribes above St. Louis, the Fox being located

i"on the shores of the Misisipy itself at a distance of two hundred leagues

from this village (St. Louis)" while the Sac tribe was located "on the
banks of t.e.Misisipy, two hundred and thirty leagues from this village."
(Pet. Ex. 69).     _

(b) A memorandum to Sir John Johnson of April 13, 1786, on the
“Numbers and Locations of lndian Tribes" refers to the "Osakies or Sacs,
1300 men" as "A Nation which inhabited a few'years ago the banks of the
River‘Risconsin but owing to their apprehensions of the Chippewas and
being rather of a peaceable turn they left their Village and went a considerable way down the Mississippi where they continue to reside and
mostly on the Spanish side: this Nation is at present at war with the
Scioux of the plains and the Spaniards are using endeavors to attach them
to their interests etc. . . ." The "Outagamies or Foxes, lhOC men" are
described as "This Nation is nearly allied to the Sacs, speak almost the‘
same language, inhabit the same country, are esteemed rather more troublesome, hunt and trade as the Sacs etc. . . ." (Def. Ex. 76).

Confirming Spanish trading.relations with the Sac and Fox tribes
among others is_Hiro‘s report of Dec. l2,’l785, offering “A.Description
of Louisiana." He states therein:

“In St. Louis, by order of his Excellency, the Conde de
0’Reilly, annual presents are made to the Sioux, Great

Osages, Iowas, Kansas, Panis, Omahas, Sacs, Octoctata, Otos,

Little Osages, Missouris, Foxes, and Kaskaskias. . .” (Def.

EX. 79) .

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675 700

(c) Other references prior to l800 of See and Fox village sites
and other locations west of the Eississippi are: Perrault; 1783, on a
journey from Montreal to St. Louis "encanped at the riviere an binde
‘(Ioee) at the village of the Sakis”; Joseph Aiesee. August 16, 1787.‘
on recounting his trip down the hdsconsin River to the Mississippi

//referred to a Fox village near the Prairie du Chien area'nhere he estinated the population at 300 men (Pet. Ex. 280); Pierre Provost to George
Rogers Clark, Februany 20, 1780, referring to a forthcoming Sac and Fox
assemhlage at the "River des Honins (Des Moines Rirer)“ (Def. Er. 85.

p. 179); Letter of Nev. 14, l780, from Cruzat to Galvee placing the

r Sac tribe forty leagues from St. Louis, whidh would correspond to a location at the mouth of-the Des Mcines River (Def. Ex. 79); a letter of‘.
May 18, 1797. from.Honore, referring to a “Sequin village on the Iowa
River” (Pet. Ex. 282); and a letter of June 14, l7§7, from.Howard to
Carondolet} referring to three Sac and Fox villages in the ricinity or
the Des Moines Rirer, as well as references to the "Sakias and the.
Renards of thearowashiver." (Pet.Eh. 282).

(d) Dr. £nthonr'Wallace, petitioners‘ expert. testified to the
general movement of the Sac and For from east to west aeross the Mississippi during the latter part of the 18th century and hp to 130%. In
response to a question relative to Sec and §ox arrifal in Cession 50, he

stated:

"There was a fluctuation'back and forth for two or three
decades, and.by about 1750 or 1760 they'were pretty well
established, certainly, in the northern part of Cession 50,
and by l80h their settlements and hunting grounds had __
drifted down the river to cover a large portion of Cession
50 in Missouri and Iowa." (Tr. p. 589). l

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 675

In response to a question whether the majori y of the Sac and F

0
>4

‘were on the east or west side of the Mississippi River, Dr. Wallace

replied:

4"In November the Sec and Fox left their summer‘villages
in all likelihood and would have been scattered over a very

‘wide area, from the Illinois River out into central and
probably even western Iowa. I would think that the majority
of the hunters would have been'west of the Mississippi, because both the largest and the best hunting lands were at
that time west of the Mississippi. ' ‘ '

"If you are referring, however, to summer settlements
‘when the agricultural pursuits‘were carried on, then I
would think the concentration of population would very
definitely be ri~.t along the Mississippi, along the banks
of the Mississippi and would probably be evenly divided
between the east and west banks.“ (Tr. p. 6C9).%

In response tola similar question propounded earlier, Dr.'Wallace
indicated the presence of Sac and Fox villages on both sides of the
?Mississippi in l80& but, “there was a much greater area ‘west of the
Mississippi‘which was used for huntingthen there were east of the

IMississippi." (Tr. p. 389); and, still later he testified . . . "beginning a little before 180% and particularly afterwards the Sac and
Fox tended.to use the area‘west of the Hississippi as their‘winter

hnnting country." (Tr. p. 626).

I‘!

G.

(e) ‘Amos Stoddard, in letter to General Dearborn dated June 22

l80h,‘wrote in.part:

"I believe an opinion has generally prevailed that the
Sauks and Reynards mostly live on the East of side of the
Mississippi. This indeed was formerly the case . . . .
but they now mostly inhabit a large island formed by a
lake on thé'west side of that river above the mouth of
the Demoine, only 258 miles above this." (Pet. Ex. ll).

and. Cl. Com. 675 q 702

Finding 19.

Prior to 180b, the Sec and Fox had extended their major hunting
efforts west of the Mississippi River into Iowa and Missouri and across
to the Missouri River. It was a period marked by frequent clashes with
the Osage Indians of the Missouri River for control of these adjacent
hunting grounds. The Osages were inveterate enemies of the Sacs and
this bloody agitation was a constant threat to all settlers along the"
Missouri River. Many references during this period place the important
Sac hunting grounds around the "Two River" country and near the Salt
River in dissouri, and as such,'this'would include roughly two thirds
of the claimed area in Missouri above the Missouri River, as well as a
part of those adjacent lands to the north.

Betueenl764 and l80h, the Iowa Nation of Indians has establishing
new viilage sites in eastern I we and on both sides of the Hississippi.
A close relationship deueloped between the Iowa Indians and their See.
and Fox neighbors to such an extent that for a while'both groups shared
the usage of an extensive area in eastern Iowa along the west bank of
the Mississippi River. Other reports show Iowa and SacandFcxhunting
parties foraging into southwest Iowa, into Missouri, and across to the
Missouri River. l u l -¢€§'

(e) Manuel Perez in a letter to Miro, dated November 8, 1791, cited
the presence of Sac and Fox hunting parties near the Hissouri River:

I

"The Sac and Foxes, who are the strongest, and from.
‘whom something might be hoped, ha'e recently'made peace,
and have sent a large party to the Missouri to hunt with
them (Osages), after some Osages had been in the Sac
nation t * *.“ (Def. Ex. 68).

: _.|'
‘.1 -. '
..-. _. _~ I .‘wwrv-‘

4‘..fZ‘:1»

 

Anoarentl* the peace was short-lived for on éugnst 26, l792, in

-L

another letter to Hiro, Perez wrote from St. Louis:

“A party of Sank who went to fight the Osage succeeded
in killing three men and taking two prisoners. Another
party of the same nation of the Sauk has also gone to war
against the Osage. There is no doubt that, if the Sauk,
Renard, and Kickapoo wish to continue making war on the
Osage, they will succeed in terrorizin them, etc. * * *."
(Def. Ex. 79);

In 1795, Trudeau wrote to Carondelet of the continued Sac and FoxOsage warfare,

“The Sacs, who are very numerous hunting on the
Missouri, killed ten or twelve Osages after having
shaken hands with them and'promising peace * * *.“
(Def. Ex. 68).

(b) Amos Stoddard in his letter of January 22, l80h, to General
Dearborn included the following:

,"How far the whites have encroached on them (See
and Fox lands) I cannot learn--nor an I informed of
how far the claims of the Sauks and Reynards extend
down the Hississippi. One thing is certain, their
claim extends back to the Missouri where some of the

whites have settled. They conquered the lands on the
Missouri from the little Osages." (Pet. Ex. ll).

(0) Thomas Forsyth, who was the See and For Indian agent ior many
years, recalled in a letter of September 25, l82l, to the Secretary of,
‘War that, "I remember sone twenty years ago I winteredas a Trader near
the mouths of the Two River (Missouri), the Sacs and the Foxes did that
year hunt'west of -:o Rivers towards and on the Missouri River.” (Pet.
Ex. 76).

Cd} Black Hawk, the legendary Sac warrior, wrote his memoirs in

1933. He states therein that in the “Two River country" were located

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 675 ' - 7011»

his tribes‘ best hunting grounds, and that throughout the existence of
the famous Sac village on the Rock River, "we were the undisputed
possessors of the valley of the Mississippi from the Ouisconsin to the
Portage des Siour near the mouth of the Missouri, being about seuen p
hundred miles in lengtht” (Pet Ex; 265). I .

Black Hawk may have overstated his case as to the areas west of
the Mississippi near the Missouri River. _In recalling events of his’
youth he tells of his many heroic deeds against the Osages who were
moving north of the Missouri and invading Sac hunting grounds and how
they were finally driven from these hunting grounds. he speaks further
of a long campaign against the Osages, “whichlterminated in  th:1_rty
fifth ye.-a~,=« this would call for a date around 1802. (Pet.  265).

(e) Sac and Fox hostilities with the Osage continued up to the
time of the 180% treaty of cession. .Hajor.Amos Stoddard, in a report
made in June of that year; stated that a See band waylaid a boatload.
of Osages on their way to _St. Louis,  that,‘ :"The. Sauks  the ‘implacable enemies of the Osages and I suspeot it will be difficult to

~reconcile then.“ (Def. Eat 97).

(r) I-iiajor James am: in a late tewiikinson on Septenzber 29%,
1804, reported a Sac hunting party on the rirer "buivre"'whioh flows
eastward in to the Mississippi Fiver through the southern portion of’
the claimed area (Pet. Ex. 12). ‘He reeounts further that a war part&'
of Sacs from the “Ouisoonsing" River "turned back after a long:march"
to attack the hsages.“ (Pet. Ex. 12).

(g) august Chouteau, in his notes on the Indians in this area;

 

7 End. Cl. Com. 575 705

which he compiled in 1816, speaks of the areas once held by the Illinois
confederacy, and in reference to that area lying between the Missouri
and Mississippi Rivers, he states the following:

"That part of their original possessions, which lies
between the Missouri and Mississippi rivers as high up
as the mouth of the river des moins has never been occupied by any Indian Tribes since the Michigamias left it
which was before the Sacks & Foxes settled on the Ouisconsin. From the first settlement of this country the
last mentioned tract of land was used by the French Inhabitants as a hunting ground, until the repeated thefts
and depredations upon their property by the Little Osages,

whose land was adjoining that tract, compelled those French
hunters to abandon it.

"The Sack, Foxes, Iowas, and some other Mississippi Tribes
have of late years been in the habit of hunting there, but
that alone cannot give them any right * * *.? (Pet. Ex. 309).
(h) Sometime between I755 and 1765 the Iowa Nation of Indians re~

moved in a body from.their village sites at Council Bluffs, Iowa, traveled

, eastward, and established a principal village on the Des Hoines River near

the present site of Selma, Iowa. A second village was established on the
Iowa River, while two other village sites were reported on the east side
of the Mississippi River in Illinois. (com. Finding 10, Diet. No. 158).

(i) Dr.'Wallace testified to the existence of two Iowa villages in
180k on the east side of the HississippiRiver within the claimed area;
one was located opposite the mouth of the Iowa River, and the other opposite the mouth of the Des Moines River. (Tr. 783, 78¢).

In Docket 158 Dr. Wallace testified to the existence of these same
Iowa villages east of the Mississippi River.‘ (Tr. #O5A - Docket l58).
Further testimony by Dr. Wallace in Docket l58 reflected I we usage

Of a belt of land in eastern southeastern I wa, "perhaps touching th

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675

Mississippi River, and possibly extendinc across the Mississippi into

Illinois a short distance.“ Tr. #51 - Docket l58).

(j) The Commission in Docket 158 found joint or equal usage i

‘ large portions of east-southeast Iowa of lands touching the west bank

of the Mississippi, with this same situation existing in 180b, Ccommtr

Finding 33 ~ Docket 158).
Finding 20,
In the 1760's and up until 180b, the Sac and F0; economp”uas
principally one of agriculture, coupled with hunting, trapping, and

a later dependence upon lead mining, principally aroundaihe Dubuque,

Iowa, and Galena, Illinois areas. Agriculture and subsistence hunting
were conducted in the inmediate vicinity of the summer villages; while
the winter hunting and trapping was accomplished along the neighboring

rivers and streams which flow into the Mississippi River. (Coma. Finding

1o, Docket 158} Comm. Finding 21, Docket 135).

Finding 21.

iThe Commission finds from all the evidence as set forth in the t

preceding findings that the petitioner, Sac and Don Nation, and the
petitioner nenbers thereof are the successors in interest to the Sac

and Fox.Indians'who'by the Treaty of November_3, l80h (7 Stat. 8h)

ceded all their right, title, and interest to those lands as described‘

in Finding 3: and the Dommission further finds that at the time defendant acquired.petitioner's right, title, and interest to the aforesaid

lands under the Treaty of November 3, 1803, the Sac and Fox held aboriginal title to those areas contained within the following boundaries:

1;

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 675

 

(a) As to the area within Cession 50 east of the Mississippi:

Conrencing at a point on the Mississippi River corresponding

to the northwest corner of Mercer County, Illinois; thence up

the Mississippi River to the mouth of the Wisconsin River; thence
up the Wisconsin River to the point where the eastern boundary
line of Royce Cession 147 (His. 2; I11. 2, Eighteenth Annual Report of the Bureau of American Ethnology, Part 2; 2 Kappler, 297)
touches said river; thence southwardky along the eastern boundary
line of Royce Cession lb? to the old'Winnebago village on the
Rock River in Illinois, forty miles above the mouth of said river;

thence due south on a direct line to the northeast corner of Henry
County, Illinois; thence southwest on a direct line to the northeast corner of Mercer County. Illinois; thence west along the
northern boundary line of Mercer County, Illinois to the place
of beginning.

(b) As to the area within Cession 50 west of the Mississippi River:

All lands within the cession north of a line commencing
at the mouth ot the Cuivre River; thence west to a point
where the western boundary line of Cession 50 intersects
the Callaway-Montgomery County line.

EDGAR E.‘wITT
Chief Commissioner

‘WM. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

707

