BEFOPE THE‘ IND ‘ix? CLA Ii~IS 0033158101‘!

THE onini TRIBE or nssaassa, AND
AMOS LAHSOH, CHARLES J. SPRINGER,
JOHN F. TURNER man I-IENRY F. FREE2~IOI~?i‘,
Ex REL. onmn TRIBE or NEBRASKA,
doom TREE AND NATION, INCLUDING ALL
oaoors, nuns AND rznasm or SAID
OMAHA TRIBE my NATION,

Plaintiffs,

1'. Docket No. 225-0

THE UNITED STATES OF AI’fE.FL':'.'CA,

~.,as._.zx..z-../\...r~.,J\../~...a\../\./\.I~./\../~...*

Defendant .

Decided: December 2?,__19§7

i_ Appearances: .
I. S. Weissbrodt, with whom
were David Cobb and A_be W.
Weissbrodt, Attorneys for
Plaintiffs.
I. H. Fredricks, with whom
was 1-11‘. Assistant attorney
General Perry W. Horton,
Attorneys for Defendant.
OPINION _(_3§  COM}-EISSION

O‘Marr, Commissioner, delivered the Opinion of the Commission.

Pursuant to the Commission's order of October 6, 1953 in the abovecaptioned matter, the plaintiffs filed an amended three-courfca complaint,
the first two counts forming the principal subject of this opinion.

To this amended complaint the defendant filed a motion to dismiss

in which it challenges the sufficiency of the pleadings as stating a

cause of action upon which relief can be granted, as well as raising

the affinnative defense of res judicata to the allegations contained

in COUnt II.

Thus, the questions to be decided are, first: do the allegations
in Count I contain facts which, if taken as true and giving to the
plaintiffs the benefit of all reasonable inferences drawn therefrom,

state a cause of action entitling them to recover under the provisions

"of the Indian Claims Commission act; and secondly, if the plea of resjudicata does not bar prosecution of the claim presented in Count II,

do the allegations therein state atzause of action entitling the plaintiffs to recover under the same principles applicable to the allegations
in Count I?

COUNT I
Count I substantially embodies a broadxclaim covering alleged acts

of trespass committed upon the tribal lands of the plaintiffs. while_it
is not too clear from the pleadings, it would appear that plaintiffs are

resting their claims in Count I upon the tortious conduct of two distinct

types of trespassers; that is, the individual trespasser acting in his

"own behalf, as contrasted with the trespasser who at the time may be actw

ing as an.agent of the Government, or whose relationship in some manner

‘indicates governmental consent or participation in the tortious conduct.

For the purposes of this discussion, acts of individual trespassers shall

be considered in treating those claims resting upon "breach of‘defendant's

obligations to plaintiff as trustee, fiduciary, and guardian, and in contravention of standards of fair and honorable dealing." Those claims

6 69

alleging acts of trespass "committed with the knowledge and consent
and participation of the defendant and its agents. . " shall be treated

and disposed of in a different manner as affected by the motion filed

herein.

It is alleged that from time immemorial and at all times specified
in the complaint, the plaintiffs owned and were in exclusive possession
of certain described lands west of the Missouri River and located in the
present State of Nebraska; that, commencing in or about the year 18140,
white settlers, miners, United States troops and other persons committed
various acts of trespass ‘upon plaintiffs‘ tribal lands , unlawfully carry»
ing away and using the timber, mineral, grass, water,‘ and other products
contained thereon, and that said trespassers destroyed the aforementioned products and.properjy to the great damage of the plaintiffs. It is alleged
‘further that by virtue of the existence of specified treaties between the
plaintiffs and the defendant,‘ “the defendant undertook at all relevant
times mentioned herein to protect the interests of the plaintiffs in their
lands and other tribal property as trustee, fiduciary, and guardian."
Plaintiffs state further that the aforementioned acts of trespass "were
committed with the knowledge and consent and participation of the defendant
and its agents“; that the defendant and its agents failed "to protect the
plaintiffs from said unlawful trespasses," and failed to compensate and
obtain compensation for the plaintiffs, for the use and destruction of the
plaintiffs‘ land and property, which acts and omissions "were in breach of
lam and equity, in breach of defendant‘s obligations to plaintiff as trustee,

fiduciary and guardian and in contravention of standards of fair and honorable dealing."

Itshould be noted from the outset that the allegations in Count I
do not point to any specific language in a treaty spelling out the contractual obligation and duty which plaintiffs desire to impose upon the

defendant. Furthemore, when read in context with the othergrounds for

‘recovery "adva'n:ed‘*by plaintiffs," a recorverv fOI1I1ti€ii“"lIp’On“8. "breach of law

and equity" falls within clause (1) of section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, and calls for a legal or equitable claim arising from a
breach of a contractual obligation found in a specific treaty provisiomy
Failure to allege the existence of any such treaty provision in Count I
disposes of plaintiffs‘ contention that defendant’s acts and omissions
"were in breach of law and equity.”

Plaintiffs‘ second contention that defendant‘s acts and omissions

H .3 ..... ._1

"“‘ in ‘si‘sac.i of defendantis obligations to pladntiri‘ as a t.._.1st-ee,
fiduciary and guardian," poses a more difficult question.

As indicated previously, the plaintiffs point to several treaties
as the source of the fiduciary guardian-ward relationship and of the

alleged duty imposed ‘upon the United States as trustee. Two of the cited

treaties between the parties are peace treaties inuhich the supranacy of

the United States is acknowledged and in which the Omahas are placed e:r%=

the sole protection of the United States. 2/ H In the case of 

 

l/ 25 U.S.C.A. 70(a). "(l) claims in law or equity arising under the
Constitution, laws, treaties of the United States, and Ebcecutive
orders of the President;"

g/ i.e. - Treaty of July 20, 3.815 (7 Stat. 129)

"Art. 3. The undersigned chiefs and warriors, for themselves air‘?
their said tribe or nation, do hereby acknowledge themselves .:;-;:-:':.e.‘;?. 
tribe or nation to be under the protection of the United States, 
of no other nation, power, or sovereign, whatsoever.“

.._l—J

80 C. Cls. 261:, the court rejected the Indians‘ contention that a
guardian-ward relationship has created by virtue of the language in
Article 3 of the Treaty of October 28, l8lS by which the United States
acknowledged the Kansas Indians "to be under the protection of the United

States of America, and no other nation, power, or sovereign 1~:hatsoeyer;"

in the following manner: j
The purpose and effect of the treaty were 2130 place the
contracting parties upon the same footing in every respect
upon which they stood before the war with Great Britain.
No contention is made that the relationship of guardian
and ward existed between them before the war. Certainly
this relationship could not be created by a treaty that
merely re-established their preexisting political status.

The contention that this was the effect of article 3 of the
treaty is without merit.

at most these treaties recognize an» existing relationship between a de..‘.’ g... '1 .- -'------~-- -\-r¢........_ra.._ V dn-¢¢---'-.i.\.n-¢¢ \) .‘ ..g.l-f\.r £IIIvL¢\-is Gib I-J\uL ‘ITIL ..L.\-/J. \J-L-.L  C31»
E _ nl ' I . u. I .

'liu"y', a dependent status
‘,1-which the Omahas have experiencedfrom the time theywere subject to
British rule, and which status has remained unchanged since the United
States wrested control from the English._2/__Th9 oth¢r'treaties cited
are land cessiontreaties, devoid of any suggestion of ‘governmental protection, either expressed or implied, the language of which under the

inoststrained construction could not impose the fiduciary duty contended

by the plaintiffs. 2/
Recent language from the Court of Claims in the case of Gila RiverPima-Maricopa Indian Com. v. United States, 11:0 F. Supp. 776, has thrown

_3_/ See Worcester v. Geor ia, 6 Peters 652, 8 L. Ed. 55).;

pg/ Osage Nation of Indians v. United States » (Docket No. 9)
l Ind. Cls. Conn. 53

considerable doubt upon the existence of any fiduciary relationship
imposing ordinary legal obligations which is not founded upon some

language in a treaty, statute, or executive action. In that case the

court stated:

Whether or not the legal relationship of guardian and
"ward exists between a particular Indian tribe and the
United States depends, we think, upon the express _provisions of the particular treaty, agrement, xecutive
order, . or statute under which the claim presented arises.
It is true, that the word 'fiduciary‘ and the expression
{guardian-ward relationship‘ have been used by the courts
to describe generally the nature of the relationship
existing between the Indians and the Government. However,
in the absence of some language in a treaty, agreement, or
statute spelling out such a relationship, the courts seem

° to have meant merely that the relationship between the
Indians and Government is" ‘similar to’ or ‘resembles’ such
legal relationship and that doubtful language in the treaty
or statute under oonsideration should be interpreted in
favor of the weak and dependent Indians. (See also Sioux
v. United States, 136 C. Cls. , decided Eéovember 7,
1956, page  of slip opimon, appeal Ho. 3-55%

While the court recognized that a clai1n'fc3r‘breach of such a
fiduciary relationship may be brought under the provisions of the Indian
Claims Cdnm1ission'Act, it in no hay intimated that the actitself created
or acknowledged the existence of such fiduciary relationship as a matter
of law. An examination of the legislative history of the act shm-:5 t“;.*;a.t.
the United States is not to be considered in the role of an ordinary’

fiduciary whenever a legal claim is filed before the Commission, but

whether the United States is or is mt acting as a fiduciary must be

asserted.

2'/

Thus, to sustain the sufficiency of the pleadings" in the instant

determined under the facts in each particular case.

case under a motion to dismiss the plaintiffs are required to plead
facts establishing the existence of such fiduciary relatipnship, the

concomitant trustee's duty, and the breach of that duty resulting in

‘damage "to the plaintiffs.

Going back and analyzing with care the allegations contained in
Count I in light of the legal principles- discussed, it is evident that
plaintiffs have failed to allege facts establishing the essential fiduciary relationship. The Commission can not speculate or surmise what
facts are needed to support the legal conclusion which plaintiffs have
Nor can the Commis sion delay proper action under a motion
attacking the sufficiency of the pleadings by permitting the plaintiffs
at a later date to supply missing links. What plaintiffs have alleged
from a fair reading of the language contained in paragraph 7 of the

complaint sets out nothing more than a conclusion of law without supporting facts. A conclusion oflaw standing alone need not be taken

as true nor does it admit the allegations of the complaint under a motion .

5/ Senate Report No. l7Sl, July 15, l9h6, at page 6.
1;. United States as fiduciary

The sentence beginning in line 7, page 3, that the United
States shall be treated as an ordinary fiduciary, has been
stricken in the committee amendments because it seemed that the
Commission should be permitted to determine according to the
usual principles of law whether the Government was .a‘_.fiduciary
in the particular case involved, and if so what fiduciary duties
were imposed upon it.

F-II

to dismiss for failure to state a cause of action. é/

Failure to plead sufficient facts is also fatal to plaintiffs‘
further contention that defendant‘s "acts and neglects to act . . . were
. . . . . in contravention of standards of fair and honorable‘ dealing."
Recovery upon this theory presupposes the existence of a moral obligation
upon the defendant to compensate the plaintiffs for danagefs resulting
-from actsof trespass committed by strangers upon their tribal lands.

But the pleadings have not demonstrated factually the manner in which
the United States assumed the moral obligation of indemnifying the

plaintiffs for the wrongs alleged, nor can such indemnification be implied

from the language in the treaties cited by plaintiffs. 3/ i As previously

indicated, these treaties did no more than acknowledge the preexisting
status of the parties, the existence of a dependent Indian tribe and a

superior government of the United States.

 

§/ The Creek Nation v. United States - 92 c. cls. 31:6, 351

   

Whilethe demurrer admits all the allegations of the petition
that are well pleaded, it does not admit allegations which are
legal conclusions. ‘

3/ Petitioners have unintentionally spotlighted the weakness and
insufficiency of their pleadings on this point when they state at
page 3 in their memorandum of points and authorities in opposition
to defendant's motion as follows:

In the first place, even assuming arguendo that the proposition of law asserted by defendant is correct there is no
evidence before the Commission as to the agreements, acts of
defendant and the surrounding facts upon which plaintiffs rely
to impose liability on the United States. It renains  
 dence, whether 
agreement on the part of the United States can be proved.

 

Perhaps at trial the plaintiffs could produce some evidence, such
as a collateral agreement, an affimative act, or some other circumstance
or fact which would develop a moral claim in favor of plaintiffs ,- and show
that the defendant acted in less than a fair and honorableway. However,
this is the pleading stage, and the Commission must consider and decide

this motion upon what the facts, as pleaded, will properly admit and
8
reasonably infer. '/

However, what has been said above falls only upon those claims seeking recovery for those acts of trespass committed by third persons which

' are grounded on breach of a fiduciary relationship and in contravention

of standards of fair and honorable dealing. Petitioners have asserted

acts of trespass committed "with the knowledge, consent and participation

of defendant and its agents." There is also an allegation that the United

States troops trespassed upon plaintiffs‘ tribal lands. It is not indicated in what capacity these troops were on the lands or that they were not legally acting within the scope or orbit of their duties. In any event,

clause 2 of section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act permits recovery
on claims "sounding in tort with respect to which the claimant would have

been entitled to sue in a court of the United States if the United States

were subject to suit." Furthermore, there is precedent to uphold the

sufficiency of plaintiffs‘ pleading in this cause of action. Plaintiffs

 

§/ As the Court of Claims said in the case of The Snake or Piute Indians
v. United States, 125 C. Cls. 2&1, 255  

'.That something or someone is or is not fair or honorable

is always a conclusion or an inference based upon many factual
considerations. i

ON

have properly called attention to the case of Shoshone Tribe of the Wind

River Reservation v. _United States (Docket No. l57), 3 Ind". Cls. Comm.
380, in which case the claimants alleged acts of trespass upon the Shoshone Reservation committed with "the active participation‘ of the United

States in protecting said trespassing miners in their operations." Passing

upon the sufficiencyof the pleading as stating a claim upon which relie f
could be granted the Commission concluded in itsopinion, page 385:

Admittedly these allegations are general and vague, and
should be "made more definite, but they do suggest that the
Government, by protecting the trespassing miners in some way
not disclosed, became aiparty to the wrongdoing. Bearing in
mind that we are here considering a pleading only and must
give effect to such ultimate facts as can be inferred by
reasonable intendznent frcm its allegations, we cannot say as
a matter of law that the petition does not state a cause of
action. Torts, for instance when committed by the Government,
are actionable under clause  of section 2 of the Indian

Claims Commission Act.

It is concluded therefore that defendant‘s motion to dismiss Count I
of ‘the complaint for reasons that "the said count wholly fails to state a cause ef action against the Defendant and in favor of the Plaintiff"

should be granted in part and denied in part. It should be granted as

to those claims seeking recovery for damages resulting from the tortious
conduct of third persons who are strangers and the motion showrld lone  ed
as to those claims seeking recovery against the defendant for 
committed with the participation of the defendant and its agenim, C 

(A-1‘ act‘
.»..-q' ‘u.
an '

to the latter trespasses the petition should be made definite  

forth the facts relating to the defendant's activities bearing upon such

matters.

COURT II
As to Count II, plaintiffs seek to recover compensation from the

defendant for damages and losses sustained.by the plaintiffs through
depredations committed upon their reservation by'hostile Sioux Indians.
It is alleged that in 1855 and in subsequent years the Siouxrlndians conducted aeaeries of incursions into plaintiffs’ reservation, killing:many
members of the Omaha Tribe, stealing their horses, and destroying their
property. According to the plaintiffs, liability of the defendant for
the above tortious acts attaches primarily by virtue of the provisions
of.Article 7 of the Treaty of’Harch 16, 185k (10 Stat. lOh3) between the
Omaha Tribe and the United States which reads as follows:

...Should"the Omahas determine to make their permanent
home north of'the due west line named in the firSt.artin1e5
the United States agree to protect them from the'Sioux and
all other hostile tribes as long as the President may deem
such protection necessary; and if other lands be assigned

them, the same protection is guaranteed.
Plaintiffs plead that the failure of the United States to protect.
adequately the lands and interests of the Omahas against the depredations
of the hostile Sioux was a breach of the defendant‘s obligation under

Article 7 of the aforesaid treaty; a breach of defendant's fiduciary obligations as trustee and guardian; and, in contravention of standards required by fair and honorable dealing. 2/

2/ Amended Complaint - page h, par. 15

‘To the allegations contained in Count II, the defendant raises
the primary defense of rfg judicata, grounded on the decisions in the
prior cases of The Omaha Tribe of Indians v. United States, 5'3 C.‘ Cls.
51:9, decided June 10, 1918, and United States v. Omaha Tribe of Indiana,
253 U. S. 275, decided June l, 1920. In addition, the defendant contends
that the claims asserted are individual and not tribal, and do not state
a cause of action upon which relief can be granted.

Byvirtue of the special jurisdictional act of June 22, 1910 (36
Stat. 10113) the Omaha Indians were permitted to bring suit against the
United States in -the Court of Claims, in order that the court might
adjudicate among other claims,

... all claims of whatsoever nature which the Omaha Tribe of
Indians may have or claim to have against the United States

.. . under the Treaty between the United States and the said
tribe of Indians, ratified and affirmed March sixteenth, eighteen
hundred and fifty four.

Accordingly, suit was filed and of the claims pressed against the,
United States, one called for compensation for danages sustained by the
Omaha due to a series of hostile attacks by the Sioux upon the Omaha
reservation in which some 22 Omahas were slain and 152 horses stolen.
At the conclusion of all. the evidence the court entered a finding in
favor of the Omaha in the amount of €‘p1:,560, being the full value of the

l9/

horses at $30 per head. In awarding judgment on this claim the

court used the following language:

 

lg The Court of Claims made no finding as to the value to the tribe
of the lives of the 22 Omahas who were slain.

J.
U. can

The amounts found to be due the Indians in the fif
finding(s) are supported.by the evidence, and are allowed
under the provisions of the treaty of March 16 185k.
Underscoring ours).

 

 

On appeal "to the Supreme Court the above claim was disallowed by
the court for the following reasons:
As to the item of $h,56O allowed as the value of horses

killed by the Sioux Indians, we conclude that the objection

of the government is well-founded. The obligation of'the

treaty was to protect the Omahas from the Sioux and other

hostile tribes ‘as long as the President may deem such protection necessany.’ The obligation depended upon an exercise

of discretion by the President. There is no finding of a

failure to provide any protection deemed by the President to

‘be necessary; hence nothing to create a liability, legal or

equitable under the treaty clause.

The court also indicated in additional language that the claim for
the value of the dead Indians must likewise fail by what was said con-I
cerning theanard for the stolen horses; namely, the same treaty provision.governs both claims.

It is not denied that the parties in.the pending controversy'before
this Commission are the same parties which litigate in the two former
cases. Thezmore difficult conclusion.to reach after careful considerb
ations is that the present claims and all the pertinent issuesrinvolved.
herein have been fully litigated and finally adjudicated on thexnerits
in those prior cases. This conclusion.seems inescapable and for the

following reasons.

It is well settled that a jurisdictional act such as the one under

which the earlier Omaha suit was instituted in the Court of Claims, confers upon that court a precise and limited jurisdiction to pass upon.only

those issues properly presented, which.limitation in the Act of.June 22,

680

fpresented andfully litigated.

i def ic iency .

1910 and for our purposes was as follows:

That all claims of whatsoever nature whichthe Omaha tribe
of Indians may have or claim to have against the United States
..... due said tribe from the United States under the treaty
between United States and the said tribe of Indians, rati3‘.'ied

and affirmed March 16, 1851;, .....; and jurisdiction is hereby
conferred upon the Court of Claims to hear and determine all

legal and equitable claims, if any, of said Cmaha tribe of
Indians against the United States, ..... -. .

Thus, while the act creates no new cause of action in favor of the

Omahas, it provides the forum in which all pertinent issues must be

The Omaha presented all their claims, both
legal and equitable, arising under the Treaty of March 16, l85b,, including

a"”clai_m for compensation for loss of Omaha lives and horses through the

depredations of the hostile Sioux. The Court of Claims recognized the

claim as one properly before the com-+. under the ‘urisdicticnsl M‘ or’

3 -5-: -5 g¢¢IUjv 'h—€ U , &&‘m

one arising out of the obligations imposed by a treaty. Accordingly, it

rendered judgment.

On appeal, the Supreme Court correctly acknowledged the. jurisdiction
of the Court of Claims to adjudicate this claim as an obligation arising
out of a treaty, but denied recovery on the basis that there was no
finding of a i'ai_lure to provide the Omahas the adequate protection {is v 

.-(' _"._- ..
---' '¢...'L.'_,J_! 1.’ -...

necessary by the President. Consequently, the claim ultimately failed 
lack of proof, a factual shortcoming, and not for a legal or jurisdiC*,‘t:i,o:g:‘t»
To permit this claim to be relitigated on the facts alleged

as a breach of a specific treaty obligation under the provisions of clause

(1) of section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act would do violence to

the principle of res iudicata.

681

.-.v:=':r‘.-tn

682

Plaintiffs seek to escape the effect of the doctrine upon their
present claim by asserting a new cause of action grounded first upon
“breach of defendant's obligation to plaintiffs as a trustee, fiduciary
and guardian," and further on "contravention of standards required by
fair 'md honorable dealings.“ It argues in support thereof:

Claims rested on these grounds were neither asserted

‘nor tried inthe prior litigation, and the Court in the

prior litigation did not have jurisdiction over claims

rested on this ground; whereas, jurisdiction of claims

rested on such ground has been conferred on this Commission.

It is not clear from the pleadings under which of the five jurisdictional grounds of section'2 of the Act of August 13, 19b6, the
"plaintiffs are  the Commission to entertain a claim basedsolely
"upon "a breach of a fiduciary relationship. It would probably fall within'the language of clause (2) which reads as follows:

(2) all other claims in law or equity, including those
sounding in tort, with respect to which the claimant would
have been entitled" to sue in a-‘I-court of the United States - '
‘if the United States was subject to suit.

In any event, the claim: is asserted as: one distinct from a specific
treaty obligation, and founded upon a fiduciary relationship presumed to
exist because there happens to be a superior government and a dependent
Indian tribe, which status has been acknowledged in the several treaties
previously cited by the plaintiffs. h-'hat has been said as to the existence
of such fiduciary‘ relationship in dealing with the allegations of Count I
is likewise apropos to those of Count II. However, further treatment of

this position is required in View of the present defense of res judicata.

While the Court of Claims has entertained serious doubt as to the

existence of any such fiduciary relationship in the absence of express

language in a treaty, statute, or kecutive order, the Commission under
its jurisdictional act may entertain such claim. However, even under
the Commission‘ a liberal ‘rules of pleading, the plaintiffs‘ have failed

to allege any additional facts in support of a distinct claim founded
"upon ‘a ‘breach of a fiduciary obligation. Indeed the facts as alleged

are ‘substantially identical with those which supported a prior suit in
the Court of Claims based upon a breach of a specific treaty obligation,
and which claim was recognized as properly before the court arxi adjudicated on its merits as a, claim arising under a treaty by both the Court
of Claims and the Supreme Court.

The samelreasoning and legal principles apply toplaintiffs’ final
"contention that their prior claim can be grounded on "contravention of
"standards, required y fair and honorable dealings.“ Such a claim calls
for the enforcement of nothing more than a moral obligation not recognized under any existing rule of law or equity. Clause (5) of section 2
of the Indian Claims Commission Act does not supply a claimant with a new
theory under which he may prosecute a perfectly valid legal or equitable

claim. The Court of Claims has made this ‘position abundantly clear in the

case of the Blackfeet and Gros Ventre Tribe v. United States

, 12? c. Cls.

807, where in unnistakable language it stated:

The contention is without merit. Clause (5) has reference
to moral claims which were not reccgrnzed by any rule of law
or equity. If a tribe was not entitled to recover under any
rule of law or equity, it still might recover under clause (5) 3
but if its claim was recognized by a rule of lay: or equity,
then clause (5) has no application. i

And in a prior case, western Cherokee v. United States, 316 C. i.“5'* »

 

665, which was an appeal from a judgment of this Ccrmission dis.*r1issi;: 

0)

kn)

petition for additional interest on a clam previously determined by

that court, -- it was there contended before us and the Court of Claims

that there could have been no determination on the merits in the former
cases because the fair and honorable dealings clause was notin existence
at the time ofithe former decisions and that clause permits a reconsideration of the interest question by this Commission. In overruling these

contentions, the court said at page 677:

'31- -39 -1- In addition, we think it is clear from the history
of the Act of 191:6 that Congress did not intend to confer
upon the Commission jurisdiction to permit claims, such as
are here involved, to be re-litigated under clause (5) of
Section 2 on the basis of fair and honorable dealings.
Clause (5) obviously has reference to the fundamental character -or the claim rather than to the theory on which an
Indian tribe or band may seek to invoke the jurisdiction of
the Indian Claims Commission.

and at page, 678 added:

44- «ti» 4- If the claims made by appellants in these cases could
be ‘again heard and determined by the Indian Claims Commission,
it would be di_fficu_lt to imagine a claim, even though previously
considered and decided on the merits by this court, which could
not he relitigated before the Commission merely by basing the
“claimed right of recovery on the provision of clause (5): supra.
Clause (5) was intended, as its language clearly shows, when
considered in the light of its history and other provisions of
Section 2, to cover only moral claims based on justice and fair
dealings or broad principles of equity and justice, with respect
to which no court had theretofore made a determination on the
merits, or could have made such a determination under the terms
of prior jurisdictional acts.

681.:

_ Plaintiffs‘ present claim under the facts alleged falls squarely within proscription of the rule enunciated above. Its claim is not only one

previously recognized by a rule of law or equity, but one that has been

adjudicated on its merits by a court having jurisdiction to hear and render

final judgment.

685

Therefore it is concluded that under the facts and cmuznstances as
alleged, the defense of _r_-e__s_ judicata must prevail, and in view of this
disposition of the allegations of Count II, defendant's other contentions
in support of its motion need not be discussed.

COUNT III

Count III is a demand for an accounting involving numerous transactions. We are given to understand a general accounting will, when .
completed, be made available to the plaintiffs. Such a report am, no
doubt, require plaintiffs to make a more definite statement of their
accounting claim and perhaps require a separation thereof from the petition. In the circmnstances we believe the motion insofar as it applies
to the third count should be overruled but the defendant may have the
right to interpose a similar motion at any later stage of the proceedings

which may involve an accounting.

Louis J. 0*}-Iarr
Rssociate Commissioner
We concur:

Edgar B. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

W111. Mo 
Associate Commissioner

 

