8 Ind. c1. Com. 195

pueem DE .;:.COS_.  33:: .i'::;i.""::-: ., re.
PUEBLO DE JEIEZ ACTZIG ziiaezr. J‘...-.E"iA':} oe
BEHALF 0? Peeeto es P3333,

Petitioners,
V. Docket No. 17h

THE UNITED .:-m.i=Es 0:? A.1~:r.;':;:cA.,

-../-...r~....2\../\.z~..,4-....z~...I*-../-../°~..—#

Defendant.
Decided: December 11, 1959c

Appearances:

Cleud Keen, Dudley Cernell, and
- J ' 0-. -‘-n-; -4»?

‘I! Q J C  LJ .345. 

Atterneye for Petitioners.

W. A. Rechoe, with when :as

Mr. Assistant Attorney General
L Perry W. Horton,
- Attorneys'for Defendant.

O?'.i"f3IC";J 03' T53 ‘* I-EZIQSIGEV

jit-Uzi

   

Watkins, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The original petition in this case, filed July 30, 19S1,'by the
Pueblo de Pecos, oresented a claim based upon the alleg d inadequate
and insufficient award of the Pueblo lends Board end payment by Congress
Of $1-50 an acre, or $28,1h§.O0, for t?e loss of the 18,763.53 acre
Pueblo de Pecos Grant, sheen in the patent and plat market Exhibit A

attached to the petition. The petitioners preyed for judgment in such

205

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 195

amount as would provide just and fair compensation for such loss, less
the payment already received.

In its first defense, the defendant alleged that “claimant is not
a proper plaintiff since by virtue of the Act of June lé, 1936 (H9 Stet}
1528), the Indian Pueblos of James and Pécos were consolidated andhv
merged into the Pueblo de James and all rights and claims of either of
said tribes became vested in the consolidated tribe, The Pueblo de Jémes”.

Thereafter, on July 25, l9SS, the Pueblo de Pecos filed a motion
for leave to amend its petition by making "Pueblo de Jemez, acting for
and on behalf of, Pueblo de Pécos“ claimant in the case and by amending
Paragraph VII to include a plea of lack of fair and honorable dealings.
The defendant filed objections to the motion and moved to dismiss the
petition.

After receipt of briefs thereon, the Commission issued a Per Curiam
Opinion (December 13, 1§55;.L Ind. Cl. Comm. 130) and Order overruling the
defendant*s objections and motion, and allowing the addition of the Pueblo
de Jémez as a separate party claimant and as a party “acting for and on
behalf of, Pueblo de Pecos," and the amending of Paragraph VII. An
amended petition was filed April 30, 1956, with typewritten inserts making
the authorized amendments.

Both the petitioners (Pet. Findings pp. 1-2) and defendant (Def.
Brief, p. 3) agree that the issues to be decided at this time are (a)
whether the Pecos Pteblo and Jemez Pueblo are separate tribes entitled
to assert a claim before this Commission. and (b) whether the action of

the Pueblo Lands Board in awarding the Pecos $1.50 an acre for the loss

206

8 End. Cl. Com. l9S

of the lands and x

(“F
C’?

""'L' ‘H--4 . .
L‘-L232‘. - 

PETITICEERS AS PARTIES

--u-—I1-u.

   

The petitioners argue that they are each lndian tribes entitled to

file and prosecute this claim (Pet. Brief, p. 3-h) and that the defendant

is estopped to dvnv

on, the right of the Pecos to assert the claim because of

the approved attorney contract of the Pecos (p. S). The position of the
defendant (Def. Brief, pp. 36-38) is that the Commission erred in reaching
the conclusion in L Ind. Cl. Comm. 130 that the act of June 16, 1936, did
not abolish the Pueblo de Pecos as a tribe; that the Pueblo de Pecos is

not 3 PTOPBT party; and that the amended petition with Pueblo de Jemez

as a petitioner was filed after the expiration of tne time allowed for

"Bgfiling claims.

_.-u. :It is only necessary to here state that the Commission stands on its
former decision concerning the parties herein, as reiterated in Finding 2.
Since the addition of the Pueblo de Jemez as a petitioner did not in any
way'prejudice the defendant in this action, the fact that the amended

petition was filed after the time for filing claims is immaterial.‘

RES JUDICATA

 

Both parties brief this question (Pet. Brief, pp. 5-10; Def. Brief,
PP» 22-35). It is the contention of the defendant that the award of
$1°50 Der acre by the Pueblo Lands Board to the Pueblo de Pecos for loss

‘L . E ‘ V ‘W 4' F5 0
of the lands in the Pecos Pueblo Grant 15 res gnaicata Oi the claim now

before the Commission. The Board's deterrination is contained in its

8 7“d. C7 C n 135 208

. ’ . V-"I \P'|"".“'/"‘_ €':"'-P""§ . R. 5‘-« ‘-‘ "\.f- 1 1 . '0 !"'|-“"
~ rte. Of ta; fou. luynlux in evidence WhLCh axe all sated August 8,

Report No. 1 (Def. Ex. 3) is entitled, “Report of Title to Lands

Granted or Confirmed to Pueblo Indians", and is made under Section 2
of the Act of June 7, 192k (53 Stat. 636). Material parts thereof are
set out in Finding 6 herein. The Pecos Pueblo Grant is described by
mates and bounds (pp. h—8 of Def} Ex. 3). The report notes (p. 9) that
the Pecos had been greatly reduced by constant attacks by hostile Indians,
that it suffered several severe epidemics and was from 1825 subjected to
everv form of coercion and compulsion on the part of the local Mexican
authorities. A grant was actually made within this Pueblo area in 1825
and possession given, as appears from an 1825 report of a committee which
asked that "all their lands be restored to the natives of the Pueblo of
Pécos of which they were plundered” (See Def. Ex. 11, the document in
Spanish, and Def. Ex. 10, a translation). Report No. 1 then states that,
because of the continued harrassing, the seventeen remaining members of
the pueblo accompanied their kinsmen to Jémez, where they and their descendants have since lived (p. 10). "In 1855 an examination of the title
_ to the Pecos Pueblo w's made by the Surveyor General, who approved it and

recommended confirmation of the grant. This action Congress took by the

.301 of December 22, 1858. In 186k a patent was issued to the same." In

1559 the Pecos Pueblo requested that their lands be restored to them or

that they be sold or leased for their account and additional lands purchased for them in the James section (pp. l0~ll). This. together with

and similar requests, made it appear to the Boarc
intentional abandonment of their rights by the few surviving Pecos Indians.
The Board recommend d that a study he had of this long deferred request and
that suitable lands be purchased near Jémcz, if possible (p. ll). Church

records show there were about 250 claiming Pecos ancest;r. “They are recognized as a separate entity and are accorded an officer in the annual

election.“

Report No. 2 of the Pueblo Lands Board (Def. Ex. B) is entitled “Re

ort

“K3

concerning Indian Titles Extinguished” and is made under Section 6 of the
A93 (506 Finding 7 herein). The area of tie Pecos Pueblo Grant is set out
35 18:81h-559 acres (p. I of Def. ex. 5). There were 339 adverse claims

by nOn~Indian claimants covering the entire area (p. 2). The Board determined ”that title to all of the lands within the external boundaries of the

watt?’0

in

”}"Pecos Indian Grant 18 extinguished.” “It does not appear that there are

an3'water rights lost to the Indians to which specific mention should be
made". The ownership of the various tracts was determined by a survey and
Study by the Cadastral Engineer and “by an independent investigation conducted by the Board“. "It is the belief of the Board that seasonable pro~
secution upon the part of the government would have resulted in protecting
this Indian claim” (p . 2-3). Therefore, an award was made for the loss
5u5tain€d (pp. 3-5). The Board acknowledged the difficulay of determining a fair basis for the award. It determined that the figures for

the entire tract should be based on its approximate average value from

*\

the occugancy of this territory in l3ha to the time of the award, which

'r'''' -‘|. r  rJ .. . .
has set at $1.30 per ere or $2C,lhh°9;§

""-‘L-~. "W-.._. A -I .A -..-L. -5- ,
. Lee ooarc than 2£o3 one a

‘number of transactions and conveyances si+h%n the area {pd

:uJ—'- ...-or

.4-.-......

. -... qr. l\u-I01: an--an -- 8 Ind. Cl. Com. 195 210

1868 eleven of the survivors of the Pecos Pueblo sold their interest in the
grant to one John Ward, who had been Indian Agent and was on very friendly
terms with the people, the idea being that he would resell three-fourths

of it, if possible, for the benefit of the People of the Pueblo“ (p. S).

In 1873 the Pécos Indians conveyed to Frank Chapman what interest they had in
the grant of l8,763.3S acres for a consideration of $5,000.00. The same year
Ward conveyed to Chapman for a consideration of $5,000.00. Other conveyances
Were for varying interests and for named considerations of from one dollar

to $19,038.63. There is some indication that “in the years l8h1-l8h2 a
proceeding was brought before the then Governor of Mexico loohing to the
abandonment of this Pueblo" (p. 7).0 The fact that Congress later confirmed
the grant in the Pueblo made it appear to the Board that the Governor's
approval, if he gave it, was not in accordance with the existing laws of
Mexico at that time. Another line of title, based on the 1825 Mexican

Grant, developed in the settlers who occupied the.congested areas within

this grant (p. 9). This made necessary a quieting title action after the
1912 agreement mentioned above. “This suit ended in the settlers generally
conveying any interest which they might have in the entire grant to the
holders under the long line of transfers referred to, reserving to‘them~
selves however the particular tracts which they then claimed and occupied.”
The concluding paragraphs of Report No. 2, which are largely reiteration,
contain a finding that the amount of money received by the Indians in

the transactions in which they were parties was an inadequate sum for this

large acreage (p, 10),

8 Indo Clo Con. 195 211

an 10-: 0-. ‘I . 1'-":0 , -3: 34anos Board as a qdn;1mJEnlClel

{U
U‘
W}
*1
I.)
O’
V3
U]
(+1:5"
‘D
'3
‘IL
( 1
‘it’
;_
0
t--l

The defendant dibody (Defo Brief, pg 2h)o It was composed of three members, one reprer
Senting the Secretary of the Interiors another the Attorney General, and
a third appointed by the President of the United Stateso The l92h Act
directed the Board to investigate, determine and report upon all lands
within the egterior boundaries of any land granted or confirmed to the
Pueblo Indians of New Mexico by any authority of the United States or
any PTi0T SOVereignty; or acquired by said Indians as a community by
purchase or otherwise, title to which the board shall find not to have
been extinguished in accordance with the prorisions of the Act? Section
6 required reports of other matters in respect to each pueblo, including

the tracts of land and water rights appurtenant thereto in the possession

of non—Indian claimants. If the Board found that such tracts could be or

iii§0U1d have been at any time recovered for said Indians by the United States

-.-,..-.a.by seasonable prosecution of any right of the United States or of the
Indians, the United States was made liable for such loss and the Board was
t0 determine the amount of loss and award compensation. The Board was also
required to report the fair market value of such tracts and water rights exclusive of any improvements made therein or placed thereon by nonnlndian
claimants.

Section 6 provided that "such report and award shall have the force
and effect of a judicial finding and a final judgment upon the question
and the amount of compensation due to the Pueblo Indians from the United

States for such losses“o At any time within 60 days after the filing of

such report with the United States District C art; the United States or

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 195

-cany Pueblo or l.:';d:’-.a.ns af.o-?eo'i.e':? thcrsr-eh}; could a1:=p:-sal to
judicial review of the Poardio findingsq In any such proceeding the report

of the Board was prima facie evidence of the facts, the values, and the

liability therein set forth subject, however, to he robutted by competent
evidence which all interested parties had a right to present. The District

Court could confirm, modify or reverse the findings of the Board and any

party aggrieved could appeal to the United States Circuit Court of Appeals.

Since no appeal was taken either by the United States or by the Pueblo
de Pecos, it is the position of the defendant that the Board‘s award is a
final judgment fixing the value of the lands and water rights lost by the
Pecos Pueblo and such judgment is not subject to review or revision by
this Commission (Def. Brief, p. 25).

The petitioners do not ap ear to question the power of the Pueblo
Lands Board to make a determination which could, under the rules of res
judicata, bar the subsequent relitigation of the same issue between the
Same Parties. rRather the petitioners argue that the defense of res judicata is not applicable here because the Board failed to follow the pro-'
visions of the Act of 192k and, therefore, the Pecos claim could not have

been decided on its merits (Pet. Brief, p. 6). An exception to the

Principle of res judicata, as defined in so cgis 5'1, Sec. 626, is quoted

udgment in a suit will operate as a bar to a subsesuit on the same cause of action if, and onlv if,
,udgment and the proceeding leading up thereto involved, or afforded full legal opporturity for, ‘r

......._...L.!
.L.LJ.Vt.'££3’s./J."
I a O
the merits of the suit.

tithL»

"31""
0.4.1.
(1

Eation and determination O1

212

8 Ind. C1. Com. 1

gThe petitioners say that the Board failed to follow the dictates of Congress
in the following respects:

1. The fair market value of the water rights were
not considered by the Board in making the awards.

2. The Board did not appraise or make a thorough inrvestigation as to the amount of water available.

‘3. The Board committed error of judgment in not allowing
interest or loss of use in considering damages.

These three alleged failures of the Board do not bring the award to
the Pecos within the exception set out above. Congress required the Board
to investigate and report its findings and awards. This it did in the case
of the Pecos. Petitioners‘ Finding h admits that hearings were held
P leading to the award to the Pécos Pueblo and that the Pueblo was represented

by legal counsel. The reports and determination of the Board are in evi*"gdence. .Apparently the reports on the Pdcos were filed in the United States

"‘1;t-I".

:?District Court to start the running of the 60 days within which any party
could proceed in that court to question the Board's determination. Congress
thereafter paid the award. This all tends to show that the proceeding
leading up to the award "involved, or afforded full legal opportunity for,
an inVe5tiEation and determination”. 'The petitioners have not proved otherm
”i5e° The FEtitioners' complaints rather go to the manner in which the Board
decided the matter. Such matters could have been presented to the District
Court on appeal. Since there was no appeal, one can only assume, lacking
evidence to the contrary; that the Pécos at that time were satisfied with
the awaatizand the proceedings of the Board leading up to it, at least to

the extent that they did not wish to appeal.

‘O
U1.
rx,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. l9§ 21h

The petitioners next argue that "the defense of res judicata cannot
legally be applied where the Ward was not represented otherwise than
by the Guardian or where the latter conducted the litigation negligently
or where the ilterest of the Ward and the Guardian are in conflict",
citing 50 CJS 3.3.1, Sec. 797 (Pet. Brief, p. 7). Petitioners‘ Finding L;
asserts that the interests of the government, as Guardian, and the Bécos
as Ward, were in conflict; that the Pueblo was not represented by legal
counsel of its own choosing; and that the litigation was conducted
negligently. Supporting evidence referred to by footnote is largely from

Senate Subcommittee hearings.
In response, the defendant says (Def. Brief, p. 3h):

But petitioners have not produced one bit of evidence
to show that the counsel provided by the government

failed properly to represent them and present their

claim to the Board. Furthermore, some Pueblos saw fit

to appeal their cases to the District Court and employed
private counsel to prosecute such appeals. No such action
was taken by these petitioners and there is no evidence

that they ever requested private counsel to represent them

before the Pueblo Lands Board.

In the absence of legal cases to definitely support petitioners‘ proPosition, it appears to the Commission that the United States should not

be held strictly to the standards which may be set for guardians and wards

regarding conflict of interest in litigation and furnishing legal counsel.
The United States, as a sovereign, is a composite of all its people. Thus
any Claim against that sovereign could narrowly be said to be a conflict of
interest, because any recovery is going to be partially paid by the claimant,
35 3 Part of the United States. It could also be technically argued that

the 80Vernment, in prosecuting a criminal and at the same time providing

. 21
8 Ind. Cl. Com. 195

counsel for the accused, is acting in conflict with itself- But the United
States as sovereign it is in a unique situation. It is immune from Suit

and can only be sued by its own consent (91 C.J.S. Sec. l76). Congress has
power to prescribe conditions on which attorneys will be allowed to Tepreseni
claimants before any of the courts of the government (59C~ 197)- Congress

furnishing for many years a special attorney to represent the Pueblo

- . . - ' ‘ u sel
Indians of New Mexico was an act of beneficence to give the IndlanS 00 N

‘ruse

without cost to them, and since all attorneys are sworn to PT0t9°t the in‘
terests of their clients, the fact that they Here Paid by the E0VCT§m9nt
should not make their efforts in asserting a Claim against the United States
subject to attach.

Neither is there sufficient evidence to establish that the litigation

_ Fag conducted negligently. The petitioners do not dispute and Would take

- advantage of some of the findings of the Board, such as the finding that

even though the Pecos had left their lands, “there neVeT'Wa5 an intentional
abandonment of their rightst, and that the Pécos were entitled to an award
because "seasonable prosecution upon the part of the Government would have
resulted in protecting this Indian claim" (Pet. Finding S, Fn. 3)» Petitioners question the amount of the award, relying mainly on statements made
at subsequent Congressional hearings as to what the Board Considered in
making its awards. The Board did take into consideration water rights

(Def. Brief,.Appendix, pp. ho-61). The Board‘s statement, previously qU0t9ds
that "it does not appear that there are any water rights lost to the Indians
to which specific mention should be made" does not mean that the Pecos Rive?

passing through the grant had no bearing on the value of the land and the

8 Ind. Cl. 195 I 216

amount of the award. The Board did not set a separate specific figure for
loss or water rights. The Board did not include any interest in its awards
and was not required to do so by statute. Neither was it required to consider
"loss of use".

‘Why'did not the Pécos appeal the Board‘s award in the United States
District Court? The record does not answer this question, and as previously
stated in this opinion, it can only be assumed that the Pecos at that time
were satisfied with the award. ‘We certainly do not have sufficient facts
now to say that counsel for the Pécos negligently conducted the litigation
by not proceeding to question the award in the District Court. Shortly after
the Board's proceedings, a number of Pueblos asked Congress to increase their
awards but no such request appears to have been made by the Pecos. The petitioner says (Pet. Finding 5, Fn. 9, p. 17):

' In fairness to other Pueblos of New Mexico the Senate

Committee on Indian Affairs, after reviewing the awards

made by the Board, recommended that said other Pueblos

were entitled to additional compensation. But in its

report the Committee did not even mention or refer to the

Pécos Pueblo or to the award made by the Board to it.
(Def. Ex. 16)

The fact that the Committee did not recommend an additional award for the
Pecos and that Congress did not make one tends to indicate that there was
little or no dissatisfaction with the Pecos award.

The final argument of the petitioners is that "there-is much to litigate in this proceeding that was not decided when the Pueblo Lands Board
made its award“, naming again "the question of interest, water rights and
loss of use“ (Pet. Brief, p. 9). Cromwell v. County of Sac, 9h U. S. 351,

2h L- Ed- 195, is cited as setting forth a second branch of the rule of res“

judicata (Pet. Brief, pp. 8-9):

8 Ind. Cl. 195

But where the second action between the same parties is
upon a different claim or demand, the judgment in the prior
action operates as an estoppel only as to those matters in
issue or points controverted, upon the determination Of which
the finding or verdict was rendered. In all cases, therefore,
where it is sought to apply the estoppel of a Judgment rendered
upon one cause of action to matters arising in a suit upon a
different cause of action, the inquiry must always be as to
the point or question actually litigated and determined in
the original action; not what might have been thus litigated
and determined. Only upon such matters is the Judgment conclusive in another action.

1..

While the determination and award of the Pueblo Lands Board was

made in accordance with the provisions of the Act of June 7, l92h, and

the present claim is brought under Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19b6, the basis of both claims is the loss to

the Pecos Indians of the lands of the Pecos Pueblo Grant. As previously

quoted from the Board's Report No. 2, the award for the entire tract of

$1.50 an acre was arrived at by figuring tits approximate average value
from the occupancy of this territory in l8h6 to the present time" (1930);
This was done because the Board found that "there is no way to get at the
actual value of this land in its entirety as it was at the time that the
Government might have acted or at the time when the members of the Pueblo
disposed of their holdings".

iPursuant to the Act of June 7, 192k, the determination of the award
for loss of lands was entirely in the discretion of the Board. It was
within the Board’s discretion to base the award on an average value over
a period of years, as they did. It should also be noted that no den
duction appears to have been made from the award for the considerations

which the Pecos Indians had received in previous sales of their lands to

private individuals.

8 Ind. Cl. 195

The present claim has the same basic issue. Both the Petition and

Amended Petition pray that the "defendant be adjudged liable under the
Act of August 13, 19b6, for an amount that will provide just and fair

compensation for the loss of the Pueblo Grant consisting of l8,763.33

acres, less the payment already received under recommendation of the

Public Lands Board".

As to the matters petitioners say may be litigated here which were

not considered by the Board, it has already been noted that water rights

were taken into consideration by the Board. The items of "interest" and

‘loss of use" seem to be presented in the alternative by petitioners, as

' the conclusion in their Brief, p. 15, says "plus interest, or loss of use".

Neither of these have been recognized by this Commission in its decisions
to date as proper elements of loss or damage in cases of this kind. Obviously there was no “taking” of the lands of the Pecos Indians under the
Fifth Amendment. Rather, the United States issued a patent for these lands
to the Pecos after they had moved from the Pécos Pueblo Grant, and the
Pecos Indians later sold their lands to other parties. This is admitted

by the petitioners when they say (Pet. Brief, p. 11), “It was the nonaction of the Government that resulted in the loss of the Pecos Grant lands

I by the Pecos Indians to others". This is precisely the finding of thei

Lands Board and the basis of its award, as set out in footnote 19 in support

of _ Petitioners’ statement .

So even though the present claim is considered a new and different

cause of action within the meaning of the second branch of the rule of

res judicata, the basic matters in issue are the same as in the proceedings

218

8 Ind. Cl. 195 219

fof the Lands Board, and the Board's decision as to such matters is coneclusive.

It is therefore the conclusion of the Commission that the petitioners
have had a determination of their claim of liability on the part of the
United States for the loss they suffered in regard to the lands of the
Pecos Pueblo Grant. The determination and award of the Pueblo Lands
Board, which became a final judgment, is res judicata Of the Claim now

before the Commission, Accordingly, the-amended petition should be dismissed and it will be so ordered.

Arthur V. Watkins
Associate Commissioner

__§We concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

wm. M. Holt i
Associate Commissioner

