BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE LOYAL GREEK BAND OR GROUP OF
GREEK IHDIAES. AND THE LO?AL CREEK
CLAIMAETS' COHXITTEE. on the relation
of Joseph Bruner. S. W. Brown. Jesse
McDermott, Lasley Haynes, Ben Johnson.
Robert Severs, Hosa Holley; Noley Buck.
John H. Jones, Elmer Bill. Thompson
King, and Seborn Smith,

Plaintiffs,

vs. Docket No. 1

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

- )

)

)

)

3

THE UNITED STATES os snares. ;
)

Defendant.

Woodson E. Norvell, with whom was

5. R. Lewis. William Ne Maben.

George E. Eorvell and W, A. Hearn,
~ Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Ralph A; Barney, with whom was
Mr: Assistant Attorney General

A. Devitt Vaneoh, Attorneys fo
Defendant. '

MAY 6 1949
OPINION 0? THE COHMISSIOH

-Iv-III-I--III-I21-f

O‘Marr. Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

la The claim here involved is presented by the Loyal Creek Band or
Group of Greek Indians, and the Loyal Greek Claimants‘ Qommittee. on the

-relation of twelve persons who are alleged to be descended from and are

heirs of individuals whose names appear on the roll of Loyal Creek IndiansIt is further alleged that the petition herein "is filed for the use and
benefit of themselves; and for all others similarly situated and having

\ike interests."

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 122 '   _ .  ‘  122 *'

1 Ind. c1._com&. 122 ' ,  .l C   123

-_2 ;

C

We shall consider this claim, for the purposes of the motion hereafter
to be referred to, as a class action brought by the named individuals on behalf of themselves and all other descendants and heirs of the group of Greek

Indians who have been described in various public documents; legislation and »

Congressional hearings, as "soldiers that enlisted in the Federal Army and

"the loyal refugee Indians and Freedman,“ or Loyal Creeks. Hereafter. we will

refer to this group as Loyal Creeks.
2. ‘The allegations of the petition may be summarized as follows:
(a) Uuring the civil war the conflict was carried on with great fury
within the boundaries of the Creek Nation and, as a result 1523 members of
the nation loyal to the Union were driven from their homes and their liveStocko food. implements and habitations were destroyed or lost to them, and

they were forced to abandon their homes and seek refuge in the State of Kansas

1'

(5) After the close of the civil war the United States recognized the
losses sustained by the Loyal Creeks through a treaty dated June lb. 1866
(lb Stat. 785). made with the Creek Ration of Indians which, among other
things. provided that a roll of the names of the Loyal Creeks should be made
and that certain named officers of the United States "shall proceed to inr
vestigate and determine from said roll the amounts due the respective refugee
Indians. and shall transmit to the Commissioner of Indian-Affairs for his
approval. and that of the Secretary of the Interior, their awards * * * *o”
The awards were to be for the property losses sustained by the Loyal Creeks
during the civil war and provision was made in the treaty for their payment

out of the sales of lands ceded by the Creek Nation. (Art. 4)..

treaty,

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 122 _ i _ 0 , 1 . l2&

«:3.‘-~- 0

(e) Pursuant to the provisions of the treaty the Loyal Creeks submitted
to the officers designated to determine the amounts due them, individual .
claims aggregating $5,090,808e50, and such officers awarded to said 1523
enrolled claimants the aggregate sum of'$l,836,830.hl, of which sun $100,000

was paid out of the funds of the Creek Nation of Indians, as required by the

\

(5) 0n.March 8, 1900, the United States and the "Musoogee or Greek Tribe
of Indians" (Creek Nation) concluded an agreement, which was ratified by the
Congress on March 1, 1901. (31 Stat. 861), which contained this provision

(Art 0 3

All claims of whatsoever nature, including “Loyal Creek
claim“ under Article Four of the §reaty of eighteen hundred and
’sixty~six, and the "selfeeuigration claim“ under Article Twelve
of the treaty of eighteen hundred and thirty~two, which the
tribe or any individual thereof may have against the United
States, or any other claim arising under the treaty of eighteen
hundred and sixtyhsix, or any claim which the United States may
have against said tribe, shall be submitted ;) the Senate of
the United States for determination: and within two years from
the ratification of this agreement the Senate shall make final
determination thereof; and in the event that any sums are awarded
the said tribe, or any citizen thereof, provision shall be made
for immediate payment of same. '

Of these claims the “Loyal Creek claim”, for what they
suffered because of their loyalty to United States Government
during the Civil Ear, long delayed, is so urgent in its character that the parties to this agreement express the hope that
it may receive consideration and be determined at the earliest
practicable moment,

(8) And the Senate, acting'under the authority of the quoted provisions
of the 1900 agreement; determined the civil war losses of the Loyal Creeks
to be $1,200,000, having deducted the $100,000 previously paid and the further

Sum Of $536,830.b0 from the total of $1,836,830.40 awarded by the CommiSSi0n

G

‘,1 Ind. Cl. Comm..122

125

O
i LP 0%

provided for in the 1866 treaty, and recommended to the Congress the payment,

‘of said sum of $1,200,000. The Senate included that amount with certain

other items which were added to the Indian appropriation bill of 1903.
(Senate.Report No. 3088, 57th Cong., 2nd Sess.). But, notwithstanding the
determination and recommendation of the Senate, the Congress made an appropriu
ation to satisfy said Loyal Creek claims, as follows:

In pursuance of the provisions of section twenty six
of an act to ratify and confirm an agreement with the Muscogee
or Greek tribe of Indians, and for other purposes, approved
March first, nineteen hundred and one, there is hereby awarded,
_ as a final determination thereof, on the soncalled "Loyal Creek

claims" named in said section twenty—six, the sum of six hundred
‘thousand dollars, and the same is hereby appropriated out of any
money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, and made im“
'mediately available. And the Secretary of the Treasury is hereby
authorized to pay, under the direction of the Secretary of the
Interior, to the Loyal Creek Indians and freedmen named in
articles three and four of the treaty with the Creek Hation of
Indians of June fourteenth, eighteen hundred and sixtyesix, the
said sum of six hundred thousand dollars, to be paid to such
Indians and freedmen only whose names appear on the list of
awards made in their behalf by W. B. Hazen and F. A. Field, as
commissioners on behalf of the United States to ascertain the
.losses of said Indians and frcedmen as provided in said articles
three and four: and such payments shall be made in proportion
of the awards as set out in said list: Provided, That said sum
shall be accepted by said Indians in full payment and satisfaction
of all claim and demand growing out of said Loyal Creek claims,
and the payment thereof shall be a full release of the Govern»
ment from any such claim or claims:

A (f) The plaintiffs seek recovery of the sum of $600,000, being the balance
of the $1,200,000 award made by the Senate, with interest from July 1, 1903a
(5) The plaintiffs also ask for an additional sum of $90,000 the Loyal
Creeks paid to the Attorneys who represented them in pressing their claim be—

fore the committees of Congress resulting in the atprcpriation mentioned above,

1 Indp. C1. Comm. l_22 p. ' ‘ f . V -s ' 1- _ 126
i- 5 a
3. It seems to be conceded that the $6C0,00U was paid in accordance

with the terms-of the appropriation act of 1903.

3

H. To the petition, above summarised, the Government filed its motion

to dismiss on two main grounds:

(1) That the plaintiff is not an "Indian tribe, band or other

‘- identifiable group of American Indians" within the contemplation of the

Indian Claims Commission Act: and ‘

(2) That the claim here presented is not a tribal, band or

9 group claim but, in reality, individual claims of a class of Greek Indians

who lost property destroyed or taken by Confederate soldiers during the Ciyil
War.

5. For the purposes of the motion to dismiss the allegations contained
in the petition will be considered as true. Gulf etc.. V. Trapp. 16$ ied.
(zd) 3&3, Porter v. Karavas, 157 Fed. (fed) 881+.

6. We encounter no serious difficulty in determining the meaning of
to words "tribe" or "band", as used in the not creating the Indian Claims
Commission (60 Stat. 1ON9§ 25 U.S.CoAs 70). for those terms have been fairly
well defined by the courts and the administratiye agencies of the Government.
The words suggest continuity of a collective or communal existence, common
leadership and the exercise of political authority characteristic of Indians
liing in the United States. Montoya V. United States, 33 C. 018. 349.

180 U} S. 521. A distinction between a "tribe" and a "band" of'Indians has

been made in some cases, especially in depredation cases where it was neces~

sary to determine whether a group of depredators was in amity with the United

I

1 Ind. c1. com. 122 127

...5...

\

States, but we are not here called upon to make any such distinction because
the plaintiffs do not contend that they are either a "tribe? or a “hand” of
Indians. nor do the allegations of the petition bringjplaintiffs within the
definition generally applied to those terms. However; the plaintiffs do insist that they are an "identifiable group of American Indians“ and as such

entitled to prosecute their claim before this Commission. Thus. we are read

.quired to determine whether the plaintiffs have shown themselves to dome

within the meaning of that category of Claimants;

7. The substance of the defendant's position is that to constitute an
“identifiable group of American Indians" such group must possess the characteristics of a “tribe” or “band”, which are, mainly. a common government or
leadership. continuity of existence and concert of action. This must be so.
it is reasoned, because the phrase "identifiable group” is associated with
the names "tribe" and "band", which are now and have been recognized as
political entities.’ ‘

8a The rule ejusdem generis; which counsel for the Government would
have us apply here, of course limits general terms of a statute, which follow
specific ones, to matters similar to those specified, 50 Am. Jur. 2&4. Sec.
ZH93 and if applicable to the phrase "identifiable group“ would exclude all
Indian groups which have group claims but whose legal status is not political
15 Charécter. This rule, like other rules of construction, is not final or

°°n°1u31V0. but is an aid in arriving at the legislative intent and is never

‘used to defeat the real purpose of a statute. as the purpose is gathered

1 Ind; C1. Commi 122

5128
X ?U'l
i ll _
from the whole enactment. The Act was intended to finally determine all
7 3.1’ . ‘ .
possible Indian group claims» *3 stated above, according to the Government's construction, the use of the terms “tribe” and “band” connotes political entities and therefore the phrase “other identifiable group" must be
construed as having like characteristicsai It would seem that the groups
denominated as "tribes" and "bands" embrace all the political groups generally
recognized as such by the Congress and administrative agencies of the Govern~
ment, and; thereiore. there are no groups of the same class left. In those
circumstances we must either treat the phrase a meaningless; or give it a
meaning outside the class indicated by the words “tribe” or tband“. It is

too obvious to require discussion that we cannot read the phrase out of the

2/

statute, so the only alternative is to give the phrase “identifiable group"

 

'   Ame J11.I‘¢  Secs 

Q] The House Committee on Indian.Affairs in its report on the bill under
which we function had this to.say as the purpose of the bill: "In order
'that the decisions reached under the proposed legislation shall have
finality it is assent al that the jurisdiction_to hear claims which is
vested in the Commission be bread enough to include all possible claims.
If any class of claims is omitted, we may he sure that sooner or later
that omission will lead to appeals for new special jurisdictional acts:
and if the class of cases omitted is one which the Congress has in the
past declared to be worthy of a hearing, in one or more jurisdictional
acts, it is probable that future Congresses will 1 newise grant a hearing to such claims, and the chief purpose of the present bill‘ to dis»
pose of the Indian claims problem with finality, w 11 have been defeated.‘
(HouseIReport No. lhéé. 79th Congress, 1st Session, page 10.)

1]  Ame 1:111‘:  Sec. 2310

1 Ind. c1: Comm. 122 . *   _ ' 1 i“' .;  ' i- .129

.- 8..

a meaning outside the groups generally considered by the Government and dealt
with as political groups. _ ‘ I

d ‘9. Congress did not define the phrase “identifiable group", but the:
association of the nerds used to describe claimants who are permitted to
assert claims against the United States. indicates very plainly that it is
group claims that the Commission may hear and determine. However, that
common characteristic of the three classes of claimants does not, in our
opinion. require that they must be political groups in_order to obtain a
hearing before this Commission, on the contrary, the Congress evidently in—'
tended to add to the generally recognized political groups, a third class
of claimants. namely, a class which can be identified as a group, that is,
a body of Indians having similar rights which are not shared by other
Indians, even though of the same tribe or band to which such group may belong. The controlling question is whether the claimant group can be identified and that it has a common claim. If such a group can be identified and
it has a common claim it is. in our opinion. an “identifiable group ofAmerican Indians" within the intent of the Act and it need not be a political
group in character. A i

p 10. According to the alleged facts the Loyal Creek group pas first
recognized in the treaty of June 14. i866 (lb Stat. 785), wherein it was
provided that they be enrolled and the amount of their individual losses.
sustained through rebel action. be ascertained. The enrollment was made

and 1523 members of the Creek Nation who had been loyal to the Union were

placed on the roll. These enrolled Creeks comprised but a part of the

a-an-....

Creek Nation and became known as theloyal Greeks. The losses of the individual Indians were determined and approved in the manner provided in the

treaty and the sum of $100,000 was applied on such losses. The roll.‘ which

by reference is made a part of the petition, shows the names of all ‘iloyal
Creek Indians and freedmen“ with the loss sustained by each: they ‘are other_—wise identified therein by showing their sex. age, marital status, etc.
(Senate Docume.-nt No. H20, 57th Congress,‘ 1st Session); It is difficult to '

imagine a clearer or more definite identificatihn of the Loyal Creeks. The

_“Loya1 Creek claim.“ was recognized in the Act of June 28. 1898 (30 Stat. #95)

and the agreement of 1900 (31 Stat. 861) to which we will refer later. but
in the Indian appropriation act of 1903 (32 Stat. 982. 990-995) in which the

appropriation of half the award made by the Senate, wash passed, the roll of

, the Loyal Creeks was recognized by the Congress bydirecting that the money

appropriated ‘be apportioned only among the Indians and freedmen whose names
appear thereon, or to their heirs (Par. 2(e) above}. Thus we find the Loyal
Creek group was created bythe treaty of 1866 (Art. 1+) and expressly recognized by the Act of 1.903 and referred to in the Act of 1898 and the agreement
of 1900 (ratified by Congress on March 1, 1901. 31 Stat. 861). Certainly.
with this historical background, we encounter no difficulty in determining
the identity of the group known as the Loyal Creeks. We are not to be
understood. hnwever, as implying that the enrollment of a number of Indians
is in all cases sufficient to make them an "identifiable group" under our
Act. for it could. be that the members of a tribe or band are enrolled, or

that two or more different tribes or bands are included in a single roll:

1 Ind.'C1. Comm. 122 i_ _ . _p , r 131

I
* I

._ 10 ._...

this possibility. obviously. would not change their status from a tribe or
band to an identifiable group, or permit a suit otherwise than as a band or
tribe or on behalf of a tribe or band. What we have concluded is that in
this case the Loyal Creeks are an identifiable group. But such identification does not in itself permit the prosecution of all claims against the
United States, for closely associated with the question of the identity of
such.a claimant is the question of the kind of claims the Commission may
entertain. ‘ '

11. It is charged by the Government that the claim here submitted is
simply a common suit for individual claims and therefore. the-Commission has
no power to entertain it. since our Jurisdiction under the Act is limited to
the consideration of common claims, that is, claims in the subject matter .
of which the members of the group have a common interest. It must be adv
mitted that the treaty of 1866 contemplated the ascertainment oi the individual and independent claims of those members of the Creek Nation who remained

'1°Fa1 to the Union and who suffered losses through enemy depredations. and for

the payment of the same, at least to the extent of $100,000. If that treaty
were solely relied upon as the basis for this suit we would hare to agree
with.the Government's contention and dismiss the petition. But we believe
the Government by the 1900 agreement with the Creek Nation. and the ratification thereof by the Congress. created a common claim which may be asserted

in this proceeding. for by the agreement of 1900 (see paragraph 2(d) above)
it was agreed that the “Loyal Creek claim" under Article h of the 1866 treaty

should.be submitted to the Senate of the United States for final determination

1 Ind‘. C1. Comm. 122 .- ' ’ ' .' -0
. ‘ » ‘ 132

and it was therein further agreed that in the event of an star: vgrcvisizn
shall be made for the immediate payment of the same." The Senate. accord- 0
ingly. made an award of $1,200,000 but the Congress appropriated, and there
was paid, only $600,000 of the award. The effect of the agreement mas that
the Government became obligated to pay the full amount determined by the

Senate. and violated its agreement by paying only half thereof. In suing

‘for the balance of the award it would not be necessary to prove or pass

9

upon the validity of the individual claims of the Loyal Creeks. Nor does

the fact that any award which might be recovered might have to be distril buted among the members, or their heirs, in proportion to the individual

losses (which, according to enrollment, differ in amounts) change the common
character oi the claim in this case because the agreement of 1900 establishe
it as a group claim and the Indian Claims Commission Act authorizes the

Loyal Creeks to submit it for adjudication. Moreover, this case is not pre—

' sented as one for individual claims but one for the enforcement of an allege

I

obligation of the Government. It is true, that there are allegations in the
petition which. if taken alone. would.indicate a different theory. but considering the petition as a whole, as we must. we believe it can be consider:
as a common claim of the Loyal Creeks for the balance of the Senate‘s award

12. The Government relies strongly on the case, Blackfeather v. Unite»

States, 3? Ct. C19. 233. 190 U.S. 368. as authority for its position that

' the claim here asserted is simply a common suit for individual losses.

13. In the Blackfeather V. United States case. supray it appears fr0H
the opinions that the white_citizens of the United States committed depredations upon the property of individual Shawnee Indians in the State of Kar

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 122 133 _

912‘and Indian Territory. amounting in the aggregate to over oneéhalf a million
pdollars. In 1854 the Shawnees and the United States entered into a treaty
which. among other things, acknowledged the losses of the individual Shawnees
resulting from the depredations of the white people and the United States‘
paid $27,000 to apply on such losses. The treaty also required these Shawnees
who sustained loss to file their claims therefor with the Indian Agent for ‘
submission to the Shawnee council for approval. In 1890 and 1892 the Congress
passed special acts authorizing the Shawnees to sue the United States and the
Cherokee Nation in the Court of Claims for "their claims against the United
States and the Cherokee Nation. or against either or both of them. of every
description whatsoever arising out of treaty relations with the United States.
rights growing out of such treaties. and from contracts, express or implied
under such treaties, * * *.“ (27 Stat. 86).. A suit was brought by the Shawnees
in the name of their principal chief (sec. 3. 26 Stat. 636) in which the

Court of Claims decided. "the plaintiff. bythe allegations of the petition.

yhas asserted an individual obligation existing between the United States and

each of the claimants. and, in order to recover, it must appear that such
relation exists." (3? Ct. C13. 233, 2&0). On appeal the Supreme Court in
its opinion stated that by the petition the petitioner sought the recovery.
of the individual claims (scheduled in the petition) of the Indians sustaining losses and asked for judgment in "favor of the Indians mentioned for the
respective sums set opposite their names." (p. 370 and 373. 190 U.S. 368.)
Thus, we see, a common suit was instituted for individual claims. and both

courts held the action was not a tribal claims (which under the Jurisdictional

1 Ind: C1, Comm. 122 ' ll ' ‘W " e ‘H A vi‘ 134
a'13 _ I ' to

act was the only kind of claim the Court of Olaims could consider) but

private claims of individual Shawnee Indians. and therefore dismissed the

'.- .

petition. . p %- 2
14. It is clear that the Blackfeather case, supra, does not appi?

’ here for that case was, under the pleadings; a common action for individual

and independent claims, and under a jurisdictional act which only permitted
suits for tribal claims. While here, as we have pointed out above. the.

claim is for the enforcement of an alleged obligation in which the Indians,

‘or their heirs. who composed the Loyal Greeks, have a common interest in the

subject matter;

15. It is also the position of the Government (andthat of the Solicit
of the Department of the Interior) that if the Loyal Creeks have any claim
at all (which the Government denies) it can only be enforced through an
action by the Creek Nation because the treaty (1866). in which the claim
was first recognized, was made by the Creek Natio“ and the contract of 1900

was also made with that Nation.

l6e It is of course true that the Loyal Creeks were not parties to

the treaty of 1866 or the 1900 contract. but it is also tree that they were
made beneficiaries of those agreements as respects the claim here asserted.
and we believe the rule is now well settled that a.party for whose benefit
a contract is made may enforce the same by an action in his own name. al.though not a party to it. 12 Am. Jur; 825. sec. 277? McKee vs Lemon,

159 U.S. 315. (See cases under 277 above.)

l?. The attorneys for the Government further submit that this claim

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 122 l I ' ‘ I‘. "I p135

\

-_1u.may not be maintained by the Loyal Greeks because that name is used for
descriptive purposes only. We do not understand that the names used in
the title and allegations of the petition. "The Loyal Creek Band or Group
of Greek Indians. and the Loyal Creek Claimants‘ Committee" are of any

special significance for it is apparent the action is a representative
one brought by members by descent of a certain segment of Greek Indians.
who sustained losses through enemy dopredation, for the benefit of the
group.‘ National Hair.Dressers v. Philad. 3% Fed. Supp. 26$. Such an
action is provided for by Section 10 of the ;,ot, August 13, who. which
provides: ' '

Any claim within the provisions of this Act may be
presented to the Commission by any member of an * * * 5
identifiable group of Indians as the representative of all
its members.

That‘is what has been done here. as shown by the allegations of the petition.
The fact that the title includes names that are merely descriptive of the
group or that the allegations of the petition use similar descriptive words
is not conclusive. What is important and necessary is that the petition
disclose that the named individual parties are members of the group for
which the claim is made. and that the claim is for the group. We think it
does so. (See General Rules of Procedure. Sec. ?(3)(c).)' .
18. It was suggested by counsel for the Government, during the oral
argument. that the Greek Nation of Indians is an organized tribe recognized

5? the Secretary of the Interior as having exclusive authority to represent

such Loyal Creeks and therefore, under the provisions of Section 10 of the

1 Ind. ci..comm; 122
._  __

Act of August 13. l9H6. this claim cannot be prosecuted by the plaintiffs.

‘In-support of this contention counsel offered a resolution. adopted by the

National Council of Muskogee Greek Nation on May 23. 1903. by which it
accepted the $600,000 appropriated by the Indian appropriation act of 1903,
referred to in the petition, as.in full payment and satisfaction of the

demands growing out of the Loyal Creek claims and finally released the

Government from all such claims. We believe the question thus raised

should be determined only when formally presented by an appropr1ate_p1ead-V
ing and after a full bearing upon that issue.‘

The motion of the defendant will be overruled»

Commissioner Holt concurs in the above opinion.

9'

May 69 

136 g

