5 Indian Claims Ccnrirsicu 3??

e::Pc:>*=  ]?I)‘='*=?T rf'._»*  CC?Z".ISEIC’;"

‘I3 ,*.::cs L_r~msc:‘?,
czwuss J. EPEILIGER, Jam 1*. P. HE1~:R‘:::' F. FmMo::T,  I?..;3L. {.‘IE.~.E{A 'r:u"_f=.;+:.‘ or
I~TE'_3RAS}{A, o?t~::::~*«. Tera: AITD E—Ta’fICET Z":“;CLUDIIa~IG
ALL GROUPS, BM-TDS we *;Z_‘.i"S.3EE?_S or 3;: 01-7; ‘IA
TREE AND NATIOET.

THE OMAHA TRIBE =T N3BRaSKA, A
'1 f"'\

1

1‘

Dockets No. 22:-A

‘~--.. »‘~- I '- ./ \,./~..._../ -..._,/‘-..__..u\.._,_./'~..,../\.._/\-...-/‘-._./‘~..../ "---I’

Plaintiffs, Io, 22§—B, No. 22S~C,
No. 225-D, to be known
V. as No. 225 Consolidated
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
Defendant.

Decided: February ll, 1950

FINDINGS OF FACT IE THE MATTER 0? THE REQUEST OF THE

PLADITIFFS as D31?‘STL3f1E3‘i‘ III THE 236,’; :;zu‘*":L*1*'*1..,'??i1‘3'D“'cJc'“'"rim
-.  “ ,~ , . 
1-..="ursa..~. 7‘ :2;-A, 22,.-s_, 22;-c, and 22;:-D 120:: A..»:.-_-aevm,
‘1F“*“*?:‘Tr*""s?T“=rnrr‘*“"""=rnrr"'*n?r“*"*?f‘ '2

_ A r..:c,c:,3D co.r:mI..3 SSTTLL.-EM‘ ring? 1903.: rum

  cor-::EsIo1~1. ""'

 

   

 

   

 

1. The Plaintiff, in each of the ahege entitled docket numbers, the}
Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, is a recognized Indian Tribe organized under a
constitution and by—laws ratified by the tribe on Februarr 15, 1935,
and approved by the Secretary of the Interior on March 30, l§35 pursuant
to the Indian Reorganization Act, The membership of the Omaha Tribe
of Nebraska is prescribed (1) by the official census roll of the Omaha
Tribe of Nebraska as of April 1, l§3h, with the supblement thereto of
January 1, l?35, and (2) by Article II of its Constitution and By Laws,
and (3) by such ordinance as shall be hereafter enacted by the Tribal
Council, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior. As of the

latest count, completed in July 1?§3, there were 2,223 enrolled members

of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska. Each of these members is in part

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 3F2

41.‘I -\ O 9 _ 0
descended free one or rore members of tne aboriginal Omaha Tribe.

- '1

The Plaintiffs, in each of the above entitlec Docket numbers, Amos

Lamson, Charles J. Springer, John F. Turner, and Eenry F. Freemont, are,
each of them, Onaha Indians, enrolled members of the Omaha Tribe of

Nebraska and former members of the Tribal Council of the Omaha Tribe

of Hebraska. Each has brought the claims asserted in the Petition as

-h

the representative of all the descendants of members of the aboriginal

Omaha Tribe. Some f these descendants of the Omaha Tribe or the Omaha

Tribe and Ration are not included among the 2,223 Omaha Indians presently‘

actually enr lled in the records of the Omaha Tribe of'Eebraska, but
each one of them is entitled to become a member of said Omaha Tribe of
Nebraska, and all of them are represented by the Cnaha Tribe of hebraska

in these cases and are entitled to sh.re in all the benefits of any

1 judgment or judgments ehich may be entered in favor of said Plaintiffs,

the Omaha Tribe of Eebraska.

That the individual named plaintiffs in their Ea. Relation
capacity appeared in the above numbered Dockets as party plainiffs to
make sure that all the descendants of the aboriginal Omaha tribe or

Nation, how ever described or named, would be represented in said cases

and that their claims would be prosecuted and fully protected.

2. On August Tth, l9§l the rlaintiffs (also known as petitioners)

‘timely filed a Complaint, Docket Re. 225, with this Commission setting
forth in five counts its claims against the defendant. These claims
Jere based on grounds permitted by the Indian Claims Commission Act

'5 Q‘ r;
-.uo.

F

Previous to the filing of the complaint ttornoys James 3. Curry,

Jay H. Hoag, Clarence G. Lindquist, David Cobb, and I. S. Keissbrodt,

were engaged as Counsel by the Plaintiffs to represent them in prosecuting

their claims against the Defendant. Contracts of enployment of these
attorneys were duly approved by the Secretary of the Interior as required
by law .

In l9Sh the contract of employment was modified among other changes
by adding the name of attorney'Abe'H.‘Heissbrodt as additional counsel
)and the dropping of Attorney Janes E. Curry as active counsel. Mru
Curry still retained an interest in the contingent attorney fee to be
allowed in the matter if the plaintiffs were successful in winning their
cases. This modified contract was also duly approved by the Secretary

of the Interior and the attorneys approved in that contract entered upon

their duties and ever since have been and now are active counsel for

said Plaitiffs.

3. In October 1953 the Commission issued an order substituting
the petitions in Docket No‘s. 225-A, 225-F, and 225-0 for the petition

in Docket Number 225. JThe same order dismissed the petition in Docket

No. 225.

An.order entered by the Commission on November 19, 1959 in Docket No.
225-0 directed that Plaintiff's claim for an accounting Dshall be
removed from the petition in said cause of action and shall be set up in
a separate amended petition which shall be given.Docket No. 22S—D are %“.

By this order Docket 225-D was set up as a separate Docket claim.

39h

5 Ind. Cl. Com.

h.

32
The complaint in Dochet No. 225-A states the claim for fair
iompensation for the aboriginal homelands of the Omaha Tribe of Indians
in Northeastern Nebraska. t was claimed these lands were taken by the
Defendant without compensation.

The case was fully litigated before the Commission and resulted in
a final determination in favor of the Plaintiffs. The Commission
awarded plaintiffs the net sum of $2,7éO,3,3.Cd less offsets, if any,
in favor of the Defendant.

The Defendant appealed from the final decision to the Court of Claims
and that appeal was pending on the day of the hearing on the Compromise
settlement before this Commission.

The Commission issued a tenporary order stating that it would approve
the proposed compromise settlement and thereupon the Court of Claims
fismissed the appeal in Docket No. 225-A. The files in said matter have
been returned to the Commission and it now has jurisdiction to approve
a compromise settlement of said Claims.

5.

fair compensation for a portion of the Omaha Tribal reservation which

Docket No. 223-3 pertains to the claim of Plaintiffs for

was ceded by the Tribe in 1865’ to the defendant to be used as a reservation
for'Winnebago Tribe of Indians.

The area involved was a little less than 100,000 acres and the
compensation paid for the land by the Defendant was $50,000 in cash
and provisions of the estimated value of

$50,000. Thus, oompensation

"for the land taken was roughly $1.00 per acre.

39

S

n 39‘
5 Lee. Cl. com. 332

Plaintiffs clained the compensation was grossly inadequate. The
Defendant denies the basic allegations of the Plaintiffs.

This docket number has not been tried by the Commission.

6. Docket No. 22S~C. The claim in essence is a claim that, prior
to the time when the Tribe in lCSL ceded its aboriginal lands in Nebraska
to the United States, many immigrants, white persons, settlers, coursed
and traveled through the land, some settling on the aboriginal homelands

of the tribe for periods of time, and caused damage to the land, cutting

itrees, killing buffalo, et cetera, and the basic claim in that case

is a claim for compensation for trespass and wrongs that these white people,
the settlers and immigrants, did to the aboriginal homelands.and the
products thereof, of the Omaha Tribe.

The Plaintiffs alleged that the said damage was done with the knowledge and
participation of the Defendant.

The Defendant has not filed an answer to the complaint in this
Docket number and hearing on this claim.has not been held.

7. Docket 22§—D is a claim for a general accounting with reference
to the handling and disposition by the Defendant of all the funds
and property of the Omaha Tribe from the beginning of claimed guardianship relationship with the Omaha Tribe of Indians down to the date of the
filing of this claim with the Commission. _

No separate answer has been filed by Defendant to this claim. It

remains undisposed of at this time.

8. On the 22nd of December 1739 Plaintiffs and Defendant through

their respective counsel filed a “Stipulation of Settlement" of’Dockets
Ho. 225-A, 225-B, 22S—C, and 225-D with the Commission and requested

approval of the proposed compromise settlement. That said “Stipulation

E Ind. Cl. Com. 392 397

of Settlement” is in the words and figures as follows: to-Wit:
BEFOI-E  ll~?DI.:§TI CIA]?-LS CO2-EEIS;3IC":f
THE OMAHA TRIBE OF K33_€SKA, ET AL.,
Plaintiffs,

Docket No. 22§—A, No. 225-8,

V. No. 225-0 and No. 22S—D.

x.__,I‘-.....I-._,,/\._../*-.._/\.../ \..-4‘

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

‘A. _,,/ ‘I--....-’

Defendant.

STIPUIATION OF SETTLEMENT

It is hereby stipulated between counsel for the parties in
each and all the above-numbered dockets, that each and all the
claims and all the litigation in the above—nunbered dockets
shall be settled and finally disposed of by entry of final
judgment, as follows:

1. The final judgment of the Indians Claims Commission
entered in Docket No. 22§—A on the 5th day of May, 1959, shall
be set aside. _, j *

2. Docket Nos. 223-A, 223-3, 225-6, and 22S—D shall be
consolidated for all purposes including judgment as Docket No.
225 Consolidated.

3. Final judgment shall be entered by the Indian Claims
Commission against the United States of America and in favor of
the Omaha Tribe of Hebraska in.Docket No. 225 Consolidated, in
the net amount of ¢2,900,000.0D. T

h. Entry of final judgment on this basis shall finally’
dispose of all rights, claims or demands which plaintiffs in
said four numbered dockets have asserted, or could have asserted,
with respect to the subject matters of said cases, and plaintiffs
shall be barred thereby from asserting any such rights, claims,
or demands against defendant in any other or future action or
actions. *

5. Entry of final judgment on this basis shall finally
dispose of all rights, claims, demands, payments on the claim,
counterclaims or offsets which the defendant has asserted or

t Ind. Cl. Can.

-309
9-"/‘could have asserted against plaintiffs

under the “revisions of_
Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission not (c. iii, 50 Statl0h9) for the period up to and including June 30, l?§C, and the
defendant shall be barred therety from asserting any said rights,
claims, demands, payments on the claim, counterclaims or offsets
against plaintiffs in any other or future action or actions. I
The bar against other or future claims by the defendant for
offsets, gratiuties and counterclaims allowable under Section 2
of the Indian Claims Commission Act shall not apply to those
which have accrued or may accrue subsequent to Juen 30, l9S3.

6. The final judgment entered by the Indian Claims Commission, and the dismissal of the appeal by the Court of Claims
pursuant to this stipulation, shall be by way of compromise and
settlement of all the claims and litigation in said four numbered
dockets before the Indian Claims Commission and in Appeal Docket
No. 6-59 before the United States Court of Claims and shall not

be construed as an admission of either party, for the purpose of
precedent or argument in any other case.

7. The final judgment entered pursuant to this stipulation
shall constitute a final determination by the Commission of
all the claims and all the litigation in said four numbered
dockets, and shall become final on the day it is entered, the

parties hereto waiving any right to appeal from, or otherwise
seek review of, such determination.

8. Counsel for the parties shall execute and file with
the Commission a joint motion for entry of final judgment.

9. Defendant further agrees that if the Commission accepts

this stipulation of settlement in the manner set forth below, it
‘will dismiss the appeal (Appeal Docket No. 6-59) filed by it in
the United States Court of Claims, from the final determination
entered by the Commission May 6, 1959, in Docket No. 22S—A.

10. It is agreed that if the stipulation of settlement is .
acceptable to the Commission, the Commission may enter an order
which accepts this stipulation of settlement; and may set aside

V-0| 4--é

the final determination made by the Commission on May 6, 1959,
in Docket No. 225-A, and may enter final jud~ment for the Omaha
Tribe of Nebraska in Docket No. 225 Consolidated, in the net
sum of $2,900,000.00 on the basis of this stipulation of
settlement, forthwith after t.e furnishing to the Commission of
a certified copy of the order of dismissal of the said appeal
(Appeal Docket No. 6-5?) in the UDib9d States Court of Claw

Respectfully submitted,

\,L)

,3

I.

C.‘
Us

C1 x_\‘ 0 -o '14
L) .. u.C’.'_l.':”"=SZll"C..«‘v

_ ‘.--.-.-—..a--:.—.o-:1..1 is ss:~aoD1'

Attorney of Record for Plaintiffs
in Docket Nos. 22S~A, 22$-B, 22’—C
and 22§—D.

Perry 1.‘ . I~‘ior'ton
Phidi Mo MOATCH

Assistant A torney General

Ralph A. Barney

. or..—---TuZI,"TE'7xT"s;r:-rs:

A torney for the Defendant
That subsequent to the filing of said “Stipulation of Settlement"
the tribal chairman of the Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, pursuant to a
resolution of the Tribal Council of said Tribe authorizing him to sign

said stipulation, has signed a duplicate copy of said stipulation, which

has been filed as exhibits No. A-2 and A-5.

The contract attorneys representing said Plaintiffs have either

signed the_original stipulation or duplicate copies thereof. The signed

copies are now on file with the Commission as exhibits ho. A-7, A-5, and
A-"90
‘Duplicate copies of said stipulation were signed by the individual

Plaintiffs Amos Lanson, Charles J. Springer, John F. Turner, and Henry

F. Freemont (Ex. A-6).

All the minutes of Tribal Council meetings, resolutions adopted
therein, and necessary signatures to the proper execution of the
exhibits were duly authenticated.

C.

/. In response to requests by Counsel for Plaintiffs and this

‘Commission, the Acting Commissioner of the Bureau of Indian Affairs

\o
xo

8 Ind. Cl. Con. 392

iprepared and delivered a letter to Counsel for the Indians affirmatively

pa

approving the proposed compromise settlement with the Omaha Indians.
A copy of the letter follows:

UNITED STATES
DEPART}ehT OF THE INTERIOR
Bureau of Indian Affairs

Hashington 25, D. C.

Cobb and Heissbrodt
ttorneys at Law
1908 Q Street NW

Washington 9, D. C.

Gentlemen:

After further consideration of your letter of November 19,
1959, and the report to the Omaha Tribe attached thereto,
and the additional documents furnished to this office by you,
we wish to supplement those statements contained in our letter
of December 17, 1959, with further comments on the proposed
settlement of the claims of the Omaha Tribe of Indians
filed as Dockets Nos. 22S—A, B, C, and D in the Indian Claims
Commission and Appeal No. 6-59 in the Court of Claims.

" -.The fullness and completeness of the report which you
presented to the tribal council on October 30, l?§9, and at
the general tribal.meeting on October 31, 1959, are worthy of
our commendation. It is our understanding that during the
general tribal meeting lasting some five hours, there was a
full and free discussion of the proposed final settlement.

‘We understand, furthermore, that at the conclusion of the
meeting a vote was taken, the result of which was unanimous
approval of the proposed final settlement and confirmation of
the prior affirmative action of the tribal council in approving
the settlement. '

You have informally advised us that on.January 8, 1960, you

attended a meeting of the Omaha Tribal Council at which time

it reaffirmed and ratified the proposed settlement and also
authorized its chairman to sign and execute a copy of the
“Stipulation of Settlement" filed with the Indian Claims
Commission.

You have furnished this office a certified, executed copy
of the minutes of the said meeting of the tribal council and
a certified copy of the notice and call of the meeting, along

hoe

 "ind. Cl. Corn. 392 1101
'ith a certified, executed copy of Resolution No. 6-50,
adopted by the Omaha Tribal Council. You have also furnished
us a certified copy of the approval of the "Stipulation of
Settlement" which was signed by Alfred U. Gilpin, Chairman
of the Omaha Tribal Council, and a certified copy of the
approval of the “Stipulation of Settlement” which is signed
by Amos Lamson, Charles J. Springer, John F. Turner, and
Benny F. Freemont, members of the Omaha Tribe named as
plaintiffs in a representative capacity in Dockets No. 225-A,
B, C, and D.

we have again reviewed and considered carefully the
statements contained in your report to the Omaha Tribal
Council and general tribal meeting and the resolution adopted
by the Omaha Tribal Council on Eovember‘30, 1959, the adoption
of which was approved by unanimous vote of the Indians atl
the general tribal meeting. ‘we have also reviewed the additional
certified documents described above. In view of the statements contained in your report to the tribe, the actions
of the Indians in approving the proposed settlement, and the
record of documents before us, we hereby give approval
to your entering into the stipulation of settlement which
has been executed by you and the Assistant Attorney General,
approved by.the Indians, and filed with the Indian Claims
Commission for compromise of the tribal claims involved in
Dockets Nos. 225-A, B, C, and D before the Commission.

Sincerely yours,
A. Rex Lee
Acting Commissioner
10. A hearing on the proposed compromise settlement was held on
the 13th of January, l96O at which oral and documentary evidence was
received. Counsel for the Plaintiffs and.Defendant expressed their
opinions that the proposed settlement was fair to both the Plaintiffs
and.Defendant and that it is the best settlement that could be had
under the circumstances.
ll. I. S. Heissbrodt, one of the attorneys for Plaintiffs, previous

to the execution and filing of said "Stipulation of Settlement", met

K-._

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392

with the Omaha Tribe and Ration members generally and specifically
with members of record of the Omaha Tribe of.Nebrasha at a largely
attended tribal mass meeting where he read to the tribal members the
proposed compromise settlement and explained its meaning and how it

affected their rights. He also read to them a special report which

i he had prepared and in which he discussed at length the provisions of

the proposed compromise.

The attorney*s statements were translated from English into the
Omaha tribal tongue for the benefit of tribal members who did not
understand the English language. After a full discussion, lasting
many hours, a motion approving the compromise settlement was adopted

by a unanimous vote.

-InMr.‘Weissbrodt also attended several regularly called meetings of

the Omaha Tribe of Nebras?a‘s Tribal Council and at each of these meetings the oompromise settlement was thoroughly discussed and analyzed.
A_written report was alsoguesentadto the Council giving a detailed

explanationcuTthe Compromise Settlement. A copy of this report was

submitted to the Commission for its information but because it contained

incidenatlly, some confidential material relating to Docret No. 138,

a case which has not yet been determined, but involving the same

plaintiffs as in the instant case, the Commission ‘feels that it should

not make this report a part of the files in these compromise proceedings.

l2. .Alfred'H. Gilpin of'Hacy, Nebraska,.testified.that he was threequarters Omaha Indian, hl years old, and Chai man of the Omaha Tribal

Council. He is a graduate of Flandreau Vocational High School, Flandreau, South Dakota, where he had one year of electronics; spent four

years doing technical work with the meteorological'ving of the.Air Force

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 392 ‘ 1:03

and had six months at Fort Monmouth studying radio wireless operations
fand teletype operations and repair. Upon discharge from the service he
took a course in general business management in a business college in
Omaha. A SOS service—connected permanent disability pension permits him
to devote full time to the Omaha Tribal business. He speaks both English
and Omaha.
About 353 of the members, which consistxiof practically all those
- living on or near the reservation, and who were a representative group,
were present at the council called to discuss settlement of these suits.
All of them are familiar with the English language bu$'ab0ut 35% do not
speak it fluentlr. Anything discussed before the Tribe is always explained

in English and re—emphasized in Omaha language, and at this meeting Mr.

Gilpin participated in explaining the settlement terms to those present.

”W:0thers disucssing and explaining the terms in both English and Omaha were

.3

.1‘

i§iambert'walker, a full—blood Omaha and former Tribal Council member; Craig

‘woodhall and Morgan Stabler, full blood Omahas; Charles'Eolf; Louis
Sansouci, a full blood and present Tribal Council member; Gustavus'Uhite;
a full blood Omaha and former Chairman of the Tribal Council.

IMr. Gilpin said the members inquired particularly as to how much
money they were to receive and how much it amounted to per person; that
they understood this was a settlement of all claims but that appearing in
Docket No. l38, which involves Iowa claims; that fees and expenses would
need be paid and that Congress might not authorize a division of that money.
That the tribal Secretary and a few other members have "explained it to
the smaller groups, from day to day." Mr. Gilpin is acquainted with
all persons signing the documents relating to this settlement, and they

darticipated in the tribal meeting; that he saw all but Charles J. Springer

;...___.__—-uj- .

C Ind._Cl. Com. 392

Amos Lamson, John F. Turner and Henry F. Freemont sign them; that there is
a faction group among the Omahas but that the members of that faction are
in agreement with the others in respect to this settlement.

13. George Grant, of Macy, Nebraska, testified that he is a fullblood Omaha Indian, 53 years of age, a member of the tribal council since
1953, and is now Vice Chairman of the Council, and that he has an eighth O
grade education. He is acquainted with the individual petitioners, and
knows they are tribal members. He was present at the meeting to discuss

settlement; that he understands this settlement covers'all but one claim,

. and is satisfied with the amount of money being paid; that the tribe

understands the tribe as a whole will receive the money and that the
members are satisfied. among the Omaha Indians he knows-of no one who
does not approve the settlement.

He is a corn farmer and understands and speaks the English language.
lh. Pauline Tyndall of'Macy, hebraska, testified she is a halfblood Omaha Indian; that she has an 11th grade education and is a graduate
of the Omaha Vocational School for practical nursing. She does not speak
Omaha but understands the language. She has been a member of the Omaha

Tribal Council since 195?, and also presently serves as Secretary to that

Council, and is also employed by the Association of American Indians’

.Affairs in New York, working in the regional office in the development

1.

program on the Omaha reservation.
Mrs. Tyndall testified.that the Tribal Council and their attorney
have been furnishing the tribal members with mineographed reports at
frequent intervals respecting the tribal claims; that the members are
very well versed on each move and that the group attending the recent

meeting was highly representative of the total people on the reservation

1101.;

8 Ind. C1. Com. 392 HO5

and were very.well informed concerning the claims; that as Secretary she
has received no protests, oral or written, respecting the settlement and
knows of no one who would protest it. Hrs. Tyndall said the names appearing on the documents to which she had made certain certifications were
attached in her_presence.

15. During the course of the litigation of Docket Io. 223-A the
Commission heard at length witnesses and counsel for the plaintiffs
and defendant who presented the claimed facts and the law respectively‘
relating to the claim set forth in said Docket number. Incidental to
those presentations there were references to the claims set forth in
Docket numbers 225-3, 225-0, and 225?D. In.Ho. 22§eA the Commission
found in favor of plaintiffs and entered judgment for $2,735,333.56. In
reaching that judgment the Commission received evidence on, and determdned,
the matter of offsets. C

By reason of the foregoing the Commission became informed with
respect to the merits of claims against the defendant set forth in.the
above entitled docket numbers.

-16. The Compromise agreement has been carefully and fully presented
to the members of the Omaha Tribe and Nation and the Omaha Tribe of
Nebraska.

That the 0maha.Tribe of Nebraska legally represents all of the
Indians known as Omahas, irrespective of how they are described, and is

entitled to have the final determination entered herein in its favor and

in its represcitation capacity.
That said compromise agreement under all the circumstances is fair

and just to the plaintiffs and defonoant.

Edgar E. I-.':¥.'%..t

diva oI'_"h..¢¢4n-at "'1"—uh-—-ts.--I.——' 'w-.--—&Chief Commissioner

'wm.‘M.'Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

Arthur V . Watkins
Associate Commissioner

 

hO6

 

 

