BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE PEORIA_TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAHOMA. and GUY FROMAN on behalf
of the PEORIA NATION, FRED ENSWORTH
on behalf of the KASKASKIA NATION,
AMOS ROBINSON SKYE on behalf of the
NBA NATION. and MABLE STATON PARKER.
on behalf of the PIANKESHAN NATION.

Petitioners.

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAHGAA, and FRED ENSWORTR on behalf

of the KASKASKIA NATION.
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOMA. and MABLE STATON PARKER on

behalf of the PIANKESHAW NATION.
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOMA, and MABEL STATON PARKER ON

behalf of the PIANKESHAW NATION.
Petitioners,

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAHOMA, GUY FROHAN on behalf of the
PEORIA NATION. and FRED ENSWORTH on
behalf of the KASKASKIA NATION.
Petitioners.

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF

OKLAHOMA, and AMOS ROBINSON SKYE on
behalf of the NBA NATION.

Petitioners.

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF
OKLAHOMA: FRED ENSWORTH. as the
representative. of the KASKASKIA NATION:
AMOS ROBINSON SKYE. as the representative of the WEA NATION: MABEL STATON
PARKER, as the representative of the
PIANKESRAW NATION.
Petitioners.

V.

.THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA.

Defendant.

Docket No. 65

Docket No. 66

Docket No. 99

Docket No. 289

Docket No. 313

Docket No. 314

Docket No. 338

$1’

4 ZQC

Decided: _March 26. 1956

Appearances:

Am Abraham Ziedman, with
whom were Jack Joseph and

Arthur Lazarus, Jr.,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

Francis J. Clary, with
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

ornnon gr [§'__F_gE_ Conn: 31 N

— 1
--3:3!-vs—$I-no-I-1-j

 

O'Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The question.presented for determination is whether, under the Indian
Claims Commission Act, a corporation formed under the provisions of the
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (#9 Stat. 1967), can maintain
claims for or on behalf of the tribes -- Peoria, Wes. Kaskeskia and
Piankeshaw -- growing out of dealings and treaties with defendant.

The name “Peoria Tribe“ is referred to in this opinion in two ways.
Where the tribal name is used'in combination with the Wea. Kaskaskia and

Piankeshaw, we are referring to the historic Peoria Tribe. The other
references are, of course, to the corporate entity. Peoria Tribe of Indians
of Oklahoma.
The Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, a corporation, is a party

petitioner in each of the above cases. In addition to the corporate petiu
tioner, individual members of the respective tribes are joined as petitioners who sue “on behalf“ of one or the other of the tribes mentioned

above. In each of the petitions in the dockets shown in the caption.

except docket No. 338. it is alleged, with respect to the individual
parties, that "they appear herein in a representative capacity on behalf
of the petitioner nations regarding any and all of their claims in which
the petitioner tribe may not be deemed a true and proper representative."
But notwithstanding the naming of individual petitioners and the above
allegations, no proof has been offered in any case as to the membership of
any individual petitioner in the tribe or nation he purports to represent.

Because of the question common to the seven cases. the parties have
stipulated (Finding l) to submit it for determination before offering
proof on the merits of the claims, but both parties have offered proof, all
documentary, to sustain their positions as to questions covered by the
stipulation.

Since the proof is set out in considerable detail in the findings,
only a summary of the essential facts will be necessary here.

During the late 18th and early 19th centuries, the Peoria. Kaskaskia,
Wea and Piankeshaw tribes were independent tribes but ethnically related,
and at times some of these groups were politically allied and the defendant
at times treated with each or with two or more together. The Miami were

closely associated with part of these groups and at one time efforts were

made to unite them with the Peoria. Wea, and Piankeshaw, but the Miami were

- not included in the consolidation of the other four tribes which was conr

summated in 1854.
Without going into the details (which are fully set out in the findw
ings) that lead to the formal consolidation of the four tribes. the

undisputed evidence shows that these tribes had met in convention and

4 2%‘

united themselves into a single tribe. This action was formalized by a
treaty between them and the defendant concluded on May 30, 1854 (10 Stat.
1082) and ratified on.August 2, 1854.

Article 1 of this treaty recites that the Kaskaskia, Peoria,
Piankeshaw and Wes Indians "united themselves into a single tribe, and
having expressed a desire to be recognized and regarded as such, the United
States hereby assent to the action of said joint council to this end. and

now recognize the delegates who sign and seal this instrument as the authorized representatives of said consolidated tribe.“ Thus, it will be seen,

_thBee Indian tribes themselves not only formally consolidated and became

a single tribe but the defendant officially recognized and approved the

union. They were then in Kansaeo

These tribes acquired lands in northeast Oklahoma (then Indian Territory) by virtue of the Treaty of February 23, 1867 (15 Stat. 513). In
that treaty they were referred to as the ”Gonfederated tribes of Peorias,
Kaskaskias, Hess and Piankeshaws“ and were living on the Oklahoma lands at
the time of incorporating under the Oklahoma welfare Act. That treaty did
not specify a group name for the united tribes but they became known as
the Peoria and were quite generally referred to as such in official references to them after 185%. By the Act of March 2, 1889 (25 Stat. 1013). the

igeneral allotment act was made applicable to the "Gonfederated Bea, Peoria,

Kaskaskia and Piankeshaw tribes of Indians." and the allotments of their
Oklahoma land were apparently authorized to be made without reference to
in Section 2 of the

tribal affiliations of the members making them. Then,

act, the four tribes were referred to as “United Peoria Indians“ and

“United Peorias.“ This is but one of many instances showing that the

tribal names were dimmed by lapse of time and the l85b consolidation,
resulting in the shorter designation, Peoria. (See Pet. Exs. 21, 22 for
the various ways the four tribes were referred to in official records
and Congressional acts). So, it was perhaps inevitable that a shorter
description of the groups would emerge.

The evidence is plain that it was the descendants of those four groups
who incorporated in 19b0, (Pet. Ex. 42).

He now reach the important question as to whether the corporationa
petitioner may maintain the claims pleaded in the various dockets -~ claims
involving large land cessions, accounting, etc.

It will be noted that the Indian Claims Commission Act makes no
express reference to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, l936
(49 Stat. l967). This seems odd in view of the fact that the Welfare Act
had been in operation ten years when the Indian Claims Commission Act was
passed, and at least 13 Oklahoma tribes. including petitioner, had then
taken advantage of it and were granted corporate charters. (See pamphlet 1
issued in l9h7 by Indian Service, entitled: "Ten Years of Tribal Government

under I.R.A.").
Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act provides:

"9 9 wherever any tribal organization exists, recogw
nized by the Secretary of the Interior as having authority
to represent such tribe, band or group, such organization
shall be accorded the exclusive privilege of representing
such Indians. * °.”

The first query presented is whether the corporate entity here suing
comes within the term “tribal organization” as that term is used in the

quoted provisions of Section 10 above. We think it does. The Oklahoma

b 24¢

Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (R9 Stat. 1967) expressly, by Section 3, provides for the incorporation of recognized tribes of Indians
residing in Oklahoma. Its purpose was to provide orderly self-government. As we have stated above, that act was in existence long before

the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act and many Oklahoma tribes
had taken advantage of its provisions and were granted corporate charters.
It is inconceivable to think that the Congress did not intend by the use of
the term “tribal organization“ to include corporate entities which it had
previouslv provided for, not only in the welfare Act but by the Indian
Reorganization Act of June 18. 193% (48 Stat. 987). the main objectives
and purposes of which were the same as those of the Welfare Act.

When the Peoria charter (Pet. Ex. 42) is examined?itZio“found:that
Section 7 thereof provides that: "He property rights or claims of the’
Peoria Tribe existing prior to the ratification of this charter shall in
any way be impaired by anything contained in this charter.“ Parenthetically, it may be stated, the substance of this language appears in Section 15
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June l8, 193%, (48 Stat. 987) which
seems to be made applicable to the Welfare Act by Section 3 thereof. In
View of the make-up of the Peoria Tribe, namely. the previous1y'consolidated
Peoria. Kaskaskia, Hea and Pianheshaw tribes. and their incorporation, the
charter provision Just quoted must be understood to recognize the then
existence of the separate tribal claims of the united tribes. And the
charter further provides that the corporation shall have the power: "To
protect all rights guaranteed to the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma

by treaty.“ Now, it is obvious that this clause did not refer to treaty

rights it as a corporation had, for there were no treaties made with it,
in fact, no treaties could be made after the Act of March 3, 1871 (16
State 5””. 565) which abolished treaty-making. To give the clause effect
it must be considered as applying to treaties made with the four tribes.
all of which were_consummated prior to l9hO, in fact, prior to 1871.

The defendant's argument seems to be that because the four groups
did not function as tribes for a considerable period before the incorporation in l9uO, they ceased to exist and, consequently, it would seem to

follow. lost their right to assert their claim and that the claims cannot

Of course. the answer

be reinstated by the creation of the corporation.
to this contention is obvious. In the first place, the Secretary of the
Interior in 1930 officially determined, as he was required to do under t
the Welfare Act. that the Peoria Tribe was a recognized tribe. Such

determination necessarily recognized that the soucalled Peoria Tribe was

composed of the four tribes which united in Kansas in 185” and moved from

there to Oklahoma following the 1867 treaty. The evidence adduced by

both parties fairly shows that it was the united tribes who were recogr

nized as a tribe by the Secretary and who were granted the charter in

Such determination is binding on us. United States V. Holliday.

19ho.
to U; s. ho79 is L. Ed. 183.
The defendant's contention that the acceptance of the charter nulw

lified the individual tribes‘ capacity to sue on the claims here asserted

has no support in the Welfare Act, nor in ours. The Indian Claims Commission Act. as we have shown, gives the recognized tribe, in this case
the corporation, “the exclusive privilege of representing such Indians.”

Thesejprovisions do not terminate tribal rights, on the contrary, they

1% 21+ 5

I;

recognize such rights and provide an entity to assert them as the representative of the tribe. The fact that the entity, the tribal organ—
ization, is composed of four tribes does not prevent it from representing
each in the prosecution of its separate claims

Nor does such a corporation become the successor in interest of the
respective claims of each tribe. The abovewquoted provisions of the charter
itself indicate the contrary. We find nothing in the Welfare Act vesting
these tribal claims in the corporation, nor is there any proof showing a
transfer or assignment of such tribal claims to the corporation. Nor is
such a tranfer of tribal rights necessary to the authority of the corporation to maintain them as the representative of the separate tribes. In
fact, the language of the act seems to contemplate that the organisation,
whether incorporated or not, if it is recognized by the Secretary as having
authority to represent a tribe, may do so for the benefit of a tribe and
that a recovery would be for the benefit of the tribe whose claim is
asserted and the award, if made, would enure to the benefit of the tribe
for which the claim is prosecuted. See Confederated Tribes of the Colville
Reservation v. United States,1§ Ind. 0. C. 151.

Tribal groups are almost invariably political bodies and have been 80
considered and dealt with by our Government since the beginning of our
contacts with those aboriginal inhabitants. So their organizationunder
the Welfare Act was that of a political body, a recognized tribe, and not
the formation of a business enterprise. Such groups could organize by
the adoption of a constitution and by-laws under the act, as several did,
and such organizations could also, if they wished, obtain a corporate

charter. But, however, organized, such organizations were, according to

,1

the Welfare Act, for their “common welfare,“ an expression usually
associated with political bodies, which leads to the conviction that the

corporate-petitioner here was essentially a political body authorized to

maintain claims for each of the four tribes whose_claimS are presented here. That it was a.po1itical entity that was organized here, rather
than a business enterprise, has basis in the fact that the Welfare Act,
by Sections M and 5 thereof, expressly provides for the separate organi—
zation and chartering of the usual business associagions needed for

business activities of the tribe.

This brings us to the legal status of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of

_0klahoma as respects its prosecution of the several claims pleaded here.

That the Congress could authorize such a corporation to present such_
claims for each of the tribal groups seems not to be questioned, and we
hold it could. But, as we have said, it is acting for and on behalf of
each group, so it must follow that there must be members of each group,

or descendants of members, living, who would benefit and could participate
in an award, should one be made. The claims authorized by the Indian
Claims Commission Act are, it seems to us, for tribal groups who have
members, or descendants of members,living today. The fact that Section l0
of our own act mentions an existing tribal organization as having authority
to represent “such Indians" shows the necessity of there being living
members or descendants of members of the group for which claim is made.

In other words, it was not intended that a tribe which has gone out of

existence through lack of members, or descendants of members, would be

entitled to recover.

34 234

Accordingly, we conclude that we have jurisdiction to entertain
the claims presented by the Peoria Tribe of Indians of_0klahoma, the
corporation, for and on behalf of the Peoria, Wee, Kaskaskia and
Piankeshaw, upon proof that there are existing members, or descendants
of members. of the tribes for which claims are so made.

After oral argument, petitioners in each of the above cases on
February 1%, 1956, filed a motion to correct the name of the corporate
petitioner. In the pleadings, brief and stipulation the corporate
petitioner was designated as “The Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma,“ while the

proof offered (Pet. Ens. M1 and k2) shows that the correct corporate

inane is: “Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma.“ Throughout the hearings,

arguments and briefing, the Commission, attorneys for the parties and the
attorneys for defendant understood that one of the parties to each case
was the corporation chartered under the provisions of the Oklahoma Indian
Welfare Act. The fact that the corporation was not accurately named in
the pleadings confused no one and was an error that can and should be
corrected.

Louis J. 0'Marr

M 2%:

 

Associate Commissioner

We concur:

Edgar E. Witt -— in part, see opinion attached.

Chief Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
associate Commissioner

Docket Nos. 65, et al.

WITT. Chief Commissioner, Concurring in Part and Dissenting in

Part.

I agree with the findings of fact in toto and the opinion and the
order entered, except the conclusion as embodied in the opinion and possibly in the order, that the plaintiff corporation is not the successor
in interest of the respective claims of the several tribes merged by
the treaty mentioned, of date May 30. 185C. I think the findings,

especially finding No. 5~—support the conclusion that the plaintiff

.corporation is the successor in interest of the respective Claims of the

tribes which were merged by the treaty of 185”. Article 6 of the 185k
treaty stipulates that the permanent annuities of $3,000 and $800 due to
the Wea and Piankeshaw Nation, respectively, be relinquished and released
and that in lieu thereof the united tribes as an entity are given a consideration to belong equally to all its members; and that the cessions of
land made by other of the merged tribes to the single entity into which
they had been merged should thereafter belong to the members of the said
merged tribes equally--all which provisions impel me to the conclusion
that previously separated tribes no longer retained in their separate
right any property or claim—-but that all were thereafter to be the
property of the united tribes of Peoria, Kaskaskia, Wea and.Piankesham' 38
as single entity. This conclusion, in my opinion, will require that any

award made herein be made to the petitioning corporation. Therefore, I do

not think proof of descendanqy from any particular tribe necessary.

E. Witt
Commissioner

   

