7 Ind. Cl. Comm. D77 _ D77

BELTORE ‘I'I-';'f:I l'I‘JDI.Gl*I CLAE‘-E" COI*1‘EISSI01xT

‘E
~._..I~.../k./~..../'-.J*-o..-/'-..../'-...-r'\...a’

HA"£H "EDZRE .3232 a corporation,
M

Plaintiff,
v. Docket No. 60
UNITED S?ATES OF AF"RICa,

Defendant.
Decided: April 15, l9S9

FDIDINGS 93 FACT

The Comnission.makes the following findings of fact: '

1; The petitioner herein, the Hakah Indian Tribe: in an jA9ntj_
fiable group of Anerican.lndians residing within the territorial limits
of tno“Uni-ted States within the meaning of section 2 of the InoLian"
Claims Commission Act, and as such has the capaoitf to maintain this
cause of aotion. (60 Stat. lOu9)

In.l937 the Makah Indian Tribe nas incorporated under the provisions of the 1-mooior-iiozsard Act, and presently residesi as a "tribal
organization at the xnno Indian Reservation; Moan Bay,'1~Iashington;

2. From the earliest times there has always existed a tribe of
Indians, pophlarly known as the "iakah" Indians'who have lived in and
are identified with the extreme northwest section of'Washington State,
in the general area.aronnd Cape Flattery and.sonthern shore of the Juan
de Fuca straits.

A

o trioal organization from earliest days up to and folloniig the Eakai.

{ In‘. Cl. Comm. *?7 H73

Treaty of January 31, l8SS (l2 Stat. 939} when they ceded all theirs‘
"Wk

right, title, and interest to these lands and removed to the reservetion at Eeah Bay, Uashington, which was set aside for them.pursuantto said treaty; The petitioner herein is the successor to and representative of those Makah Indians those descendants nerotiated the
Makah Treaty of l8SS.

(a) Earliest recorded white contact of any reliability occurred
during the l780‘s and l79C‘s when English and Spanish explorers visited the general area around Neah.Baj and the entrance of the Juan
de Fnca straits at Cape Flatterya. (Tr; 63) A j ‘

In l792 a short-lived Spanish.mi_itary outpost was established

at Noah Rev-and records kept -v'a Spanish naval officer named Quimrcr
‘' _ A an . ¢

shows early contact with the Cape Flattery Indians. (Tr. 6h)

During this same period, famed explorer Captain George Vancouver,
visited this area and left accounts of his explorationsp

The frequency of white contact with this group increased toward
the middle of the nineteenth century when they were visited by Hudson
Bay men,.american government officials and.ethnologists,f (Tr. 55):

(5) George Gibbs, the noted ethnologist, she served.Governor
Isaac Stevens as secretary to his treaty commission and who participated.ih.the l8SS7Makah Treaty at Neah Bay, made repeated pre-treaty*
contacts with Eakah groups of Indians and wrote extensively on their
culture, habits and general existenceo

In l8 ? Gighs published a rep rt and identilied the'Hak*h indians h;'the following description:

7 Ind. Cl. Cores. M7 1:79

..-.--z-v an.

\P \!
A x * Of all the tribes west of the Cascades, the Eakah
exhibit the most marked and characteristic traits, differing
from.the Sound Indians in features and habits as much as
language. Their intercourse with the whites has been very
limited, and that not of a kin to make much change in their
original customs. Physically they have the type of the Nutka
Indians. e e e

* % %-The tribe had considerable infusion of white blood, a
Russian vessel having been cast away near here, as it is supposed, some thirty five or forty years since, and the crew,
being strong enough to protect themselves, having lived among
the Indians for some t'ue'before they were relieved. Several
individuals were present at the council who in their features,
vcomplexion, and yellow hair bore the strongest proof of their
Slavonic origin. They have four principal or winter villages:
Neah, at the site of the old Spanish fort on heah Bay (Port
Nunes Gaona); Waatch, on the south side of Cape Flattery,
Tsueyess, in a cove or indentation a fan miles south of it;
and Osett, at the Flattery rocks. % % %

.3’. - - J’. J‘.
A A A A

On occasion of the treaty made with them by Governor Stevens
in January last,.the Makah were first brought into official
intercourse with the whites. Previous to that time, they had
declined to receive papers from the agent Colonel Simmons, being under apprehensions that they would bring back the smallpox.
(Pl. Ex. 1:1 - Gibbs 1877, pp. 173-177)

 

(c) James Swan, noted ethnologist and authority on Puget Sound
Indians, spent a great deal of time with the Hakah Indians during the
186015 and taught for several years at the Eakah Indian Reservation at
Neah Bay}. In 1868 he prepared and published under the direction of
the Smithsonian Institute a comprehensive study of the Hakah Indians
entitled, "The Indians of Cape Flatteryx” In connection with this
undertaking, it is noted.that George Gibbs contributed some editorial
assistance. (Pl. Ex. 3.7) Swan identifies the E-Iakah Indians. in the
following manner:

The tribe of Indians who inhabit the region about Cape



 xI, 1916)

7 Ind, Cl, Conn, a7? ' h80

Flattery is known aiong the whites and the '"ndians '1.-:ho reside
further east:-:ard, on the Straits oi‘ the Ivlalcali, or more
properly speaking, I-Zaicwécah, the word be trongly accented
on both syllables, They are also call y the tribes on the”
western coast of Vancouver Islarri, "ilase-aset, and by those
tribes residing bet‘-.-reen the-Colurfsia river and Cape Flattery, '
‘Ewe-net-sat?h.‘ The tribal name among themselves is ‘Kwe-netche-chat.‘ Allthese different names have the same meaning, 
and signify 3 the people who live on a point of land projecting
into the sea,‘ or as we term it, the ‘Cape People.‘ . There are
other tribes who reside on promontories, but the l—Ea1«:ahs appear
to be the only ones who are particularly called ‘-‘Cape Indiai
(Pl. Ex. 1?, Po 1)

I (d) Edward S. Curtis, who labored some thirty years in completing his famous twenty volurze series, “The. North .: tterican Indians," had
occasion to visit the Cape Flattery area in 19111 and describes the
iakah Indians as those people who live at 1‘§'eah Bay and are called "the
Hakah, so named (Hake) by the Clallam. They ca_l themselves Quidich-=-»
chaatl. Tlaasutka  the name applied to than by the tribes of the
west coast ,_oi'__'Vancouver island.“ (Pl. Ex. ill, :3. 22  Curtis, Vol. i

(e)‘ According to Dr. Herbert Taylor, petitionerls emert witness,

the histories... references to the Iiakah Indians go back to about I789.

 He states that_“1789, 179041792 are our earliest historical records.

and alliii of them list the T area as Classett or it Ca?e: Flattefif Indians:
describirig the-_ Indians 2-.-‘ho are in the area today, ‘she were in the area
when the zhite Iran ft t ca.rreo‘3 (Tr, 122-)

3. The I-iakah Indians are si.ngular_y identified linguistically as.
the only tribe of.‘ American‘ I. dia-.s I-sitnin the continental limits of the

"9

United States who belong to the E-falcisiran linguistic and to the I-Eootkan

I -3

liliguis tic fa.::1i_ly. Thus theyare reac-3.1:,‘ distmgguishaole Irom other

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. h77 ' hel

northwest coast tribal groups because of their linguistic and cultural
differences. W

(a) Dr. Herbert Taylor, ethnologist and peti“ioner‘s eigert ti ness , testified as follows:

They (Makah) belong to the Waukishan linguistic stock

of the Hootkan linguistic fami_y. They are the only tribe

in the United States that belong to the'Waukishan.Linguistic stock, and the only one that belong to the Nootkan?Linr

guistic family.

e e —%

%*% % So that linguistically they are very identifiable.
(Tr. 118) i

.According to Dr. Taylor the "Hakahs" originally came over onto
‘Washington territory from Vancouver Island about five hundred years
ago. (Tr. 120)”

(b) Hodge, "Handbook of ioerican IndiansV, (1905) lists the Eakah
Indians as_"The southernmost tribe of the wakashan stock, the only one
within the United States. They belong to the Nootka branch.“ (P. 791)

According to Seanton, "Ihdian Tribes of North America" (1952), the cons

o~nection in which the Hakah.have'become most noted, they and the Ozette

“are.peculiar as the only tribes of the Nootka group and'Wakashan stock
in the United States.“ (P. uza)

. (c) Dr. Phmip Drucker, "Cultural Element. Distributions Northwest Coast" (1950) describes'Hakah tribal affiliation.in the following
manner: "On the ‘west coast‘ of Vancouver Island £rom.Cape Cook down

to the vicinity of modern Port Renirew lived the Nootkan tribes. Across

the Straits of Juan de Fuca on stormelashed.Cape Flattery was an outlying

7  Cl. com... 1477 1482

digisidn of the samepeople, the 1-Iakah. There were no -other members
of this nation." (Pl. l'lx. 141,0 p. 29‘)

011. Population wise, the Mahala Indian Tribe was estimated in 1805
by Lewis and Clark to approximate 2000 souls. Smallpox decimated this
area. toward the ‘middle of the 19th century and  down the Iéiakah Tribe
to about one quarter of its 1805 estimate. a  reported  1852 "-that
smallpox had reduced the total of both sexes and all ages" to slightly
more than 500 souls. (Pl. Ex. hl) Later in 1861, he completed a census which showed a total of 66b, souls and again  1863 he counted a
total of 6c’>3‘(Pl. Ex. 17, }—£3.)._ Dr. Taylor estimates the figure at 880
at the tirle of the 1855 Hakah Treatir. Other figures for the post treaty
years showzi 1905 a total of LL03; 1900 a total of 360; in l937 a total
of 11.073 and in 1950 a total of 550. _(:E=e.ge 952, Bulletin 115 - The
Indian Tribes of North America)

0   S. In the middle of the 19th century and at the tme of the 1855

Hakah Treaty the I-‘Iakahs enjoyediprimarily as rraritizne e.conor:;5r, and relied less upon the products of the soil. t Their splendid reputation
as twhalers and i‘isheI'men_1-was widely?  andrespected in comparison
with the other northwest Indian tribes. " They ranged far out to sea to  0
in pursuit of whale, sea and other marnmals and they fished mainly along
the S1-u'ii'tsure Banks off Vancouver for halibut.  
(_a) James S1-Ian wrote the f_ollo1.;ri.ng  his 1868 treatise ofliakah
Indians:
The principal subsistence. of the I‘-iakahs is drawn from the

ocean, and is forrrzed of near 3;’ £3. its products, the most i_n1portant of which are tE'.et:hale and halibut. (Pl. Ex. 17, p. 19)

 

i
5'

7 Ind. Cl. c::::::. LL77 LL83

Excerpts from an article written by S:-ran for the Seattle Post Intelligence in l87O on I-lakah life reflects the follo:-ring:

Their means and subsistence were almost entirely d_ra:~:n from
the ocean, and at t ;at time their principa. food was dried halibu'g ~59. ‘ -1-1'; H 1 ‘ ‘ -can '1 F.‘ ‘H-u-awn ';--\A1 A G  ‘ 1

t, caied .-. .a.2.e b._uooe;. and o3_,., sc.-...........,., true co...., a- us mornua,

cultus cod, etc. -X-  -x- The 1*—Eal<:ahs are pei*tic*alar3' dextrous in
handlinv their canoes, and proceed in them fearlessly many :.les
from land in pursuit of ‘whales or seal , or for fishing in the
halibut banks fifteen m£es northwest Iron: the Cape. (Pl. Ex.

1'11: 9- 15: 16)

U
3
4'!

(b) In his "Tribes of E-festern '5.-zashington and Northwestern Oregon, "

Vol II [published by the Depaartnent of Interior in l877_7, George Gibbs

wrote the follo:-r:Ln_g:

“The Makah are, as has been mentioned before, almost exclusively raaritime in their habits; their country being very
sIr.a3_l, broken, and rocky. They pursue the I-:'nale'in their
canoes even out of sight of land and attack him with a daring
that would not disgrace 1‘.~Ie'-.-I Egland fishermen." (Def. 32:. o)
Gibbs also notes‘ that the halibut season is from Iiarch to May when

the I-iakah then devote themselves to salmon fishing (ibid, p. ll5).
(c) WI-i.iT. Si:-:In.' ens, Indian Agent, "vIashingtoniTerritniry, re-'
ported on July 1, 1860, amongother things:

"The, treaty of E-Ieah Bay with the tribe of Hakah Indians
comes next under consideration. Living as they do, on the
straits their characteristic traits, their habits, andtpur-t‘”
suits are~,_theA,same as their neighbors the Clallams. I They
are bold and experienced pursuers of the whale, and carry
on a considerable trade in oil with Victoria and Port Townsen - ‘X’ ‘'£.'- -3-?"
O

W‘ "-3 61- Halibut are taken in great quantities by this tribe,
and I would recormend that, in addition tothe farming operations that should be commenced on their reservation, houses
for salting and drying these fish should be erected and that
they should be taught to care then ‘after the“ fashion of the
Whites. These fish coznnand a good price and read; sale and
I think a lucrative trade in then can be established." '
(Def. Er. 8c - Ex. Doc. 1 - 36th Cong., 2nd Sess. (1860))

-3
I3‘

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 1:77 .1

(d) In testifying in petitioner‘s behal;-*C‘ Dr. Taylor stated that
the Iiakah halibut fishing area was  S:-:i.f.‘tsure Banks off if Vancouver.
(Tr. 103) As to the extent of Iviakah sea operations he testified that
"seventy-five to ninety per cent of their dependency for subsistence
was on the sea. Part of thx was clarrzning and taking of mussels. But
the Piakah were sometimes at sea as much as two weeks. _They would go
out in a canoe and harpoon a whale, and the whale would drag them sometimes for a day, sometimes for a week, until it died. *   so they
went out a considerable distance to sea. I have no way of knowing how
far out to sea, but out far enough to be gone two weeks sometimes."
(Tr. 105) iacicgording to Dr. Taylor, La Perouse Bay was whaling territory and lad3%:,isomei fifty'niles,oi‘f shore. (Tr. 106) [gt-Iiitsure Ban?-.~: L
is located about seuenteen or eighteen miles off of Jcape Flattery(Tr.
3'1?-17.  I , II |—

(e) liakah Indians testifying for N petitionerrelativei to se 1
hunting state that it was necessary to go twenty or thirty and
sometimes iurther out to sea before contacting the animals (Tr. 315).

u 6. On‘-..,Ji"anuary'*3].i%iithe United Stateis, the‘_e.fi‘ortst,
of Governor lsaac I.,Steuens,',§uperintendent_oi’ Indian';.'ai‘fairs, ;
cluded 2 treaty oi‘ cession with the liakah  Tribe at Heah 
Washington. Under the tverrr-_s of said ‘treaty, the Ivlal-zrah I_ndia_n Trihe
for a stated consideration, “cedes, relinquishes, and conveys to the"

United States all their right, tit_e, and.interest in

ggand to the lands
and country occupied by it ~"»- % -31-.” '

Under Article IV of said treaty the I~Zaka£'1 I‘ri"oe of Indansi reserved

"The ri ht of takcing fish and of ‘whaling or sealing at usual
and accustomed grounds and stations is ;?ur'ther secured to said
'I_nd:‘-.e.ns in common with a..l citizens of the United States, and
oi‘ erect‘-he temporary houses for the purpose of curing, tomud-¢D

gether with the privileges oi‘ hunting and gathering roots and

berries on open and unclaimed lands, provided, however, that

they shall not take shell-fish from any beds staked or cultivated by citizens.“ t

In addition the Kakahs, among other things, ackno:-:1 dged then
dependence on the United States Government. (12 Stat. 929, Art. I, IV,
and E)

Sealing
7. At the time oi‘ the Neah Bay Treaty of 1855', and for many years

thereafter, the Hakahs, as did others oi‘ the Pacific Coast Indian Tribes,

engaged in pelagic sealing, the prevailizng and customary method of tak 

(.3

ing the seal. Having‘ «-rained peculiar lcnoz-Iledge of the migratory habits
of the Alaskan fur seal, inhvwhich aamaay they and pass in great
numbers off the west coast north’-.-rard toward their breeding grounds on
the Pribilof Islands in the Bering See, these Indians would put out
to sea in their canoes at distances of from ten to fifty, miles and i
upon interrupt ing the moving herd with great stealth they go pgamongst
them, k'iJ_Li11g them  spear and harpoon as  slept “on the ocean
surface.

(a) Pelagic sealing as the term is defined in ‘;Iebster‘s International Dictionary means,

"‘I‘he act or occupation of killing, capturing, or pursuing fur seals m the ocean, as distinct from lcLll:Lng
these at their breeding places on land.“

7 Ind. Cl. Corrr.. LL77 ., LL85

(b) Pelagic sealing grew.-: out of a custom of ancient origin, as
practiced by the Northwest Coastal Indians:

"Going out from -rm shore in the vicinity of Cape Flattery
and Vancouver Island in their canoes they captured with the

spear such stragglers from the nigrating herd as came '5'3':LthiTl

their reach.“ (The Encyclopedia enericana - l9LI,L:, p. LL81; ,

Def. Ex. l0)

(c) The Alaska Fur seal, indigenous to the North Pacific Ocean
and the Bering Sea is a highly gregarious and polygaraous mammal and
remarkable in that it only touches land for a brief.‘ period during each
year in order to breed and raise the young pups. The remainder of the
tire is spent entirely at sea. The ‘oreeding grounds, R1101.-«'11 as rockeries are .f'L~ced areas, so that each year the seal undertakes a long Iaigration to reach the rookeries. In the case of the Alaskan fur seal,

the common breeding grounds are the Prihilof Islands located in the

Bering Sea.

“Practically all the individuals of the herd during some
part of the season from May until December makethe Pribilof
Islands their home. The winter and early spring months are
spent entirely at sea. The migration route in general is I
southward to the passes of the Aleutim Islands, then eastward and southeastward along the coast of '1-'~_'Laska.",’i’ British s
Columbia, and the United States to the -latitude of southern
California." (The Far Seals And Other Life of the Pribiloi‘ I
Islands, Alaska, l9l).;, pp. 18-19, Def. Ex. 31:) ‘

The Pribilof Islands are the home of the greatest seal in the world
today. In 1875 this herd was estmated at from 235  5 million sealss
(Def. Ex. 35')

8. _On March 30%, l867 Russia ceded Alaska topitfnipted States

(Treaty with Russia - .15 Stat. 539). with this cession Russia not

only gave up the Aleutian and Pribiloi‘ Islands but its then unchallenged

 

dominion over the Bering Sea. with this acquisition it became apparent that the fur seal industry represented a considerable source
of goverrraent revenue if properly exploited. Beginning in l87O the
Government let the fur seal industry under two consecutive 20 year
leases, first to the Alaska Commercial Company and then to the North
American Commercial Company; (Def. Ex. 10, 3h)

9. In spite of congressional action extending“the laws of the
United States over the recently acquired Alaskan.territory, and in
spite of the exclusive leasing of the entire Alaska fur seal industry
to private enterprise, other independent factors contributed to th
rapidly diminishing yield of seal skins. The principal offender was
the growth of pelagic sealing utilizing firearms and conducted from
large vessels. Coupled.with this and the steady increase of foreign
sealing ships principally from Japan and Great Britain, further governmental control over the_sea1itg industry eas ieet when in 1393 Great

Britain successively-chaiienged the right of the United States to

, exercise dominion beyond the accepted three mile limit. Free of any’

real restrictions the pelagic sealers began to decimate the once vast
seal herds to such an extent that unless immediate corrective action

‘was taken, ultimate extinction of the species was foreseeable eiehin

pthe near future.

(a) Around l879 independent pelagic sealers, comprising chiefly
Canadians, Americans, and Japanese, began to operate extensively'and
‘without restriction in the Bering Sea area. Up to this period the

government's first lessee, the Alaska Commercial had not experienced

é

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. £77 -' ‘ h88

too much difficluty in taking its set yearly quota of l00,000 sealit
skins. The effect of unrestricted pelagic sealing on the sealing industry was adequately reported as follows:

For some years previously'an additional catch was obtained.by'independent operators who killed seals at sea
during their migrations and fishing excursions to and
from the islands. These pelagic sealers originally come
prised.chiefly Canadians and Americans, but in later years
many Japanese engaged in the business. Beginning to operate

xtensiveiy about l879 they rapidly increased in number and
in 1889 their recorded catch was 29,850 seals. In addition
as became evident from later investigations, they killed
many seals which could not be retrieved and still more im»
portant from 60 to 80 per cent of their catch were females
-whose death involved the loss of their unborn pups, or the
‘starvation of newborn ones left on land, or both. (Def. Ex.

3h - The Fur Seals and Other Life of the Pribilof Islands,
Alaska in l9lh, p. 22) I

'\ &'''|aI-—. on an -. 1- z \ - . c . . . 1 m. .
\U} my ioyu the lur seal oreeoing stock naa Suilered a serious

decline.i

The cause of the decline was found in the development oft
pa rival sealing industry, the hunting of the seals in the
open sea while on their migrations and feeding excursions.

‘I \I \J
'5'")-\'.' 7\'

lPelagic sealing was necessarilj*indiscrininate,Vas the i - a ‘I

sex.of-the animal could.not be distinguished in the wate

and.the hunter tried to kill every animal found. %~% %-* I
The killing of the female seal on the spring migration involved.the death of her unborn offspring.c when killed infl
Bering Sea in.August and September her dependent young'was
left to starve on the rookeries. Investigations of the
pelagic catch in 1895 and.l896 showed the percentage of
females in the pelagic catch for these years to be 63 and
8h per cent respectively. In the latter season 20,000
starved pups were counted upon the rookeries of St. Paul and

t. George, their mothers having been killed at sea (Def.'
Ex. 10 - Encyclopedia Americana, p. h8h) c

(C) The Indian agent‘s report from the Neah.Bay Reservation in

 

l888 reflected the effect of indiscrir1.ate commercial pelagic sealing

The catch of seals the past season.was small. The Indians
attribute this to the schooners that came from San Francisco
and Victoria having introduced shooting instead of spearing,
which they say scares he seals away. If this is the case,
the Indians will have to shoot seals in the future. (Def. Ex.
13 - Fifty-Seventh Annual Report of the Commissioner Of Indian

Affairs (1888))

(d) In 1889, the House of Representatives published a lengthy
report covering its extensive investigation of the "Fur-Seal Fisheries
of Alaska." That Congress was well aware of the impending destruction

of the Bering Sea seal herds through unrestricted pelagic sealing is

adequately’denonstrated.by_the following excerpt from this report:
The testimony discloses the fact that a large number of
British and American vessels, manned by expert Indian seal
hunters, have frequented Bering Sea, and destroyed hundreds
of thousands of fur seals by shooting them in the water,
;and securing as many of the carcasses for their skins as
they were able to take on.board.i The testimony of the
Government agents shoe that of the nunber of seals killed
in.the eater not more than one in seven on an average is secured, for the reason that a wounded seal nill sink in the
sea;“ So that for every thousand seal skin secured in this
manner there is a diminution of seal life at these rookeries
of at least 7,0CO.‘ Added to this is the fact that the
.,_shooting of a female seal with young causes the death of
°"botn; if after, the young seal dies for want of sustenance.
(Def. Ex. 35 -ZKouseiReport No. 3883, 50th Cong., 2nd Sess.

(1889 )1

(e) Thereafter the United.States began to seize those vessels,
both foreign.andcionestic, engaged in pelagic sealing in the Bering
Sea. The government clained absolute dominion of this area as a result of the Alaska purchase from Russia. Great Britain challenged

this contention and.in.l892 the dispute'uas submitted for arbitration

7 End. Cl. Conn. £77 £00

/

whereas on.August l3, l893, the arbitration board ruled adversely to
the United States and held that inerican jurisdiction did not extend
beyond the customary 3 mile limit. (Def.  2o, 21, Convention-Great
Britain, February 29, l892)

l0. Having accepted the decision of the Paris Arbitration Board
on the extent of American jurisdiction over the Bering Sea waters, both
Great Britain.and the United States sought by subsequent conventions
implementing statutes and regulations to restrict the area and the
quota of seals taken. Notably'exenpt fron the agreed restrictions by’
specific language was the Pacific Coast Indians. As it turned out

merely restricting the number of seals and the area in which they could

be taken did not sten.the,decline of fur seal population. Subsequent

1

investigation confirmed that pelagic sealing had to be abolished. After '

repeated negotiations and conferences with the interested foreign.powers,l

the first real step touard reconstituting the declining seal herds was
accomplished when a treatg suspending pelagic sealing for fifteen years
was signed   seeee, Greet. Brite¥in,W Russia and Japan #211  
July 7, 1911.”~dcengi-ess  the tree; pre=:isiens be *g1%iel.re.et of
August 2,il9l2. iln the years that followedother international seal"
agreements nere concluded, and in each and every agreement as well as
in the implementing legislation as passed by Congress, provision.nas
made reserving unto the coastal Indians their right to engage in
pelagic sealing as historically practiced.

(a) The Act of April 6, l89h, was passed to give effect to the

decision of the Arbitration Board and provided that it shall be unlawful

for the citizens of Great Britain and the United States to kill at any

the Pribilov Islands, inclusive of the territorial n'a.ters.“ (28 Stat. 52,

Act I)

(h) The following exception wascontained .'..n article 8 of said

The regulations contained in the preceding articles shall
not apply to Indians dwelling on the coast of the territory

of the United States or of Great Britain, and carrying on

for seal fishing in canoes or undecked boats not transported

by or used in connection with other vessels aid propelled

wholly by paddles, cars or sails and manned by not more than

five persons each in the tray hitherto practiced by the Indians provided such Indians are not in the employment of

other persons and provided that when so hunting in canoes

, r or nndecked boats, they Shall not htmt fur seals outside
2 of territorial waters under contract fordelivery of the

sEr_ins to any person. (Def. Fix. 22-28, Stat. 52 - Act 8)

(c) Because of the continued decline of the fur seal herd, Great
Britain and the United States re-examined the prdolem of conserving 
protecting’ the species, and after joint studies. had been completed in
1893, it was decided that pelagic sealing had to be abolished. iriith
the advent of Japanese sealing in these waters in 1903, it was apparent
that only through cooperative int ernat ional control would the di:::.inishing seal hard be protected. Accordingly in 1911, Great Britain, United
States, Russia, and Japan concluded an agreement which was duly ratified
-the following year and had i‘ or its avot-zed purpose “the preservation and
protection of the fur seals which frequent the waters of the North
Pacific Ocean." (Def. Ex. 31 " International Comrention - Fur Seals,

July 7, 1911“ - 37 Stat. 1538-151;?)

Article IV of the Convention exempted the coastal Indians who carry

7 ma. Cl. com. 1:77 £92

on pelagic sealing in the customary manner in open canoes 2-dthout fir earms. (lbid .9-rt. IV)
(:1) Implementing legislation passed by Congress in 1912  -it 

to give effect to the convention between the Governments of the United

J.

States Great Britain, Japan, and Russia for the preservation and protection of the fur seals and sea otter which frequent the waters of
the North Pacific Ocean  ->‘<- -22-," contain the exemption for the coastal

Indians‘ who conducted pelagic sealing in the customary and historical

‘humethod. (‘Dei'.'E:>:. Q2 - 37 Stat.llL99, Sec. 3)

(e) The Canadian-American Provisional Fur Seal Agreement of l9h2i
(58 Stat. 1379) and the implementing legislation of l9}.IlL (58 Stat. 100)
each contained exemptions for the coastal Indiars permitting them to

engage in pelagic sealing in the historical manner as heretofore described; The same provision permitting the coastal Indians to engage

. ,.
. -4 _ .__ . . .

in pelagiclsealing has beenne-ontinued and  in efiecti today (16 iU.S~,C.

Sec c 

ll; By suspending pelagic sealing through international agreements,

‘h_ _-A F H 1-_ _  ._. ,. _ . . ._ _ , . . 4-E.

    remarkable  in the  ‘oi’, 
Pribilof seal herdssince 1911. at that tjnebest estmates indicatedi
a total population of 125, OCO.i‘ur seals while the latest averaged popua
lation approximates l-_%- million ar.:»'_mals producing   sustained i
yield of between 63 and Yothousani seal skins. it These international
agreements and controls have proven through the years to be not only

reasonable but absolutely necessary to preserve the species from abso“lute extermination.

7 End. C1. Corn. LL77 1493’

(a) Dr. Victor B. Scheffer, biologist for the past pt}-rent;r—t1»:o
years trith the U. 8. Fish and E-Iildlife Survey, test£ied that in 1910
the Prib£ofi seal herd had been reduced to about 125,000 animals which
would represent about five or ten per cent of ‘the original size prior

to the era of unrestricted pelagic sealing 1~ri'_th firearms. Since the

9 suspension of pelagic sealing by international agreement in 1911,

the Pribilof seal population level has risen to about 1% Imillion animals
reaching an optimum harvest level in 19140 of sixty-five to seventy
thousand seal skins annually (Tr. LL08-L410, I418).

(b) The effects of suspending pelagic sealing on the restoration
of the Pribilof seal herds was reported in the Encyclopedia Americarn
(19M.L) as follows:

This law was enacted 2).; august, 1912, and I-rhile it caused

a temporary loss during the five years m which sealing}-rasp

suspended, its beneficial effects were apparent when itt-ras 1

resumed. Every year brought an increase in the number of

seals. In 1921; the Prib£of herd contained 697,178, in 1925,

723,050, and in.l926, 761,281.- In 1930 h2,ooo pelts were.
taken, the largest kpilling in over ho years. (Def. Ex. 10,

p. h85)

¢ 12. By entering into international agreements and enacting reasonable implementing legislation designed to conserve ,,n,pr,otect,. 
restore the once vast Pribilof fur seal herd from the disastrous ef=fects of pelagic sealing, the United States has not abrogated oridenied
to tie plaintiff tribe, any right to take seal as guaranteed under
Article IV of the 1855' I-iakah Treaty.

(a) Specific exemption in the laws and regulations controlling
the sealing industry has always been made for the benefit of the “Pacific Coast Indians, and even today the 'i~ia?:<:ah Tribe of Indians may

7 Ind. Cl. com. 1:77   1;9b,

engage in the practice of pelagic sealing as conducted in the tra itional

-"*4 m 4...and historical manner of their ancestors at the time of the 183; lreaty. —

(l6 U.S.C. Sec. 63):.)
(b) According to Plaintiffs’ witness the traditional method of
taking the fur seal was by stealth, approaching silently in canoes and

spearing tE~£'*' animal. as it lay on the sur:C'ace. Frank Smith, an elderly

' .fuJ_'L-blooded Makah Indian living on the reservation testified as follows :

Q. Tell the Judge how you used to catch seal.

A. Seal run clean in Straits of Juan de Fuca. We go
out from Neah Bay right straight out to the Straits and we
just start hunting seal. and we spear them. '

Q. , You used_ spears.
A." res.

A. They built them sealing canoes out of cedar, dug out
boat. and it was made pretty smooth, i so smooth that you
couldn‘t make no noise, like in water you 1<:r1o':=:.  -X" -11Q.  was it so important for them to bei'smooth?l" t  S

A. Because the seal has got good hearing  the water
and this don“; make any noise, and they sneak up on the seal.
(rr. 170.171) And further on cross-examination:

Q. How did it happen that you speared seals in 1895 and
‘96 when everybody else was shooting them with firearms?

A. ‘Hell, we had the custom of.‘ using spear many times,
always. a

Q. Everybody else was shooting them with guns, weren't
4- '2
they.

*\-,.“H’;.i7 Ind. Cl. com. Li’? 1:95’

LA. They did and \Q. But you didn't?

4!

A. t w % There was no success in using the gun all th

3
time. When.you shoot the seal you sound it. You can't ki_l

it because it travels fast and you can't keep up with it.
That's the reason the Indians they don¥t use guns. (Tr. 273, 27k).
Another eighty year old full-blooded.hakah Indian.by name of
Alexander Green'uas even more explicit in his testimony as to merits
of pelagic sealing without firearms:
Q. Did you.use harpoons or guns to kill seal?
. A. Harpoon and spears too. Spears and harpoons.
Q. Why'did you use spears and harpoons instead of guns?
A. dh,'because it was too much noise and scare the seal
awayu" If you shoot seal, you see, they get scared, too much

noise. They could hear way out in the ocean. No talk in
canoe. 'When.they hear other canoe, will leave. '

(c)I The fact that the Rakah Indians no longer take any seal in
the traditional manner cannot rightfully be attributed to governmental
restrictions upon.a reserved treaty right but involves other completel
independent factarsas: (I) The Hakah Indians today feel that pelagic
sealing as practiced traditionally and at the time of the l8SSIHakah
treaty involves too great a personal risk since for the most part they
lack:the ancestral skill to take seal in.this manner; (2)e the tremendous

growth of the commercial fishing fleets in the Pacific Coast waters has

caused the migratory seal herds to lay off even further fron.shore3 and

‘ .
urt(3) the palpable civilizing influence of the white men through the years
following the 1855 Hakah Treaty has lessened the desire of the modern

‘Makah Indian to continue the ancestral skills along these lines.

7 Ind. Cl. Cor.-':n. 1477 _ 1190

-P I .5
(d) The right reserved in treaties by the Makah Indians _, as well
as by man}? other Pacific Coast tribes, to fish and seal at their usual
. ‘L
and accustomed places in commotn tttth citizens of the United States, is

a superior right in may respects. The Supreme Court has passed upon

this question in other instances there the extent of the right has been

   

questioned. (1) United States v. tdnens, 198 U.S. 371 (19oSle rishe
ing rights secured to Yakima Indians at usual and accustomed places

in common with the citizens of the United States by the 1859 treaty-.1
survives private acquisition oi‘ lands bordering Columbia river by
grants iron the United States or State of Washington. Said rights impose a servitude upon future ownership of lands. (2) Seufert Brothers

 

Company v. United States, 2149, U.S. 191.‘, - upheld Yakina Indian‘s right

 

to fishat usual and accustomed places which lay outside of any area
ceded byp,pthese~sp'Indiars tothe Uni ted States. I  - :   S
(e) Such reserved fishing rights, however, are not so absolute, ;

eXC11lSiV€, rand‘ unlimited that they cannot be limited or accommodated

to suit changi;I1°..conditions;where the circumstances are such thatsthe  7

government actingsiniits sovereicn capacity must take reasonable and
proper measures to conserve and protect our natural resources for the

general welfare and benefit of all citizens. (l) Tulee v. tate of

Washington, 315 U. S. lC8l (19142). - Even though the Yakima Indians

by treaty with the United States had reserved their right to take fish
at their usua.. and accustomed places in common 2-zlthnthe citizens oi‘

the United States, nevertheless the State of ‘zfashington was free to

 

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. #77 " 8 E97
impose on Indians equally n'th others such restrictions of a purely
regulatory nature concerning the time and manner of fishing as are
necessary for conservation of fish but they cannot charge a fee for
a fishing license isince it is more akin to mere charge on the exercise of a right reserved to the Indians and any regulatory purpose

sought to be accomplished in.this manner could be done otherwise.

 

 

(2) IHakah Indian Tribe V. Schoettlar, 192 F. 2d 22h (1951) - The
United States Court of Appeals, Ninth Circuit, in applying the rule

of the Tulsa case (supra) passed upon the very treaty provision per 

tinent to the instant case and held that where the treaty guaranteed
plaintiff the right of taking fish at accustomed grounds and stating
the State of hashington had the burden of showing that regulation
promulgated by it which limited the right was necessary for the con»?
servation of fish.

Halibut Fishing7

 si3. Up until 1888, Pacific halibut fishing off of Cape Flattery

and the entrancerto the Jgan de Fuca straits was prosecuted primarily’

by the northwest coast Indians; halibut, being a principal food item.i

of the Hakah Indians. (See Finding S ante) Soon thereafter, with
the completion of coast to coast railway communication commercial
fishing originated and expanded rapidly'coastnise covering a terrir
tory some 2,000 miles along and up into the Bering Sea. (Def. Ex.

113 - H. Report 391, 72nd Cong., 2nd sess.)

(I)

Dr. William.Thompson in his r part to the American Fisheries

Society stated:

? Ind. Cl. Conn. £77 E98

¢_L-9.“

This great fishery is relatively new. It began with the
inaugurazticn of steam transportation across the continent.
with the completion of the Northern Pacific railroad, the
first cerloads of halibut were shipped through Tacoma to
eastern :::ar‘:<ets.  -7-‘ -31- t. In 1888 the fish came from Cape Flattery; in l9lO the

vessels'were exploiting southeastern Alaska; in l9l3 and

l9lh, the banks on the eastern side of the Gulf of Alaska

first received concentrated attention; in 1923 and 192k

the banks along the western side of the Gulf were first

fished in earnest; and now, vessels are going as far as

the entrance to the Bering Sea. (Def. Ex. lll, p. 126)

11:. with the growth of the halibut fishery as one or the most

_,important'of the Pacific northwest, the ever increasing concentration

of highly efficient fishing gear along the coastal fishing banks,
while producing an ever growing total yield of halibut taken, nevertheless began to deplete this valuable food source with an alarming rate.

In 1913 a peak yield of over 66 million pounds was taken, but since

  that date the figure has steadily declined until in 1918 it reached

a low of barely 39 million pounds total catch. Unless immediate steps
were taken to conserve the dwindling halibut supply3 the Pacific fishing banks non1d'be completely exhausted of this species within a short
PeTi°dd“-“. f i e‘v r ,1. . [.Z.”f

(a)_e_rD1zr'i_1:1g.pt1'e period of 1911; to l_9l6_,;Dr. Willlglh‘-E._-T_-?,1Qm§S0n,'
one of the pieneer experts in this field.and a member of the International Fisheries Comnission, called attention to the decline in.the
halibut fishery by noting the increase in.work hours needed to come
plete each fishing voyage, by the decrease in the average number of’

fish taken for eaeh.unit of gear employed, and the reduced average

Weight of the fish.taken. (Def. Ex. £2) .

 

7 End. Cl. Comm. b?7 h99

xx
0‘
\~../
:"'J
in
tr!
w
[Jo
Ci‘
lo-:10
ml
33
C?

0
F5’
34
PI
03
*1)
‘J!
3
(D
*1
‘JO
(D
(.0
C3
9
:3
[$1.
0']
U}
'50
‘.3
w
(D
'1'}
O
*1
Cl’
(D
Ch
}-J
\O
}...J
O\

*'* % intense fishing on the halibut banks of the coast of

Bri ish Columbia and the United States has resulted in not

only serious depletion, but has made its influence felt I
throughout the whole biological appearance of the species “ .¢
* % %. The numbers still found on them.[fishing'banK§7

are so small, and the percentage of mature fish in this
population has fallen so low, that it appears imminent

that the halibut will drop to a minor position among

food fishes of the Pacific. (Def. Ex. 109)

Report No. l of the International Fisheries Commission (1928)

states the following;

The amount of gear now used on the older banks is about
two and one-half times the quantity formerly used, yet the
present catch is only about hC per cent of the former yield
from these grounds. Under the stress of this great intensification of fishing effort the abundance of fish on the
older banks has fallen enormously to 16 per cent of the
abundance in 1906. Where in 1906 the catch per set of a
unit of fishing gear was nearly 3C0 pounds, in.l926 it was
below 50 pounds. % *-% % Accompanying this fall in abundance
there has been a decrease in the average size of the fish
landed, and a great increase in the percentage of undersized
fish. (Def. EX3_l29) c u not i ”

15.. A contributing factor to this steady decline is the halibut‘s
characteristically'slow rate of reproduction; its period of maturation
being approximately 12 years. Thus, in a given period__the intensity
of the depletion of a total fishery could be conaentrated within the
life span of one immature fish.

(a) Jozo Tonasevich in." International Agreenen's on Conservation
of.Harine Resources; with Special.heference to the North Pacific (19h3)"
described the physiological characteristics of the halibut as follows:

The Pacific halibut is a "demersal“ species of flat
fish living at the bottom of the continental shelf along

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. b7? 500

the Pacific Coast, mainly in ‘waters between l5 to .900
fathoms deep and having a bottom temperature of 3° 8° C.
One of the most irrrportant characteristics of the halibut
is its slow growth. Only about SC percent of females

are mature at the age of twelve years. Some reach an

age in excess of thirty years. The male is always much
smaller than the female; the male seldom reaches a weight

of over LLO pounds, while the female occasionally exceeds
300 pounds. (Def. Ex. h2)

(b) The International Fisheries ConmissionReport No. l (1928)

states:

The rapidity of decline is regarded as especially .
serious because of the yery slow growth of the halibut,
an adult being from 12 to 25 years, or over, in age. Hence
the present decline has taken place uithinathe life span
of one halibut of ordinarily large size. As nearly all
the fish which are being caught now were spawned 8 to 10
years ago, the abundance of the younger fish, which will
be annually available for capture in the next l0 years, has
already been established. If these are geatly reduced in 
numbers, and the intensity of the fishing is maintained, the
outlook for a future stock of spawning fish sufficient to
maintain the supply presents a hopeless picture.  (Def. Ex. l29) 8 '

l6. The: (‘preservation  utilisation of the rich _Pacific’g (ocean g _
halibut fishery has always been the concern of Canada and the

United States. As early as 1892, it was agreed that a joint commission

(Should undertake an overall and comprehensive! study’ of the ha_'Li"::-but

leading toirirpecomraendations of measures designed to'”i_ns‘ure ipriotect.ionT 5
and preservation of the species. (Def. Ex. 38) anueixtensiive report" 
was published, but no affirmative aetion was ever taken. O In 1910
there were sent to Congress recommendations for a system of uniform
regulations for the preservation of food fishes in Canadian-American

waters, but these were never adopted.‘ (Def. Ex. 39 - House Doc. 638,

61st Cong., 2nd ssss.)

.-‘ ‘.'--‘'_.'a

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 3477 p 501

17. In 1921; after much agitation, Canada and the United States
concluded a treaty establishing the International Fisheries -CO1'HI1'.=iSSl.OI1

which was designed solely to administer a progrcm for the preservation

_o:‘.' the halibut iishery of the Northern Pacific Ocean. (113 Stat. 181:1)

Subsequent conventions of 1930 ()4? Stat. 1872), 1937 (50 Stat. 1351):’,

and 1953 (67 Stat. 2491;) continued and strengthened the regulatory

5
power of the Commission.

18. The Commission‘s prime power is limiting tie halibut catch
by restricting tlce length of the fishing season. Artifical propagation of the species is impractical. By limiting the catch to that amount which will. permit replenishment of.‘ the stock through normal reproduction, a future supply will be insured. The results over the
">

years have justified the Cor::r:1ission's policy. in this regard, landthis
type of regulation has not onlylproted sound and reasonable, but is
the assured method which will eventually produce  theijears to come
a sustained optimum yield without damage to future supply.

(a) Circular. 1, International Fisheries Commission (1936) ‘states
the Comm_ission‘s power to regulate as ufollioiuszi 1 1  TM

The most important power is that of limiting the catch
of halibut which can be taken from an area. This power is
stated in two ways in the treaty; first, as the power to
change the length of the closed season; and second, as the
power to set a lmt to the catch. These reach the same
end because the length of the i‘ishing season determines
the amount which can be taken. The intent was to see that
the Commission had the power to do the one essential thing:
namely to limit the catch to the amount which the banks can
produce without damage to future supply, and which will allow
sufficient reproduction to ta-.<:e place. (Def. Ex. 79')

C

(b) Dr. Z-Iilliasn E‘. Thompson, speakmg on the feasi‘cility“o.{‘ artificial propagation of.‘ the halibut, stated:

.3

7 Ind. Cl."Co'r'.I:1. 1.2.77 502

_t is a pity that nan cannot effectively increase the
rate of survival. Each halibut lays as nany as a million
and a half eggs during a spanning season. as a result the
ocean waters contain vast nunoers of floating larvae. No
hatchery could carry the larvae beyond a stage at which it
begins to take natural food and the numbers in such stages
in nature is so vast, that hatchery production would be
but a negligible percentage.

Unable to interfere, man finds himself faced with a
serious problem in the regulation of the marine fisheries.
(Def. Ex. lll - “The Hbrx of the International Fisheries
Commission Upon the Halibut" (1928))

(c) The first report of the International Fisheries Com?
mission (1931) sums up the problem of artificial propagation as follows:

Artificial propagation of halibut is for technical and
scientific reasons, impracticable. The nunbers of young
that could be thus produced would be a minute part of
those hatched under natural conditions. Their culture
would'be expensive an the young fish could not be kept ;
long after hatching. Hence, it is evident that the natural
Supply is overwhelmingly the most important, and that it
must'be cared for. (Def. Ex. l29, p. 21)

(d) The result of the conservation-measure adopted by'the Come

mission have not only stopped the decline of the fishery but have iHkV
proved the condition of species and increased the abundance of the

halibut Stocks on the banks. As stated in the Commissionls report,

number 13; (l9h8) “The accumulation of larger stocks has already made

it safe to permit the takingof an annual catch of S6,COO,C-OO.pou.nds,

an increase of l3,CO0,CCO pounds over that obtained'by the unrestricted‘

fishery’immediately'prior to the inauguration of regulation. IPresent

‘ .

increased catches are taken with one-third less fishing effort than

before." (Def. 35:. 1111)

S03

-4
-4

in "I ('5
-f-v[f'1  1,
..LA-an-60 C... I V-’\..«Jo_.:..¢ gi.

:0(e) Dr. William E’. Thompson, defendant’s expert witness, testified as to the results of the Cor:mission’s conservation measures

over the ‘years, as follot-rs:

Regulation increased the stock on the banks tremendously.
The catch per unit of year rose sharply from the date of
first restriction. The restriction did this. It reduced
the take from the bank to Within the limit which the banks
were producing. (Tr. 2141)

According to Dr. Thompson, if there had been no international
agreements or regulations designed to conserve and protect the existing halibut fishery, then —- L J
In my opinion based upon my experience with other fisheries,
the stock of halibut would have been reduced to as 101-! as a level

as it would have paid the corrzercial fisherman to operate on
them. That level would have been so 1 1-: as to reduce, in my
opinion, the total take from all sources. "t would have reduced the stock of large fish for more than what happened.

(Tr. 2!.) - 2125)

 

(f) Other comments on the positive results of the Cor:n1ission‘s
regulation of the halibut fishery may be found in Tomasevilch, "International Agreemnts on Conservation of I-Karine Resources" (1913), page

187: "The .§°.merican-Canadian halibut conservatioh program, the first

international undertaking with the purpose of conserving and rebuilding a relativelv depleted deep sea.l:£'i.shery,  on the l1~Ia3r.to 7complete
success in its primary purpose." T (Def. Ex. ll8)‘; ltBarnes and Gregory,
“Northern Pacific Fisheries, l939)," at page 2LL2:. “The danger of t
possible interruption to the halibut conservation work cannot be too
greatly stressed. At present the Pacific halibut banks are unqu'estionably being rehabilitated. This is a very delicate process, how9

ever; the reserve so far built up is small, capable of being swept

7 Ind. Cl. Com. I477 509-:

away in one year of unregulated fishing. To bring the banks back to -—~

anything like thek former state of abundance will requre years‘ of

careful regulation.” (Def, 33:. L31)‘ Testimony of I-tiller Freeman, ex‘ member of the International Fisheries Commission; "From the moment

that regulation was applied along the lines which research had E icated, depletion ‘E-J’aS arrested and the curve of abundance turned upward. The upward trend continued f or twenty years arr‘. I am proud to "_
say that in l9Sh the North Pacific halibut catch was the largest ever
made even in the early days when the industry was fishing a virgin
stock.“ (Tr. 19]., 192) 

19. The regulations pronulgated by the International Fisheries
Cozrmission established a seasonal limit for the taking at halibut
within the convention waters inclusive of the Cape Flattery area. The
duration of the open season depends‘ upon the tire it ltahes f or i" fishermen work_.j.ng  given area to land the quota fitedlldby the Cotcmnissiwon  A

' .-"'.&
' no

for that year. The calculated quota represents the total number or

halibut which a particular fishing band may safely yield that year

Without damaging future suppl l . Said regullationsl are applicable’ to

all fisherman including thell-iakah  ‘without lleitception.  :lU.S.>C. ‘ ‘

Sec. 772, Tr. 381).

A marked decrease in the length of the fishmg season has occurred since the advent of regulations. J This has resulted from the
abundance of halibut, coupled with larger trips and an increase in the

number of ships attached to the fishery. Over a five-year period,

0

"‘oegl'_nn:I.ng in l9b,2 the length of the halibut season has been as follows:

7 Ind. C1. Conn. L7? 505

19b2, 2 months, 13 days; l9h3, 2 months, E days; 19kb, 1 month, 18 days;
19hS, 1 month, 15 days; and.19h6, 1 month, 11 days (Def. Ex. lh2, Report of International Fisheries Commission, 19h9 - p. 12).

20. The modern.Makah Indian does not depend upon a subsistence
‘economy as practiced by his forefathers at the time of the 1855 Treaty.
Besides engaging in commercial fishing on his own, he may be emr
ployed.by the fisherman‘s cooperative, work for other commercial
fishing interests, or work at the logging camps. Commercially speaking, the individual Hakah fisherman does not play an important part
in the coastal fishing industry since he finds it prohibitively expensive at this time to outfit and eoni_ a modern fishing vessel capable
gof competing with the commercial "long line" fishermen.who work the

Cape F1attery'uaters and the Swiftsure Banks during the open season.

 

(a)' Plaintiff's witness, Charles Peterson, a Hakah tribal coun-1
cil member and a commercial fisherman, testified that the Makah Indians
ordinarily fished the Swiftsure Banks for halibut from.open canoes with
hand lines and that since commercial fishing boats using modern "longg
line” equipment are able to saturate a large area_nith hoods, it is
impossible to take halibut in anygreatnumbers by single hand lines.
(Tr. 332-336) Mr. Peterson.spoke further of the tremendous expense
of purchasing modern fishing gear (fr. 336). He stated that a smaller
boat can cost $17,000 and that "some of the never vessels that are equipped
to fish halibut and combine their use for other fishery, they run 350

to 375 thousand dollars.“ (Tr; 337)

(b) Bin Peterson.testified further that trolling for salmon on a

.3

7 Ind-o Clo CO3TlT:o  ' 

Ox

commercial basis is his main ocou‘ tion today.

I!)

Q: Do you get the fish that you then dry and preserve for
future use in your hone , or are you in the commercial
business?

A: Well, we do trolling. We do more or less a commercial
fishing; We save what we feel like and cure them and

salt them and dry then, can them. Like I say, we are

educated now, we don‘t confine our food to dried seal
or dried fish." (Tr. 3118)

(c) In l9SO Pk‘. Peterson on another occasion and before another
tribunal testi_‘=“ied that during the l9b,2-l9h3 season the annual income
of the Makah Tribe (population 1.1611) total $206,050, of which $55,000
represented total income from fish sold for cash. This was in_ addition
to these fish taken for the personal consumption of the merrberas. of the
tribe. (P1. Ex. 16, pp. 82, 101) .

(:1) Plaintii‘i“s witness, Ernest Robert soeneke, Vice-Chairman oi‘
the iiskah Tribe1 Council, identified himself as a fish buyer and co- s
partner bi: the Bay Fish Company, testifiedin this case that during  
the  season (1933 )i the number of saleable halibut taken by the I-Eakah

fishermen averaged about one hundred pounds, per man per day (Tr. 351)

In  ldtlrritnessl“ Soeneke testifying in Nanitotheir matter before’ another 

trnussiioststeo thatidduringl the three-year period _or1"9h7,~ 19h8 and 
191:9, the it total amount or all fish landed by I-Eakah fishermen at his
company exceeded $00, 000 pounds of which 150, 000 pounds were halibut.
(Pet;."Eht. 16, ‘pp. 197, 198)

(e) Plaintiih?’ s witness Kenneth ‘E-Iard, chairmen of? the Makah Tribe
testified that in the past ten years halibut fishing has not played an

important part in the economic life of the tribe.

 

.can be found perhaps one hundred to-one hundre

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. t7? SC?

mcfell it hasn’t done too much for the econoriy of the
tribe lately on account of the restrictions and the amount
of people who are fishi .g out there." (Tr. 361)

He stated further that around the S1-Iiftsure Banks at a given tirz:-.e

..L.

y fishing ‘oo ans.

C1:
F‘;

.1.
Lu
cf‘

(Tr. 363-363) 

21%. By entering into international agreements with Canada to
conserve, protect and restore the depleted Pacific halibut ocean
fishing, the United States did not deprive, abrogate, or deny to the
Hakah lribe of Indians any right which they may have reserved under
Article IV of the l8SS Makah Treaty to fish in common with all citizens of the United States at usual and accustomed grounds and stations
because: A

(1) Such fishing rights as guaranteed under a:§~~:.. l'\T  the S1855
Hakah Ireatyf are not so absolute, unlimited, and exclusive in that
they cannotbe acucionmodateid and adjusted to meet changing circumstances

where the Government must mose reasonable resulations desi- ..ed to

conserve, and protect our natural resources for the benefit of all.

Tulee v. State of ‘.-'-3"ash33..=.rton, 315 13.5. lC8l (19142), I-iakah Indian Tribe

 

   

v. Schoettler, 192 F. 2d zuu (1951); and

 

(2) The defendant has shown by overwhelrzdng evidence (for the most
part undisputed) that the seasonal restrictions, mposed upon the
Pacific coast halibut fishery by regulations promulgated and adopted by

the Intern::.tional Fisheries Cor.-mission, oursuant to the Convention between Canada and the United States, are fair, reasonable, and absolutely

necessary to conserve, protect, and rehabilitate the halibu... species.

. u —-_n-u-....._.a..._...._....p-up -u.g-—u-u-—.—-.:..n-u-.n..nu-7 Ind. 01. con. A77 508

sasningtona Eaaah Indian Tribe V. Schoettler, supra  

(3) The reserving of7Eakah fishing rights at usual and accustomed
places under the 1855 Treaty was founded upon.the need of the petitioner
tribe to maintain its then.subsistence economy which was based primarily‘
upon the immediate products of the sea, and in no sense was this treaty’
provision a guarantee of future commercial fishing rights.

(h)o Petitioner has failed to prove that in complying with the
regulations of the halibut Commission, or by'their enforcement, the
individual members of petitioner tribe suffered a deprivation to the
extent that they'are unable to sustain their immediate wants or that
of their families consistent with a subsistence economy.

x_— /s/ ‘sham E. ‘:IIJ'."I‘
v Chief Commissioner

 

/s/ an. 1.. How
iassociate Commissioner

 

I '‘. ."
--..