Q1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43
BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE_0SAGE NATION OF INDIANS:
Petitioners
Docket No. 9

Vso

THE UNITED STnEES OF AMERICA.

Defendant.
I Wesley-E. Disney and F. M. Goodwin.
s with whom was L. H. Gall, for petitioner
Ralph A. Barney: with whom was

p.A. Devitt Vanech. Assistant Attorney
General, for defendant.

EEG 3 O 15.44335};

01911210}: or TEE co1~—nn_s_s;g.g;

O'Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:
The claim in this proceeding, presented by the Osage Nation of
Indians. grows out of a treaty concluded on September 29, 1865 (14 Stat.
687). by which the petitioner for a consideration of $300,000, granted
and sold the United States 865,930.31 acres of the land they then occupied
This tract of land will hereinafter be referred

in the State of Kane 3.

to as the "ceded land."

54~

1 mi-. c1.i Comm. 43 y . L 55

(0

The petitioner seeks an.award from the defendant for the market
value of said land.at the time of the cession.which. it contends. then
greatly exceeded the consideration paid by the defendant and the expenses

paid by the Government for surveying and selling it. From such award

the petitioner concedes that there may be deducted the consideration

paid and the costs of survey and sale. The grounds upon which the

petitioner bases its claim will hereafter appear.
After describing the land and providing for the disposition of the
purchase money. ticle l of the treaty contains this further provision:

"ABTIGLE l. * * * said lands shall be surveyed and sold,
under the direction of the Secretary of the Interior; on the
most advantageous terms, for cash, as public lands are sur- veyed and sold under existing laws, including any act grant—

ing lands to the State of Kansas in aid of the construction

of a railroad through said lands; but no pre~emption claim or
homestead settlement shall be recognized: and after reimbursing the United States the cost of said.survey and sale. and the
said sum of three hundred thousand dollars placed to the credit
of said Indians. the remaining proceeds of sales shall be placed
in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the
‘civilization fund‘. to be used, under the direction of the
Secretary of the Interior: for the education and civilization

of Indian tribes residing within the limits of the United states."

The creation.and use of the “civilization fund" for the benefit
of all Indians residing in the United States has been the source of many
bills introduced in.the House and Senate by which appropriations were
sought to pay the Osage Indians an amount equal to that deposited in the
“ciuilization fund", however. none of the bills became law. By an act
-passed February 6. 1921 (#1 Stat. 1097), the Osage Indians were permitted

to bring a suit in.the Court of Claims "for the ahount due or claimed to

be due said tribe from the United States for the misappropriation of any

1 Ind. C1.'Comn. 43   , .. 3 — 0 ' ‘ , . _ $6

--..

Of the funds of said tribe. or for the failure of the United States to pay

_the tribe any money due under said treaty." A.suit was brought. Nb. B~38s

and dismissed by the Court of Claims on jurisdictional grounds. (65 Co Clso

f

6%). Certiorari was denied by Supreme Court. (2?9 U.S. 811).

In the case at bar the petitioner prays "that a judgment be
entered * * for a sum which will provide just compensation for the lands
so taken and sold by the defendant for its own use and benefits" And at

the commencement of the hearing counsel for petitioner read into the record

this‘statement:

"The claim of the Osage Indians —~ and I am reading this:
so as to have this exactly on the record —— the claim of the
Osage Indians is for just compensation for those lands called

the ceded lands expropriated by the Government under the socalled Treaty ct Certcrbor 29, lgdd» The ceded lands in turn

A §.;\'.lu;'a\4a...-\-f|uJ—- HIV!!!‘f"\ f'\('\

were sold by the Government and a total sum of $l:089,73o.oo
was received by the United States for the same. The Government
reimbursed itself for the cost of survey and cost of sale of
the land. amounting to $l2e796.85. It reimbursed itself for
$300,000 advanced to the Indians. The United States unlawfully
placed $776;93l.58 from the proceeds of its sales of the land
in the so—called Civilization Fund, which fund was used by the
Government for the needs of other Indians: thereby obviatin

the necessity of appropriation from the Treasury to other
Indians of that sum of money. The Osages received from the
fund the sum of $189555. when the fund was closed in 1911,
$2#8.78 was transferred to the United States Treasury."

"Just compensation claimed by the Osage Indians consists
of the market value of the lands at the time the Treaty was
negotiated and ratified. at not less than $lc25 per acre,
which was the stipulated amount per acre for similar lands in
the same Treaty with the Osagess plus a sum which would be the
equivalent of interest thereon from the date of the Treaty to
the date of the judgment. less any proper credits and offsets.
The Osage Indians agree that the cost of sale and survey of the
lands and the reimbursement of $300,000 to the U.ited States are
proper credits or offsets.” (Rs pp. 2h~25).

1 Ind; C1. Comm. 43 it I g e57

_ a Similar statements appear in petitioner's briefs. So petitioner
has made it very plain that it does not seek recovery of a sum. equal to
that placed in the "civilization fund" created by Article 1 of the treaty:
to be used as a civilisation fund for the sole use and benefit of the
Osage Indians. although many of the allegations in the petition and much
argument in the briefs would seem to apply to such a claim.

The petitioner} at the time of the 1865 treaty, did, and now does.
consist of two groups known as the Great (Northern) and Little (Southern)
Osage Indians and those Indians were in possession of the ceded lands at the
time of that treaty and the Government admits their right to the occupancy
thereof at that time.

In the year 1862 the Osages held a large compact area of land in
the State of Kansas. much of which was of little use to them, so negotiations
for the acquisition by the United States of part of it were started that
year. These negotiations continued for more than a year and finally resulted in the treaty of August 29. 1863 (Def. Ex. life. 6; 4 Kappler 1129). by» "
which the ceded lands in controversy here were sold to the Government for
the sum of $300,000. By the provisions of the treaty there was a sale
and conveyance of the Indians rights in the land to the United States.
the consideration to be placed to the credit of the Osage tribe and

interest thereon at the rate of five per centum to be paid semi—annua11ys

in money. clothing. provisions or articles of utility.

.l Ind. C1. Comm. 43

-5...

The treaty was submitted to the Senate by the President and on

July 2. l86#, the Senate ratified the treaty with.amendments.‘ The treaty
with the senate amendments was again submitted to the Indians and on
February 17. 1865, they rejected some of the Senate amendments. assented
to part and‘proposed amendments of their own: (Def.'Ex. No; 7).

When the treaty was returned to the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs it was believed that, because of the nature and form of the amendments of the Senate and the Osages. it was in no shape for publishing, so
it—was decided by that officer and the Secretary of the Interior that it
should be re—drafted embodying all the amendments. for presentation to the
Osages and for the consideration of the Senate.

The 1863 treaty did not contain the "civilization fund" clause
quoted above, but as before stated, it provided for an unqualified con~"
veyance of the ceded land. The record discloses no deception. over»
reaching or other perverse conduct on the part of the representatives oft
the Government. either in the preliminary discussions or in the actual
consummation.of the treaty. True; at the time of the negotiations the
Indians were "very poor and destitute in every way and very anxious to
make a treaty". according to the letter of the Superintendent of Indian
Affairs of the Southern Superintendency dated April 5. 1862: but it nowhere appears that those who represented the Government took advantage
of their condition; on the contrary, it appears that the amount finally

agreed upon.was at a price per acre somewhat larger than the price the

Osages were first willing to take. Furthermore, the time consumed in

se1 Ind, c1. Comm. 43

0160-4

‘s
' 0

negotiating the purchase. beginning prior to.April 5, 1862, and conu

tinuing. as we may presume, to August 29, 1863, indicates extended

. deliberation on the part of the negotiators.

It is also true that the Osages nere full~blooded blanket

iilndiansa few of whom could read or write. or had any extensive knowledge

of our language, but at least one of their representatives: Charles Mograin.
was. according to M. G. Doffin. Superintendent of Indian Affairs. "duly
elected assistant Head Chief of the Great and Little Osages. is a well
educated Half Breed and really the business man of the Osage Nation."
(Letter dated July 16, 1863. Def. ‘Ex. No. 2). This same Charles Mograin
signed the treaty of 1863 as "acting head chief". This evidence leads

us to believe that the petitioner executed the 1863 treaty with fulli
knowledge of its contents and its purpose to convey the coded lands to

the United States for the consideration mentioned.

It is significant that no complaint was made about the consideration of $300,000 for the ceded lands fixed by the treaty of 1863,
although the Indians had an opportunity to do so in February, 1865, when
they were considering the Senate anendnents. It will be noted that the
Senate made no amendment to Article 1 of that treaty, however. the Osages
proposed a very important amendment to Article 1 by which they fixed the
western boundary of the tract to a location that would protect the Indians‘
camping ground and thereby substantially diminish the cession. and this

amendment was included in the re—drafted treaty of 1865. Here the Osages

59

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43
IlD?OIi

could, had they been.dissatisfied with the consideration, hare proposed
a change in the sale price’. (Def. Ex. no. 8). There is no evidence
that they did so or even discussed the consideration.

we pause to state.that in case No. 3-38 (66 Ct. Clseg64)e referred to above. the evidence which has been offered here concerning the

1863 treaty. the circumstance surrounding its consummation and its relation to the treaty of 1865, was not introduced by either party at the

~trial of the case decided by the Court of Claims. so that Court did not

have before it those important facts which have a direct bearing upon
some of the statements made in its opinion. although not upon its deter«
mination of the jurisdictional question.

The treaty of September 29. 1865, was negotiated at Fort Smith.
.Arkansas, between D. N. Cooley, Oommissioner of Indian Affairs. and
Elijah.Sells. Superintendent of Indian Affairs. representing the United
States. and representatives of both the Great and Little Osage Indians.

It had been furnished by the Secretary of the Interior and was substantially
the same as the treaty of 1863 as amended by the Senate and the Osage
Indians. except that the clause providing for the "civilization fund" had
been added. pThe treaty was signed by the representatives of the Little
Osages at Fort Smith but the Great Osage representatives did not sign at
Fort Smith because they had not been granted such authority; it was therefore necessary for Superintendent Sells to meet with the council of the

Great Osage group at Canville Trading Post in Kansas, where the treaty was

60’

1 Ind. Cl._Comm. 43

y H 8 _
executed on behalf of that group on September 29. 1865.

The record is silent as to the length of time consumed by the
negotiations at Fort Smith. but it is shown that the Great Osages signed
the treaty at the Canville Trading Post after three hours deliberation

(Pet. Ex. No. 8; Record 305-6). Petitioner stresses the

in council.
fact that so 1itt1e'time'was taken in considering the amended treaty att
Canville and argues that such a lengthy document could not be adequately
explained and considered in three hours time. That argument ignores the
‘undisputed fact that the preliminary negotiations and terms of the treaty
were agreed upon at Fort smith. at which place the Great Osages were
represented. and, for ought that appears to be the contrary. the Great
Osage representatives took part in the parley and understood the terms of
the treaty. Furthermore. the Little Osages. had already signed the treaty
at Fert Smith. These facts would seem to explain the comparatively short
time required for the Indian council to consider and sign the document.
Then, the fact that White Hair. principal chief of the Osage Nation. and.
his second chief. Beaver. had already approved the treaty by signing the
same at Fort Smith cannot be minimized as a possible influence in bringing about a quick acceptance.
There has been some evidence introduced for the purpose of
showing that the Indians were misled or that they misunderstood the purpose

of the "civilization fund" to have been for benefit of all Indians rather

than for the exlucisve benefit of the Osages. .As to such evidence see

Sisseton & Wahpeton Indians v. United states: 58 Ct. Cls.. 302. where

the court said:

61

1 ind. C1. Conm. 43
n w 9 a

"We can not attach credence to the testimony
offered in this case. assuredly we may not go behind
the plain terms and conditions of a-treaty and set
it aside, when it is properly executed by the tribe
or band. on the mere assertion of a few members of
the tribe that it was not understood or assented to."

See also Delaware v. Cherokee. 193 U. S. 127. 1&1; Lone Wolf V. Hitchcock,

 U030 5530

The civilization clause was apparently in the treaty when it
was first presented to the Osages at the Fort Smith parley. There is
no evidence indicating any objection to it or to the consideration for
the ceded lands. The report of Sells: one of the Government Commissioners
who negotiated the treaty. makes no mention of the civilization clause in
his outline of the contents of the treaty, thus indicating that that

clause was of no special interest to tie Indians or the Government, and
that night well be, because they-were selling the lands to the Government
for a fixed sun (that was also agreed to in the 1863 treaty and by the
terms of that treaty whatever amount the Government received from a sale of
the ceded lands would go into the Treasury) and they were not concerned
with the disposition of the proceeds from the sales remaining after pay~
nent of the purchase price and the expense of survey and sale. Under
the terms of the clause the fund was for the use of all Indians in the
United States, which would include the Osages. The fact that they received
only a pittance ($189.55) from the fund is no proof that the Osages were
misled into making the treaty and thus agreeing to the civilization fund.

The Court of Claims in disposing of the case. referred to

above. appeared to be of the opinion that the "civilization fund" did not

concern the Osage India s for in its opinion it made this statement:

62'

1 Ind. C1. comm. 43 s      63

"* * * the treaty was a sale and conveyance of the
land for the sum of $300,000, and the land thereby
became the property of the United States Government.

By its terms it was obligated only to pay to the
Indians the sum of $300,000, and there is no dispute
about the fact that it did this. Any surplus proceeds
which might arise from the sale would therefore, under
the treaty, become the property of the United States
Government, and had it not gratuitously devoted this
surplus to a civilization fund for the civilization

and education of Indian tribes, there could have been
no question raised such as is raised here." (See Osage

Tribes Va United States, 66 Ct. Cls. 64, 80).

This statement is of especial significance because the Court was speaking

00f the 1855 treat: in referring to the Government as having “gratuitous~

ly devoted this surpius to a ‘civilization fund‘". It then had no
knowledge of the 1863 treaty under which it had been agreed that the
Government became the owner of the ceded lands and was not required to
place any part of the proceeds from the sale thereof in a civilization

fund. in fact the Government was not required to sell the ceded land under

- the earlier treaty.

When the treaty was submitted to the Senate for ratification.

that bodye on.June 26, 1856, ratified it with amendments, one of which
amended Article 1. Because of the amendments it was deemed necessary

to submit them to the Osage Indians: so here again the Osag§s;had an
opportunity to consider the article 1 (providing for the purchase price

and containing the "civi1ization.fundé clause) and; after stating that they
had heard the amendments read and fully explained. seven.chiefs and headnen.

who had signed the original treaty. accepted and assented to the amendments.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 43 : C C _ _ C64
...1]_...

I

From a careful review of the entire record we find no evidence
that would justify a. conclusion that the Osage Indians did not fully
understand the treaty of 1865 or any of its terms. or that they were over»

reached or in any way taken advantage of by those representing the

W'Government. The l865.treaty~must be cenaidered in connection with thenx,

_1863'unratified treaty because the later treaty is the outgrowth of the
earlier one and the events and negotiations tie them together in a relation—
ship that cannot be ignored, in fact they were in reality one transaction.concluded after negotiations extending over a period of more than three
years.

Preliminary to a discussion of the grounds upon.which petitioner

bases its claim, it may be pointed out that the act creating the Commission

(60 Stat; IOQ9: 25'U.S.C.A. 70) vests it with jurisdiction to hear and
determine five general classes of claims against the United States and
permits "any Indian tribe. band or other identifiable group of American
Indians residing within the territorial limits of the United states or
Alaska" to prosecute such claims. This act. like all others granting the
right to present claims against the Government. nest be strictly con—
strued and may not be applied to claims not plainly within its terms.
Klanath and Moadoc Tribes v. U. 5.. 296 U. S. 244; Schillinger V. U. S. 155
U-S3 153: Price v. U. S.. 174 U.S. 373; Blackfeather V. U; St, 190 U.S.
3-68. '
Prior to the passage of the act creating the Indian Claims

Commission Indian groups had no forum in which they Qould.prosecute their

_ - .- ..._4...o.4...

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43

....]_'2-.....

claims against the Government; except when Congress passed special acts
giving the Court of Claims jurisdiction to hear and determine such claims.
It is not necessary to here recite the objections to that way of settling
the old Indian claims: suffice it to say that Congress recognized the
need of disposing. once and for all time. all the old Indian claims against
the Government. and to accomplish this object abandoned its former practice
of enacting special acts and passed the 1946 Act. which might aptly be
called a general jurisdictional act; but that act makes no admission of
liability on the part of the Government. it merely provides a forum. the
Indian Claims Commission, for the adjudication of claims coming within the
classes or categories set forth in Section 2 of the Act. Osage Indians V.
U: 8.. 66_Ct. C130) 64; Mille Lac case. 229 U. S. 498 and cases therein
cited. .

The Indian Claims Commission not does not specifically state the
character of relief the Commission may grant, but this lack of specificity

is not vital; for its provisions plainly limit the relief to that which

is compensable in money. That this must be so is shown by the following

o provisions of the Act:

(e) In the third para-raph of Section 2 the Commission is

required to make certain deductions "in determining the ouantum of relief:"
(b) In Section 19 it is required that the "final determination"

shall state the "amount" of relief;
(c) ‘And in Section 22 provision is made for the appropriation

Of "such sums as are necessary to pay the final determination of the

 

Commission" and that the "navment of any claim * * * shall he a full

 

1 Ind. c1. cosm. 43

....]_3...

discharge“ of all claims and demands. etc.
(italics ours). '

No other kind of relief islprovided in the act.

 

:1-—u-a-—a:..-—.n— —-nu-1-9--—-Iu—-I-nu-uri-u---Io-I—¢-nib

   

Ejduciarv relationship_between Government and Indians.
Counsel for petitioner contend that, in deciding this case.

I’

we must regard the Government as a common law guardian or trustee. and
hold it accountable in the same manner and to the SFAS extent a private
party would be held in litigation bctween.private parties.

Before considering the cases which passed upon the question
of the Government's fiduciary status in respect to its dealing with the
Indians. it should be pointed out that when H. R. &#97 (which was the bill
finally passed creatin" the Indian Claims Commission) passed the House it
contained this provision:

"The Commission. in determining whether a

claimant is entitled to relief on legal grounds.

shall apply with respect to the United States the

same principles of law as would be applied to an

ordinary fiduciary.“

(italics supplied).

This provision was eliminated by a Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
.mendment beceuse. as the Coamittee explained, "that the United States
shall be treated as an ordinary fiduciary has been stricken in the Committee
amendments because it seemed that the Commission should be permitted to

determine according to the usual principles of law whether the Government

was a fiduciary in the particular case involved, and if so, what fiduciary

66

riReport No. 1715. 79th Congress 2nd. Session).

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43
  ‘ ..1u..l

duties were imposed upon it." (Senate Committee on Indian Affairs

The bill as so amended

passed the Senate. (Gong. Record — Senate, pp. 9343~9345s July 172 1946):

The Conference Committee of the two Houses agreed to the elimination of the quoted provision, and the House Members of the Committee

attached a statement to the Committee Report. saying;' %
t"The conferees agreed to the elimination of
this provision because it is now well settled that withu

out express language the United States owes a very high

degree of fiduciary duty to Indian tTlb€So" I .

(Report no. 2693. p. 6, House, 79th Cong..
2d Session). .

Counsel quote this statement in support of the contention that
~the Government stands in the relation of an ordinary guardian or trustee
to the Indians. we find nothing in the language whieh gives rise to an’
isuch meaning. This is especially so when read in connection with the
elimination from the bill of the very clause by which it was intended to
create the relationship here contended for. The idea the Committee in«
tended to convey was that the Government owes a very high degree of
fiduciary (if that is a proper term to be used) duty to Indian tribes,
and to this as a general statement we agree, but that falls far short
of imposing upon the Government the duties and responsibilities of an
ordinary guardian or trustee in transactions involving the acquisition,
through treaties. of Indian lands.

In further support of its position, counsel cite a number of cases
which; they insist, establish the relationship of the Government to the

Indians as that of an ordinary fiduciary. we shall refer to some of them

67

1 Ind; c1.’coam. 43

- 15 _

wherein the courts have referred to the Indian as "wards" of the Government
and the Government as "guardian". or have referred to the relationship
as "resembling those arising out of the relation of guardian and ward."
and similar terms and phrases not employed in a technical sense.

The earliest case discussing the stats of lndians. as respects
their relation to the Government, was Cherokee Nation v. Georgia. 5 Pet. 1.
There the Indians were considered as in a state of "tutilage." and that
“Their relation to the United states resembles that of a ward to his
guardian.“ In the Kagana case, l18 U. S. 375. the Court said: "These
Indian Tribes are the wards of the Nation. They are communities dependent
on the United States: dependent largely for their daily food; dependent
for their political rights." The case. United States v. Shoshone Tribe.
304 U. S. 111. involved the expropriation of tribal lands by the
Government and in construing the rights of the Indian to the lands. the

I

Court used this language:

Wes transactions between a guardian and .
his wards are to be construed favorably to the
latter. doubts. if there were any. as to ownership of lands. minerals or timber would be resolved
in favor of the tribe."

0

And in United states V. Creek Nation. 295 U. S. 103, which also involved
the taking of Indian lands without compensation, the Court referred to
the tribe as an "independent community under guardianship of the United
States." and in denouncing the taking of the Creek lands without comn
pensatien. said such expropriation "would not be an exercise of guardianship hut an act of confiscation".

See also Lane v. South Rosa. 249 U.S.

11G; Cherokee Nation V

C68

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. Z43 .— 16 It is language used in cases such as the above. the petitioner

reasons. that compels us to regard the Government as an ordinary fiduciary

and subject to all rules of law and equity governing that relationship.
_The precise question raised here has not: so far as we can find.

been passed on by the Supreme Court, but the Court of Claims in

Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations V, Gnited States. 75 Ct. Clee_“94» and

Kansas“Tribe v. United States; 80 Ct. C18 254: has PaS33d On the question‘
In Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations v. United States. supra: the

Indians sued the Government for a million dollars damages on the theory.

as the court determined. that the Indians suffered loss because the

Government, acting in the capacity of trustee or guardian of the Indianspermitted a railroad company to appropriate lands of the Indians and use
connected wi
by a grant, ‘Concerning the capacity in which the Government acts in

Indian matters. the Court said:

"If the Government was solely responsible

for the loss complained of as a trustee or guardian

of the plaintiffs’ lands and property, and in that
capacity the only party legally capable of asserting
plaintiffs‘ rights in court, and as such negligently
refused and continues to refuse to act, this, in our
opinion, is a direct and specific allegation of omission
to perform a duty, and plaintiffs’ cause of action is
predicated upon the common law liabilities pertaining

to the relationship of guardian and ward. No treaty or
act of Congress is cited wherein the Government assumed
liabilities of the character claimed in positive language,
and the court must deduce liability from the relationship

of the parties if judgment is awarded, and not rom treaties
or acts of Congress.

"Since 1871, in speaking of the relationship
of tribal Indians and the Government, it has, we think
we may say, been designated by the courts as guardian

and ward. The Government by discontinuing the poiicy
of treating with the Indians and adopting the one of

69

A1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43
....17..

direct legislation and dealings in order to
conserve, protect, and equitably administer the

_ estates and.property of the tribes.‘passed in—
nnmerable acts respecting allotments to the
individual Indians and otherwise providing for the
disposition of Indian funds accumulated in the course
of a governmental policy, but it has never heretofore
been contended in this court that because of this
governmental policy the common law liability of a
guardian with respect to the wardis property obtained:
and that the Government became liable for the acts of a
third party to when lands had been granted by treaties»
on the theory that the grant became forfeited.“

e sis *

"The Congress has in innumerable special acts.
far too many to cite. limited the jurisdiction of the
court to the ascertainment of the legal liability of

the Government to respond in damages for violation

of the express provisions of treaties or acts of Congress:
and no precedent exists which would authorize the court to
extend the meaning of the terms used so as to comprehend a
right to sue thereunder on the theory that as a matter of
general law the Government because of treaties and acts

of Congress becomes responsible as guardian of the Indians."

And in Kansas Indians v. United States: supra. those Indians.
among other claims, sued for the value of some 20,000,000 acres of
landceded to the United states by a treaty concluded in 1825. The
Indians contended that the consideration for the cession was wholly
inadequate and that the relation of guardian and ward was established
by the treaty of October 28, 1815, by which the United States
acknowledged the Kansas Indians "to be under the protection of the
‘United States of America, and no other nation, power, or sovereign.

whatsoever,“ and, therefore the United States could not legally or

70

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

- 18 _

equitably receive from the Indians their lands without paying the fulls ~

, value thereof. (The Osages by the 1865 treaty. art. 10. acknowledged

their dependence on the United States and invoked its protection and
care). In disposing of the contention of the Kansas Indians. the

Court decided:

"The purpose and effect of the treaty were

to place the contracting parties upon the same footiing in every respect upon.which they stood before the war
with Great Britain. No contention is made that the

' relationship of guardian and ward existed between them
before the war. Certainly this relationship could not be
created by a treaty that merely reestablished their preexisting political relations. The contention that this

was the effect of article 3 of the treaty is without merit.”

from the cases cited above, or similar terms. can be construed as imposing on the Government the fiduciary obligation contended for here;
where the Government has acquired land through a treaty of cession.
Moreover. such an inposition.would be inconsistent with the Government‘s

treaty making powers which existed at the time of the treaty of cession

of 1865 was concluded.

Cohen's Handbook of Federal Indian L&Ws Sec. 9:

Chap. 8.

There are, of course. cases in which the acts of the Government
must be adjudged by the "most exacting fiduciary standards“, but those
are cases in which the Government was charged as trustee in carrying

out treaty obligations. and handling trust funds of Indian tribes. O. f.

71.

1 Ind. 91. Comm. 43 p I '. ' pi 72'

_ 19 _

- Seminole Nation v. United States. 316 U; S. 286.' We do not think
the rule in such cases can be applied here. So. we conclude that the

Government cannot be regarded as any ordinary fiduciary in determining

 C8590

Construction of treatv.

In the briefs. counsel for petitioner would have us construe
the 1865 treaty so as to make available the amount of the civilization
fund for the exclusive use of the Osage Indians. not for their "education
and civilization", but as an award. or as the basis for an award. for
additional compensation for the coded lands; For our authority to so
construe the treaty they cite many cases. including United States V.
Shoshone Indians. 304 U. S. 311, 316, from which they quote:

"In treaties made with then the United States

seeks no advantage for itself; friendly and dependent
Indians are likely to accept without discriminating
scrutiny the terms proposed. They are not to be interpreted narrowly, as sometimes may be writings expressed in
words of art employed by conveyancers, but are to be construed in the sense in which naturally the Indians would
'understand them."

This. of course. is the general rule followed in construing Indian
treaties. and a salutary one, but there is another rule to the
effect that courts may not disregard the obvious. palpable meaning
of a treaty. Choctaw Nation v. United States: 179 U. S. 495;

United states v. Winans: 198 Us s. 371. This rule was followed by

' .

1 Ind. C1. Com. 43
..20....

the Court of Claims when this case was before that court where.
in.speaking of the same clause here in question, it said:

"But the language of the treaty is uh»

ambiguous. Its meaning is clear without the aid of
extraneous facts. The fund here was to be devoted ‘to

the education and citilisation of Indian tribes residing
within the limits er the United Statese' In order

to make this language apply exclusively to the Osage
Indians. the whole meaning of it would have to be

changed by the inclusion of additional words." (66 Ct. Cls.

6h, 80).
We believe. as the Court of Claims did, that the treaty provisions in
it is

respect to the "civilization fund" are unambiguous. Therefore.

not open to construction.

Grounds of recoverv.
Throughout the hearing. in the briefs and by oral arguments.
counsel for petitioner have vigorously contended that the claim presented

to us is predicated.upon each and all of the grounds set forth in section

2 of the Act. we shall, therefore. consider each in the light of the con—'

tentions of counsel.

Clause (12 of Section_g.

Clause (1) of Section 2 of the Act provides for the deternina—

tion of:

"claims in law or equity arising under
the constitution, laws, treaties of the
'United States. and.Executive Orders of the
President;"

Counsel for petitioner argue that the claim arises under the

Fifth Amendment to the Constitution because they believe the Government

73 1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

took advantage of a weak. ignorant and destitute dependentand obtain:
ed a treaty by which it acquired the ceded lands for the inadequate
and unreasonable sun of $300,000, which, as they say. was not just
compensation under the amendment. Coupled with the above; counsel
complain of the fact that part of the proceeds from the sale of the
ceded lands were used for the education and civilization of other
Indians.

This argument about the civilization fund is repeated time

and again in the briefs. Just what part the argument plays in the consideration of clause (1) is beyond our comprehension unless it is advanced

to persuade the Commission that it has the power, under that clause. to

-~-..._.- -an a---Inn.-.. 3  
UL N-rCbU

‘‘‘‘'2''''‘ £‘''--- an.---—u.a--n -n-b 4-4 1
£0 UC3I1-L111-a tutu‘; ':;A}_JJ.t.'»‘.-_;':: iJJ.\JV-I-a“...‘4-U;.J-Q C.» u....a... ' 311A ''‘1’’‘ 9“ 3..""°""-' £9.73 an

\-in» J-—-i..n--I--I-H-1 5..-corn In u.,v- --—

anount over and above the $300,000v'agT€€d upon as the consideration
for the ceded land. That we have no such power is borne out by
decisions of the Court of Clains and the Supreme Court which have con~
strued provisions. contained in jurisdictional acts. which are similar
in effect to~those in clause (1).

The United states V. Old Settlers, 148 U. S. U26. 3? Lo Ed; 509:

the Indian petitioners sought relief from the provisions of a treaty made

in 1846 on the ground of duress and fraud under a jurisdictional act whichp

conferred on the Court of Claims the power to "determine what sun * * *
of money may be justly due from the United States to said Indians: arising
from 0? growing out of treaty stipulations and acts of Congress relating

thereto." The act also gave the court “unrestricted latitude in

74°

1  ' C1‘:  
_'22 _'

adjusting and determining the said claim; so that the rights. legal
and equitable. both of the United States and of Indians. may be fully
considered and determined. * * *." i

The Court of Claims (2? Ct. Cls. l) declined to go back of the
treaty because it was not within its province. under either law or
equity, to determine that a treaty or an Act of Congress had been
obtained by duress or fraud. On appeal, the Supreme Court, in affirmg
ing the decision of the lower court. on this question. said:

“Unquestionably a treaty may be modified or
abrogated by an act of Congress. but the power to make
and unnake is essentially political and not judicial. and
the presumption is wholly inadmissible that Cong ess
sought in this instance to submit the good faith of its
own action or the action of the eovernment to judicial

. decision. by authorizing the stipulations in question to
be overthrown upon an inquiry of the character suggest—
ed: and the Act does not in the least degree justify
any such inference."

l#$**IiI=*#I!<

"The settlement of a controversy arising or growu
ing out of these Indian treaties or the laws of Congress
relating thereto. and the determination of what sun, if
any: might be justly due under them, certainly does not
include a claim which could only be asserted by disregarding the treaties or laws. or holding them inoperative on '
the ground alleged.

"The Court of Claims was indeed to have ‘unrestricted
latitude in adjusting and determining the said claim. so that
the rights. legal and equitable, both of the United States
and of the said Indians may be fully considered and determined.‘
But this did not mean that either party was entitled to have or
receive by virtue of the Act anything more than each was entitled to under existing stipulations. or to bring supposed
moral obligations into play for the disposal of the case."

See also United States V. Choctaw Nation. l79‘U.So U94:
5319 and cases eited.

-.75.

l Ind. C1. Comm. 43

The case. Osage v. United States. 66 Ct. Cls 6%. was subu

.mitted to the Court of Claims under a jurisdictional act authorizing the

submission of "That claim of the Osage Tribe of Indians * * * for
moneys due. arising out of the sale of Osage lands under the treaty

of September 29. l865.,* * * * for the ahount due or claimed to be due
said tribe from the United States for the misappropriation of any of the
funds of said tribe. or for the failure of the United States to pay the
tribe any money due under said treaty; and jurisdiction is hereby con»
ferred upon the Court of Claims to hear and determine. as right ands
justice may require, and as upon a full and fair arbitration, the claim

of said tribe * *s* *."

The Indians sought a reformation of a provision of the treaty
which set up a fund for the education and civilization of all Indians
of the United states. and to linit its use to the education and civilizau

tion of the Osage Indians. In denying the Indians right to relief. the

court said:

"It is not the province of this court to reform
treaties or to na.e new treaties for the parties. That
is the function and province of the political depart—
nent of the Government.“

3#Il==i<#-".=

"While the language of the act ‘to hear and
determine. as right and justice may require, and as
upon a full and fair arbitration. the claim of said
tribe against the United States,‘ etc.e has a wide
scope. we are of the opinion that it does not
authorize this court to go beyond the limits which the

courts have set in cases where a court has had to deal
with treaties."

76

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

- 24 _

Incidentally. the same parties are here claiming rights involving the sane treaty as in the above case before the Court of
Claims.

Klanath v. Unitedstatess 296 U. 5. 21m, 80 L. Ed. 202, was
a case in which recovery of the value of the Indian rights in 87:000
acres of land taken from the Indians was sought. The JuriSdiCti0na1
act provided: "That all claims of whatsoever nature“ the Indian
tribes may have against the United States could be submitted to the
Court of Claims for determination of the amount "due said Indians
under any treaties, agreements or laws of Congress. or for the misappropriation of any of the funds of said Indians. or for the failure
of the United States to pay said Indians any money or other property

due;" and the Court of Claims was empowered to hear and determine all

I legal and equitable claims * * * of said Indians. against the United

States. and to enter judgment thereon.” The facts disclosed that the
United States had.paid the Indians a sum of money (in an amount much
less than the value of the Indian rights) and obtained a release for
all claims and demands of every kind and character for the lands
involved. In holding that the Indians could not maintain an action for

the actual value of their land rights under the jurisdictional act, the

Court said:

"If the release standsg no money or property
is due plaintiffs. for the settlement and release
‘wiped.out the claim. If the act is sufficient to
give jurisdiction of this claim. then it permits
plaintiffs to bring into the Court of Claims for
deternination.de_novo all claims. whether released

77

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

-25..

or not, that they ever had against the
United.States excepting only those already

there determined. It goes without saying that.
if Congress intended to grant so sweeping and
unique a privilege. it would have made that
purpose unmistakably plain. As shown in the
opinion below, Acts intended to waive settlements
employ terns quite different from the provisions
under consideration." a

WAs jurisdiction will not be extended beyond
the terms of the.Act by any implication or other
resort to construction. no force can be given to
plaintiffs‘ suggestion that intention to include
ciaims already settled and released is shown by

, the clause in paragraph 2 allowing defendant credit
6 for money it expended for plaintiffs.“

The Klanath Indians in the above case. also claimed that inu
adequacy of consideration, where coupled with the unequal position of
the parties. is sufficient to invalidate the release. The petitioner
apparently takes the same position here. but that Court also decided
that question. After stating that while in litigation between private
parties inadequacy of consideration coupled.with lack of business

capacity and inferiority of position are significant elements, the

court said:

“But the rules that govern in such cases have no
application in suits by these Indian tribes against
the‘United States. The relation between them is
different from that existing betweenindividuals whether
dealing at arm's length. as trustees and beneficiaries
or otherwise. See Choctaw Eation v. United States. 119
U. S. 1. 28: 30 L. Ed. 3C5» 315: 7 S. Ct. 75: Lone'Wolf V.
Hitchcock. 18'? 11.5. 553. 11-7 L. Ed. 299. 23 s. Ct. 216,
ubi supra; Choate V. Trapp2 224‘U.S. 665, 36 L. Ed. 9&1.
32 S. Ct. 565,'ubi supra. Regard being had to the nature
of duties. resembling those arising out of the relation
of e'uerc’.ian and. 'v:'e.rd owed by the United States to Indian
tribes. and in view of the undoubted power of Congress to

78

1 Ind. C1. Comm. h3

- 26 _

determine the amount and to fix the terms of payment

of compensation for the rights lost to plaintiffs. it

is clear that. in the absence of specific authorization. they may not avoid the release given in accordance
with the Act upon the ground that the payment was too
small. That would enable them to question the laws of
Congress in fields where, because of the relationship
referred to. they are supreme. The obligation_of

the United States to make good plaintiffs‘ loss is a moral
one calling for action by Congress in accordance with what
it shall determine to be right."

While the abeve_casc involved a release given by the
Klanath and Modeac Indians. the same principle as there applied would

govern cases like the one here considered.where. in order to obtain

.relief. it would be necessary to avoid the express provision of a treaty.

It seems quite plain that the petitioner has not proved a
claim which can be considered under clause (1).

In support of the contention that additional compensation
may be awarded under clause (1), the petitioner cites the cases. United
States V. Creek Nation. 295 U. S. #77. Shoshone V. United States. 299
U. S. 477. and United States v. Klamath. 304 U. s. 119.

The Creek case. supra. involved the taking by the Government
of some 5500 acres of Greek land without their consent and against their
will. and disposing of it to another tribe; in the Shoshone case. supra:
the Government. against the will of the Shoshone Indians. placed another
tribe on lands reserved for the exclusive use of the Shoshone Indians.
and, likewise. in Klanath case. supra, the Government appropriated a

large tract of land previously set aside for the Klanath and Moadoc

79

_,.,.,.._._.....— -a

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43 ‘
.... 27 ..

Indians. In none of.these cases was there an agreement or treaty for
the transfer of the Indian title or payment for the value of land taken;
on.the contrary. there was a clear expropriation of Indian lands under
the Government's power of eminent domain and. in these circumstances:
the Supreme Court held the Fifth Amendment applied. Obviously. those
cases have no application here. where there was a valid voluntary
cession for an agreed consideration.

Clause 2 of Section 2.

Clause (2) of Section 2 of the not provides for the
determination of —
"{2} all other claims in law or equity, includ—'

ing those sounding in tort, with respect to which the

claimant would have been entitled to sue in.a court

of the United States if the United States was subject

to suit; "

The argument of the petitioner. as to the applicability of this
clause to its claim; seems to be based on the notion that the Commission
may. under this clause; consider the treaty as a contract between private
parties and grant the same relief that it could in cases growing out of
ordinary contractual engagements. This contention overlooks the fact
that Indian treaties are the “sdprene law of the land" and that no
tribunal has power to go behind them and declare then.inoperative in any
respect any more than it can go behind an.Act of Congress or declare it
inoperative. (Fallows v. Blacksmith, 60 U. s. 356, Old Settlers case,

27 C. Cls. 1. 1&8 U. S. #26), except, of course, to the extent that
Congress may'subject the Governnent‘s dealings with the Indian tribes

to judicial review. (Klanath case. 296 U. S. 244).

80

1 Ind. c1. comm. 43 ‘ -28..

For the reasons and upon the authorities cited in connection
with the discussion of clause (1). above. we find nothing in the provisions of clause (2) giving this Commission jurisdiction to go behind
the provisions of the 1865 treaty and try de novo the question of the
good faith of the Government in making it or the adequacy of the con«

sideration agreed.upon.

Clause guy of Section 2.

Beviating from the order in which the clauses are set
forth in the Act, we shall now consider clause (4), which gives the

Commission power to determine —

"claims arising from the taking by the
United.States. whether as the result of a
treaty of cession or otherwise, of lands
owned.or occupied by the claimant without

the payment for such lands of compensation

agreed to by the claimant;"

The purpose of this clause is not clear when read in connection
with clauses (1) and (2) which seem to give claimants a cause of action
for lands taken.without the payment of compensation therefor. If the
lands were taken.under a ratified treaty of cession or under any other
arrangement by which the Government became obligated to pay, a claim
would arise under one or the other of clauses (1) and (2). and, if the
lands were taken under the guise of an unratified treaty or any other ex~
propriation, and without the payment of compensation, recovery could be

had under either clause (1) or (2). depending upon the facts. In both

situations there would be an obligation to compensate for the land taken;

81

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

-29-...

the first obligation.would be contractual, while the latter would be
a legal one. But. however that may be, it seems quite plain that a
claim can be based upon clause (4) only when there has been no payment for such lands of compensation agreed to by the claimant.

The undisputed facts are that the petitioner in the treaty of
1865 agreed te a consideration of $300,000 for the ceded land and that
the amount as paid in accordance with the terms of the treaty. So it

is evident that petitioner‘s claim has no standing under the provisions

of this clause.

Clause {5} of Section 2.

Clause (5) gives the Commission jurisdiction to

determine —

"claims based.upon fair and honorable
dealings that are not recognized by
any existing rule of law or equity."

This clause is nique as a ground upon which Indian claims
may he founded. Nb similar ground has been called to our attention.
nor does our research disclose any similar enactment, or any judicial
consideration of a similar law. although references were made to the
clause in the opinions filed in the case, United states v. Alcea Band
of Tillamoehs. et al.. 329 U. S. 40, decided by the Supreme Court on
November 25, l9h6. some three months after the passage 6f the Act creat_
13E the C0Enission. So in approaching the task of determining the

effect of clause (5). its application to the submitted proof, and its

relation to the other grounds; we are without judicial precedent to

guide us.

82

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

.-30.A.study of the legislative history of the Act convinces us that

Congress intended to pass an act that would permit the disposal of all
old Indian tribal and group claims. It recognized the limitations
of the former special jurisdictional acts, so it included in the-Act

of August l3. l946,.the grounds generally covered by those special

acts and added more, including clause (5). But. as we have stated above.

the.Act assumed no liability on the part of the Government. or of any

iground of liability. It said, in effect. that any Indian tribe or group

which has a claim which was in existence at the time of the passage

J-r_'\n-0
UV;

5'‘. a-I‘!'Ic't1"l nu‘-unvvc-\r\
wdu out \.o

perhaps more of the categories specified in the act. an adjudication thereof may be had. Shoshone case, 299 U. S. #76.
‘In construing the Act we may start with the premise that our
jurisdiction is not unlimited. This must be so because the Congress
specified the general character of claims which it authorized us to hear
and determine. Certainly we have no power to entertain a claim that does
not come within one or more of the categories or types of claims specified
in the.Act. nor can we so construe the grounds to extend to claims beyond
the letter of the consent of the Government to be sued. This principle

is very plainly stated in the case of Schillinger v. United states, 155

U. S. 163. in which the Suprer.1e.Court said:

83

3 I I _ 1 Ind. C1. Comm. &3

-31..

“The United States cannot be sued in their ’
courts without their consent. and in granting such
consent Congress has an absolute discretion to specify
the cases and contingencies in which the liability of
the Government is submitted to the courts for judicial
determinations Beyond the letter of_such consent, the
courts may not 509 no matter how beneficial they may
deem or in fact might be their possession of a larger
jurisdiction over the liabilities of the Government,"

With this rule in mind we shall examine clause (5),
Counsel for petitioner base their arguments an the assumption

that clause (5) must be applied to every claim, even though it might be
. . 3 7.11 E  ‘!‘«"":"‘."£- .

of such character as to be, essentially. a claim §mi$ew§?g w1thin.the

purview of one of the other categories. Their argument is summarised in

this statement, taken from their briefs:

"It is the position of claimant that classification 5 is a requisite to every claim presented before
this Commission. While in appropriate cases where only
one of the first four classifications may be applicable,
the Commission must consider classification 5 in each
instance, otherwise there would be no final determina- tion of any claim, because a claim which falls under
classification 1, for instance, could not possibly be
res judicata to a claim under classification 5.“

A.simple il1ustration.will show the absurdity of this contention.
Suppose, instead of making a treaty of cession with the Osages. the
Government had taken the 30 x 50 miles area from them, as it
could have done under its unquestioned plenary powers (as was done in
the Shoshone, Creek and Klamath cases mentioned above) and the Osages

submitted a claim for the value of the land taken. Is there any doubt

8h

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

....32...

but that the claim would arise under the Fifth.Amendment to the
Oonstitution - clause (l).— or under clause (2), as an implied contract to
pay the value of the property taken? United States V. North American
Trans & Trading Co.. 253 U. S. 330. and cases therein cited. construing
that part of 28 U.s.C.A. 250, which is similar to saidclause (2).

We think.not. Then suppose an award were made for the value of the land
expropriated. Counsel maintain such an award would not be final; that
to make it final_we would have to again consider our award and determine
whether it accords with fair and honorable dealings. or. perhaps they
mean that we must first make an award for the value of the land taken
and another for taking the lands in a manner which did not square with
lfairness and honor. To say the least, it is difficult to follow the’
reasoning of counsel for petitioner; but, in any event. we cannot ascribe
to Congress any such circuitous method of determining such claims.

Then again, if Congress had intended for clause (5) such an

‘unique place. it would not have specified the other four categories

of claims. Furthermore. the effect contended for ignores the fact that
the categories set forth in the act are treated as separate and distinct

kinds or types of claims. True. a claim might possibly be based upon

pmore than one category. but that is no argument for applying clause (5)

to claims that are. in substance, claims coming within the scope of some
other ground. Moreover. the language of the clause precludes the
application and purpose contended for by the petitioner. For a claim

to come within the purview of clause (5) it must be one "based upon

fair and honorable dealings." but it is not every claim_so based that

.85

1 Ind. C1. Comm. Q3

...33_.

we must consider. as counsel seen to think, but only those "that area
not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity." according to
Black's Dictionary the word "recognize" means: &To try; to examine in
order to determine the truth of a matter.“ So, if a claim. even
though it might be based upon fair and hgndrable dealings, is one
that is triable under an existing rule of law or equity the clause does
not apply. The case at bar, as we shall show, is one that comes squarely
under the provisions of clause (3), both by the pleadings and evidence,
and therefore. clause (5) has no application:
Another reason why the clause (5) cannot apply to the instant

case is that to grant relief it would be necessary to go behind the
express provisions of a treaty, or to disregard them. We find nothing

in this clause that permits us to go behind the solemn engagements

of the parties any more than under clauses (1) and (2). We believe our
reasoning in considering those clauses applies with equal force here.

Clause 3 of Section 2.

There remains for consideration clause (3) of Section 2, which
reads as follows:

"(3) claims which would result if the treaties:
contracts and agreements between the claimant and the
United States were revised on the ground of fraud, duress,
unconscionable consideration, mutual or unilateral mistake.
whether of law or fact, or any other ground cognizable by
a court of equity.“ (italics supplied.)

   

 

 

For the purpose of bringing their claimunder this clause
petitioner claims the 1865 treaty was obtained by fraud. duress. and

also. that the Indians misunderstood the provisions respecting the

86

‘I  indo Clo: Comm.  I ' . _ ._ ' I '_ I I . ' ' .' ._ It ., 

_ use of the “civilization fund". in that they believed it had been

‘created for their exclusive use._and not for the benefit of other
Indian tribes. Eh have already decided that question against the
contention of petitioner..so we need not elaborate further on that
feature of the caso..

' There remains the question whether the consideration $300,000
agreed to in.Artic1e 1 of the treaty of 1865 was unconscionable._ If
it was. the petitioner is entitled to an award.

i‘As we interpret the Act. it is only clause (3) that permits us to
go behind the provisions of a treaty and grant relief. and then only
by applying equitable principles. We do not belieye it was intended to

permit us to revise a treaty. for that would be delegating to the

s Comnission legislative powers. That Congress may by legislation repeal.

modify or disregard Indian treaties there can be no doubt. Lone Wblf y.
Hitchcock; 187 U; S. 553. and cases therein cited; But we find no

authority that says the Congress may delegate such powers. so it has
empowered the Commission to try and determine claims “which would result"

if the treaties “were revised" on the equitable grounds specified.

Congress has. in a.number of instances. authorized the submission of 1
Indian claims without regard to previous decisions. findings or settlements.'/

And by clause (3) it has authorized the Commission to go behind the

enpress stipulations of a treaty and determine the rights of the Indian

 

;_/ Delaware Tribe v. United States. 72 c. 91;-,,_ 483, id. 525, 71.» 0. (313.
368; Choctaw Eation V. United States. 19 C. Cls. 2&3, 119 U. S. 1:

United States V. Klanath and Moadoc Tribes v. United States. 30¢‘
U} S. 119.

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43

...‘3§ ..

parties which are given or protected by a treaty, but. as stated above.
such determination can only be made in accordance with applicable
principles of equity.

Preliminary to consideration of the question of the adequacy
of the consideration for the 865,936.31 acres of land ceded by article 1
of the Treaty of September 29, 1865, we must determine the meaning of the
term “unconscionable consideration", which is made a ground for relief
by clause (3). Congress has not defined the term. It is too well
settled to require more than the statement. that mere inadequacy of consideration is not of itself a distinct principle of equity that will

-8

warrant equity in assuming jurisdiction to grant relief. Story‘s Equity.

88'

Sections 245-6; Eyre v. Potter, 15 U. S. 42, lb L. Ed. 592; Klamath V. U. 800

 Us so “'2!  Lo Eda  9 Ame Jul‘.  Seco  P013-3 Eqa Jur.  Eda)

sec. 926;fWi1liston, Contracts; sec. 115. But in cases where there is a
gross disparity between the sale price and the actual value of a thing
courts of equity have assumed jurisdiction and, in so doing. have used
language in their opinions from which the meaning of “unconscionable
consideration“ may be gleaned.
lIf. "unconscionable consideration". as used in the clause, re»

quires us only to determine the value of the land at the time of the
cession, deduct the amount paid, plus cost of surveying and selling, and
make an award for the difference, a relatively simple problem would confront us. But the term implies no such unhampered determination. for it

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 43 .
-36..

is one used to designate a ground well established in equity jurisprudence
and, therefore. must be deemed to have been.used in the Act as generally
‘understood in equity proceedings. cf; Jordon v. Stevens; 51 Me. 78oe
Furthermore, had Cong1ess intended, in.using the term, to permit re—
covery on the basis of the difference between the value of the land at
"the date of sale and the amount paid. more commonly used and expressive
words would have been employed to show such an intention. certainly not
words recognized by courts of equity signifying something more than mere

inadequacy of considerations

The writers on the subject use various expressions to indicate

0

the measure of difference which must exist between.price and value to

1;, _. . _.

excite n» interest of use chancellor. story (Equity uurisprudence. leth

Edition, See. 355). in referring to the inadequacy that must be shown.

said:

"such.unconscionableness or such in~
adequacy should be made out as would (to use
an expressive phrase) shock the conscience
and amount in itself to decisive evidence of
fraud.”

Black, in his treatise on Rescission and Fraud (l9l6), puts it

this we :

“There must be such a checking in”
adequacy of consideration that the court may
presume fraud; or the inequality must ?e so
gross and palpable as to shock the conscience
and convince the judgment.“

In Eyre v. Potter, 14 U. S. 42: 14 L. Eda 592. a suit was
commenced to set aside conveyances of land made by_a widow on the ground

that the consideration was grossly inadequate. In disposing of the

89

1 Ind. C1. Comm. h3 p - — 37 —

case adversely to the widow the court stated the equity rule to be

as follows:
“Again. it is ruled. that inadequacy of

consideration is not of itself a distinct principle

of equity. The common law knows no such principle.

The consideration, be it more or less; supports the
contract. Common sense knows no such principle.

The value of a thing is what it will produce. and it
admits of no precise standard. One man; in the dis— 0
posal of his property may sell it for less than another
would. If courts of equity were to unravel all these
transactions. they would throw everything into confusion. and set afloat the contracts of mankind.

Such a consequence would of itself be sufficient to show
the injustice and impracticability of adopting the
doctrine. that more inadequacy of consideration should
form a distinct ground for relief. till. there may be
such an‘unconscionah1enesS or inadequacy in a hargain, as
to demonstrate some gross imposition or some undue

~ influence; and in.such cases courts of equity ought to

interfere. upon satisfactory ground of fraud; but then. such
unconscionableness or such inadequacy should be made out

as would. to use an expressive phrase. shock the conscience.
and amount in itself to conclusive and decisive evidence of
fraud. Vide Story‘s Equity sec. 235. 246, and 9 Ves. 2H6;
10 Id. 219: and other cases there cited."

The case of Graffazn v. Burgess. 117 U. s. 180. 29 L. Ed. 839.
was a suit for lands the defendant acquired at a judicial sale for a paltry
sum. In permitting complainant to redeem the lands from the sale the
court discussed the question of inadequacy of consideration. It said:

"From the cases here cited we may draw the
general conclusion that if the inadequacy of price
is so gross as to shock the conscience, or if in

' addition to gross inadequacy, the purchaser has

been quilty of any unfairness. or has taken any

undue advantage. or if the owner of the property,

or party interested in it. has been for any other
reason, misled or surprised, then the sale will he
regarded as fraudulent and void. or the party injured will he permitted to redeem the property sold.
Great inadequacy requires only slight circumstances of
unfairness in the conduct of the party benefited ?y
the sale to raise the presumption of fraud.”

#3§<$#$Bi4

90.

1 Ind- C1. Com. 43 91

_ 33 _

"Mr. Kerr, in his treatise on Fraud and Mistake,
says: 'Inadequacy of consideration, if it be of so
gross a nature as to amount in itself to conclusive and
decisive evidence of fraud, is a ground for canceling
the transaction.‘ Kerr, Fraud, Am. ed, 186. Chancellor
Desaussure, in the case of Butler v. Haskell, 4 Des.

651, 697, on the same subject says: ‘I consider the
result of the great body of the cases to be, that wherever the

court perceived that a sale of property has been made at
a grossly inadequate price, such as would shock a correct
mind, this inadequacy furnishes a strong and in general a

conclusive presumption, though there be no direct proof of
fraud, that an undue advantage had been taken of the ignorance,

the weakness or the distress and necessity of vendor; and
this imposes on the purchaser a necessity to remove this violent presumption

violent presumption by the clearest evidence of the fairness
of his conduct.'"

In referring to “unconscionable contracts" it is stated in
Elliott on Contracts. Volume 1, Sec. 159, that when there exists a
situation “where the inadequacy of the price is so great that the mind
revolts at it the court will lay hold on the slightest circumstances
of oppression or advantage to rescind the contract."

-‘in none of these cases has there been an attempt to fix a dividing
line between what the courts consider grossly inadequate consideration
for a thing and what is merely inadequate, for the obvious reason that
each case must be_determined in accordance with the particular facts
of the case under consideration. However, it is plain that for the
Commission to make an award here it would have to find from the
evidence that. as compared to the value of the land at the time of the
cession, the amount paid was so small as to shock the conscience and

convince the judgment of its inadequacy,

1 lnd. c1. Comm. 43
...’39 ..

we again pause to observe that it seems that gross inadequacy
of consideration must be accompanied by fraud in some form to justify

relief in equity, in other words: uncon

U)

cionable consideration is an

incident or circumstance of fraud. lhis seems to be the effect of

Klamath v. United States 296 U. 5. 254, wherein it wag sought to avoid

a release g;ven by an Indian tribe in settlement of a claim against

the Government on the ground that tno amount paid, for which the

release was given; was inadequate. The court agreed that the considera—

tion was "grossly inadequate‘, but it said:

"Save to the extent that Congress may authorize,
the Government's dealings Wibh Indian tribes are not
subject to judicial review; Even if judicially

cognizable. as would be a like contention in ordinary
litigation between individuals: plaintiffs’ insistence
that inadequacy of consideration invalidates the release
could not here be sustained. That is so because the
findings fail to show that any person acting for the
United States deceived or misled plaintiffs as to the
value of the land or, indeed, had knowledge of any fact
bearing upon its value that was not well known by
plaintiffs when they made the settlement and gave the
release. Mere inadequacy of consideration is not

enough.“
‘And see Pom. Eq. Jur. (14th Ed.). sec. 927. where it is said: "fraud
and not inadequacy of price is the true and only ca se for the inter~
position of equity and the granting of relief.” See also story's
Eq. Jur. (14th 31.). sec. 354.

Then there is the rule laid down in Eyre v. Potter. 15 U. S. 42 and
Graffam v. Burgess, 117 U. S. 180, to the effect that inadequacy of

consideration may be so gross as to amount in itself to conclusive

92

t- _ 3.
.-1 Ind. c1. t1omm._43

. .': .. ‘ ‘ .

-a-40 evidence of fraud. These cases are not in conflict with the rule in

the K1amath_case. supra, because they amount perhaps; to nothing more‘

than a rule of evidence. But, however that may he. the primary question

in cases based upon inadequacy of consideration is whether the consideration was grossly inadequate? and it if is determined that it was not, the
question of fraud becomes of no importaneea Whether the statute (clause 3),
in making "unconscionable consideration" an equitable ground for recovery.
changes the rule discussed above is not necessary to determine, as we view

this case.

Now, let us consider the facts relating to value of the cession.
The evidence is plain. and not seriously disputed. The evidence submitted
by the petitioner shows that the ceded lands Comprised a large area of
fifteen hundred square miles. or 865,93043l acres. It was opened for
‘settlement in the year 1868, during which year only 2l.902s60 acres
‘were sold. in the year 1869 there were U6,029.8 acres sold, in the year
1876 the sales amounted to lh5,687.1l acres. and in the year 1871. there
were sales amountingto lhG.95h.O8 acres} During the four year period
.from 1872 ~ 1875 only 3hd7,68 acres were sold, and in the year l876‘
there were no sales.t So. during the first nine calendar years after
the sales started, less than half or only 358,Chl.é7 acres of the ceded
lands were disposed of, and at an average cash price of about $1.25 per
acre. .

On.August 11, 1876, apparently for the purpose of stimulating

sales. Congress passed an.Act (l9 Stat. 12?) allowing purchasers to buy

$3

b l Ind. C1. Comm. 430

9:.
...b,1..'

at $1.25 per acre and pay one—fourth at the time of entry and spread the
balance over a period of three years. so during the next four fiscal

years. 1877-80, h5b,652.h8 acres were sold. but the sale of the romainp
ing_part of the cession took about twenty more years.

According to petitioner's evidence the Government realxsed from

the sale the gross sum of $l,l0l;303.78, out of which.it placed

$300,000 to the credit of petitioner. paid the expense of the survey amounting to $20,372.20. and paid $776,931.58 into the "Civilization Fund“.

The record does not disclose the cost of administering the cession during the first sixteen years the Government was disposing of the land."
except $3177.22 for "expense of sales" paid out of the "Civilization Fund“,
but the expense to the Government in administering the cession and handling
the thousands of sales must have been enormous. In this connection

the remarks of the Court of Claims in the Fort Berthold case. 71 Ct. 019.

-u.

308: are pertinent:

"When these large tracts were acquired it is
apparent that enormous expense is involved in the :,
future segregation of the tracts into marketable
‘units and their sale upon installment paymentsa
pThe Government's overhead in the maintenance of a
department to accomplish their disposition and the
incidental expense accompanying the transaction undisputably establishes that the $1.25 per acre was not all
profit, if, in fact, profit accrued at alls The Indians
could nht have disposed of the lands in the way and
manner the Government did, and while the homestead laws
valued the lands at $1.25 per acre. the return to the
Government was_not a net but a gross price."

1' Incl. _c1-fcoxiun. 43,:
- U2 _

‘The above facts, which are the only ones which we deem

aoceptable on the question of value, support the position that the

p $300:000 paid.by the Government for the ceded lands was not grossly

inadequate, in truth, the slow sales during the first nine years following the opening of the area for entry indicates no great demand for the

land. The first years of that period, 1868, and 1869, during which it

"would be reasonable to expect the greatest demand, the sales_were

exceedingly light, so it might well be said that the purchase price was

‘not inadequate at the time of the cession in September, 1865, and in c

any View of the evidence the pnrchase price of $300,000 was not so palpably

low as to shock the conscience and convince the judgment of its unu

conscionableness.

We are of the opinion, therefore, that petitioner's petition
must to dismissed. It is so ordered. 0 - ' p ' L

Commissioner Holt concurs. 0 '_

9.5 .

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 43 is C It i ~ '. ° l. 96x"

Chief Commissioner Witt. dissenting:A

I

I am'unab1e to agree with my colleagues in their construction of the
‘law applicable to the facts of this case. or as to the ultimate facts determinative of the right or not of the petitioner to recover. I must.g
therefore. respectfully dissent for reasons as hereinafter set out. ‘

The majority opinion holds that if petitioner has any cause of action
it is under clause (3) of Sec. 2 of Public Law 726 (the act creating the
Indian Claims Commission) (60 Stat. IOH9; 25 USC 70); but that the facts
do not create a liability under that clause and that liahility cannot be
predicated‘upon clause (5) of said Sec;'2 of the act. I am of the opinion
that the petitioner has estahlished a cause of action under clause (3).

However. I am further of the opinion that if it should be determined that

petitioner has asserted but has not established a claim under clause (3).

.claimant is not to be precluded from relying on clause (3) as a basis for

recovery: and I am of the opinion thatthe petitioner has established a
cause of action under the latter clause. as well as nder the former." I.
think the liability of the United States to any petitioner should be determined by the application of any one or moreof the five clauses of jurisdiction set out in Sec. 2 to the facts of the particular case,
Construction of Section 2 of
the Indian Claims Commission Ant

.At the outset of such consideration. it is recognized that the jurisf °
dictional sections are subject to strict construction and that the plain
language of the jurisdictional provisions cannot be enlarged: however; it

is submitted that the history of the legislation and the intent of Congress

should be taken.into consideration in determining the meaning of any 1an53&5°

9?

on
t

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43 i 7 . ~in the act. when the meaning of such language is considered doubtful or
subject to differing constructions.

l think that clause (5) requires the Commission to apply the yard»
stick (if it may be so called) of “fair and honorable dealings? to the
subject matter of any suit, although the facts of the claim may also nake
applicable the provisions of other clauses of the section. The provisions
of clause (5) authorizing the consideration of claims based.upon fair and
honorable dealings "that are not recognized by any existing rule of law
or equity" seem to me to plainly mean that claims which may properly be
asserted under the recognized rules of law or equity but upon which a re—
covery is held not to be allowable under said rules. max yet form the basis
of a claim to be judged according to fair and honorable dealings.

It seems to me that the law itself confirms this construction of
clause (5) when later. in Sec. ll, it is provided that any suit pending
in the Court of Claims may have applied to it by said court the yardstick
of fair and honorable dealings arising out of the subject matter thereof.
I know of no other jurisdictional act authorizing that court to consider
the matter of fair and honorable dealings in determining the merits of any
claim. Therefore. the provision in Sec. ll could have no application ex_
cept to suits that were then pending for deCisiCn‘up0n rules of law or
eqpity. The’provision. therefore. of Sec. ll could have no purpose except
to reauire that the Court of Claims also consider the claim upon the basis

of fair and honorable dealings.

It would also seem that the Supreme Court and the Court of Claims have

already decided that any petitioner in any kind of an Indian suit now pending

1 lnd. C1. Comm. 43 o ;.3 4

has the right, since the passage of the Indian Claims Commission act. to
have the subject matter of that suit subjected to the fair and honorable
dealings clause of the Indian Claims Commission act. In the case of the
United States of America. Petitioners vs. Alcea Band of Qillamooks. et al..

(329 U.S.#O) Mr. Justice Black, in concurring with the majority opinion

said the court was giving a more liberal interpretation of Indian rights

“ than'previouslya and used this significant language:

“This (Indian Claims) Commission is given power to make

awards subject to review by the Court of Claims« with and
‘without regard to previous rules of law or equity courts:

The Commission is even given a blanket power to make awards
upon finding, for example, that the land of Indians was taken
by the Government in a way that did not comport with ‘lair
and honorable dealingso‘ Since whatever our action here,

these Indians could, I assume. pursue their claims under this
broad recent legislation * * * *." _ “.

Thereafter. in the case of the Sioux Tribe of Indians vs. The United

States: on December 9. l9#6, the Supreme Court (329 U;S. 68%) vacated a previous order denying certiorari and granted the petition. using the following
language:
"The judgment is vacated and the case is remanded to the I
Court of Claims in order to enable that court to determine
whether the Act of August 13. 19b6, gives rise to any claims

which petitioners may assert to affect the judgment theretofore entered in this cause. as to which this Court means to _
intimate no opinion."

.And the Court of Claims. upon a reconsideration of the case, did not hold
that having considered the claim under a jurisdictional act requiring theiapplication of existing rules of law and equity, it was precluded from
applying principles involved in fair and honorable dealings. On the con»
trary. that court reconsidered the facts. applied the principles of fair

and honorable dealings. and in affirming the previously rendered judgment

9o 

1 1nd..ci.jconn. 43 ' .';   L -}+- A -   J, a p.7 .3" _ 99used this language:

"On the record we find no substantial support for the view
that fair and honorable dealing, within the meaning of that
term as used in sections 2 and 11 of the_Act of August 13. 1945:
requires or justifies the conclusion that these expenditures
should be changed to the Government rather than to the Plaintiff."

And elsewhere in the Opinion:

"we think Congrest was dealing fairly and honorably with the
- plaintiff tribe * * * *.” And again. in conclusion. the opinion says:
_ "For the reasons hereinbefore stated, we hold that the

Act of August 13, ISQ6, does not give rise to any claim

which plaintiff is entitled to assert to affect the findings:

judgment and opinion heretofore entered February 4, l946."

If I am mistaken in thinking that the language of the act is plain and
unambiguous. and supports the construction I have given it; and if I am mis—
taken in thinking that the Supreme Court and Court of Claims have already
construed the act in keeping with my viewpoint, then I submit in support
of_my viewpoint the intention of Congress as disclosed by the legislative

_history of the act. I will not burden the body of this opinion with this

history. but will attach the same and denominate same Appendix.

As to the facts of the case

My principal disagreement with the findings of fact as made in the
majority opinion is with finding E0. 3 to the effect-that the terms of the
treaty of September 29. 1865 were fully explained to the Osages in council
at Fort Smith. Arkansas and Canville Trading Post in Kansas. and that they
were understood by the Indian representatives who executed the treaty; and
with finding no. 8, that the value of the land coded by the 1865 treaty,

did not exceed the sum of $300,000 at the time the treaty was concluded:

1 Ind. c1. cosm. 43‘ ‘ ‘ - ' r   I I I‘ _i 10o

~ -1-5-~ _  r ‘'
and with finding No. é. that the terms of the treaty of September 29. 1865,
were fully explained to and understood by the Indian representatives of the
Osage Nation of Indians who executed the same at the time they signed it.

I disagree with the finding that the Indians understood the treaty beu
cause I do not think there is a scintilla of evidence in the record other
than the statement in the treaty itself confirnatory of such finding. On the contrary. the record is replete with evidence definitely showing that
they did not understand the provision in that treaty which provided that
the proceeds of the sale of the lands in question should be placed in a
"civilization fund" for the benefit of Indians generally. and not for the
exclusive benefit of the Osages who were the then owners and grantors of
said land.

Chiefs signing the treaty were all full blood. blanket Indians. Keno
of them understood or could read. write or speak, the English language. and‘
all affixed their signatures by mark. The sane is true of all the otherl
Indians who signed the.treaty. with the possible exception of one. The
treaty negotiations were conducted at Fort Smith. Arkansas with the southern
Osages. through an interpreter by the name of L. P. Chouteau. a halfabreed
Osage. and with the northern Osage Indians at Canville Trading Post. Kansas:
through an interpreter. Alexander Beyett. also a halfubreed Osage. The competence of these interpreters to understand and to translate the "civilization fund” provision into the Osage language and make it clear to the Indians
is'not shown. ‘

Although the Commissioners were at Fort Smith. Arkansas several days.

the time given to the consideration of this treaty is not disclosed. Ito

is shown that many tribes were called to this meeting and there was negotiu

'1 Ind. c1. Comm. ¢§ 1. ' '. .6 ‘
i  '  ~ '.. = , " " 101

ated what was called a treaty of Amity which was signed by many of the tribes.
(II Kapp. pg ld50~lO5l) and as to which the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
reoorted that some of them held out for several days.

Commissioner Cooley and Mr. Irwin. Secretary of the Council at Fort
Smith, where Mr. Cooley says this treaty was agreed upon. each kept deu
tailed records of what was said and done by the various members of the Commission and by various members of the several Indian tribes who engaged in
negotiation of the treaty of amity. These records tell of the arrival of
the rebel bands and of the signing of the amity treaty by the loyal Osages
and by the rebel bands of Osages. They make no mention of any discussion
of any matter connected with the consideration of the Osage treaty of 1863
or the execution of the treaty of 1865 involved herein; or of any discussion

as to the price to be paid. location or acreage affected. or as to the dis—

liposition of the proceeds of sales of lands sold or coded in trust.

It is significant that the Indians who signed at Fort Smith were the

-chiefs and some of the members of Clermont‘s and Black Dogls bands of Great

Osages. The council at Canville was with the Little Osage tribe and with
two bands of the Great Osages who had renained loyal to the United States.
-This council at Canville was three hours duration} Several of the Indians
who signed at Canvillo are not shown to have signed the treaty of amity at
Fort Smith, and there is nothing to show that they were at Fort Smith. It
is to be noted that the chiefs and headmen of the Clernont and Black Dog

bahds who signed at Fort Smith state that they are signing a treaty "bade

by our brothers. the Osages“. when as a matter of fact Clermont and Black

Dog and their associates signing at Fort Smith must have signed before their

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 43 - y _ 102
. _. 7 ..  

\brothers signed at Canville. several days thereafter. The chiefs of their
brothers. White Hair. Beaver and Little Bear, chiefs of the Osage Nation
and the Little Osagesa appear to have signed at Canville and not at Fort

Smith. and not until after Clernont and Black Dog had signed; although

_shortly before, or at the time of the trashing u of this neetin" at.
Fort Smith; and on September 20, 1865. Commissioner Cooley. who was there
present gave to Elijah Sells. Superintendent of Indian Affairs. who was
there present. a letter in which he said:

“You will repair from this place to the Council Grounds
of the Osage Indians for the purpose of presenting a treaty

(of 1863) as amended by the Senate of the Us 8.: for their
ratification * * * * ." '

honorable Elijah Sells thereafter advised Commissioner Cooley by wire as

'W£rrived at Osage Council grounds Thursday night ~ twenty
eighth went into council next day at twelve o‘clock & in three

hours had the treaty signed with no material changes.“

The amendments made hy the Senate to the 1863 treaty. however, do not
include any provision for a "civilization fund." The Osage Indians were,
at the time. not only ignorant and illiterate, as heretofore stated, but
greatly impoverished Eecause annuities from the Government under earlier
treaties had ceased. The time was immediately following the cessation of
the Civil far, in which some of the Osages had participated and by reason
of which friction had developed between factions of the tribe,

It is significant to me that contrary to the usual practice there was

no report of the discussions of the Commissioners or of the Indians at the

time of the execution of the 1865 treaty by the Indians, filed with the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43   ’ 103
.. 8 ._ ’

treaty for the consideration of the Senate; nor was there in the submission
of the signed treaty by Superintendent Sells to Commissioner Cooley. or by
Commissioner Cooley to the President of the United States for submission

to the Senate. any mention made by any person of the "civilization fund"

provision nor of the radical change as to disposition of the nroceeds of
the sale of lands made in the treaty.

Reference might also be made to the testimony of Frances LaFlesche
(EX- 3- R. 104). to the effect that he was acquainted with the principal
men of the Osage tribe since 1881 and that he could not conceive of Indians
being able to understand this treaty, or being willing to agree to it if
.they did. "They (the Osages) have always maintained that this treaty was
solely for the benefit of the dsage people." This witness identified
among his acquaintances Black Dog and Clermont. who signed the treaty. He
testified that they told him that they understood the “civilization fund"
was for the benefit of the Osages (R. 120). LaFlesche was in the employe
of the Government at the time of his testimony and had been so for many
years. Another witness. by the name of Palmer, testified that he knew_
Osages who had had a part in the 1865 treaty and who were living in 1876
and all testified that the interpreter had told them that the money was to
come to the Osages for their use and benefit. As previously stated, there
is not a scintilla of evidence in the record other than the treaty itself
in support of the contention tha the Indians who signed the treaty underStood it.

It is in evidence that in the negotiations of the so—called Drum Creek

treaty in 1868 (which treaty, for other reasons than the matter of the

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43 9

disposition of the tract involved herein, was not ratified by the Senate
of the United States) Coniiasioner Taylor, one of the Commissioners re—
presenting the Government, stated to the Fndians:
“If the treaties heretofore made were bad your Greati
Father sees it; and if made wrong? as 1 telieve it was in '
le£§, part of the usin-ss of this Council is to make it
right * * *¢ Ii veu uneerstand the prrpeeei treaty, we
propose to take this money back and put it into the Osage
school fund."
The treaty there and then negotiated contained a provision that the pro—

ceeds of the sale of the Osage lands involved in this claim should go to

the tribes compri

(G)

ing the Osage Nation. and not to a "civilization fund"
for the education and civilization of Indians generally.

‘The Indians must have been complaining about this 1855 treaty at the
tine of the negotiation of the 1868 treaty or Commissioner Taylor would
not have made the statement about the matter that he did, and would not
have provided in the treaty then being negotiated for a correction.

It was not until the early '70s that any payments from the sale of
the land involved developed. and by letter dated August 20, 1877. Agent

Cyrus Beede reported to the Government as follows:

"Dissatisfaction exists among the Osages on account of
a provision in their treaty with the Government, made in
1865. wherein it was provided that certain proceeds of the
sale of a part of their reservation to applied to the civilization of indian tribes throughout the United States without"
distinction. Upon careful inquiry I find no neuter of the
tribe who claims to have understood the interpretation as
given in the treaty; all claim to have accepted this provision
to apply exclusively to beneficial purposes for the Osages.
and my knowledge of the nature, character. and wants of
Indians; especially the Osages, their extreme poverty at the
time. and ahselute need of all their available means for their
own support, leads no to conclude that they were overreached;
that they did not ' "
aggregating many thousand dollars. to the support of other
wards of th. r “

‘V q t C . nu -no‘ . 4- -. pg . ‘--. + .._ ,_‘  F Q ‘anoersto_:inaly nan, .n1s larpe contrirution.
14

104

1 Ind. c1, Comm. 43 ’ — 10 — 105

No treaty with any tribe of Indians. at any time in the history of
the United States. has been found wherein the United States has applied
the proceeds of sale of lands of one tribe to the benefit of others.

Among the treaties made near the time of the treaty involved. all of which
provided for the proceeds of the sale of lands ceded after deducting the

costs of surveying and sale. are the following:

with the Winnebago - 1859 (11 Kappler. 790)
“ " Chippewa ~ 1859 ( " " 792)
" " Sauk & Foxes - 1859 ( " " 796)
" “ Kansa Tribe — 1859 ( " " 800)
" " Delawares — 1860 ( " v 803)
" " Sauk & Foxes — 1861 ( " N 811)
" " Potawatoni — 1861 ( " " 824)
" “ Kickapoo « 1862 ( " " 835)
“ “ Cherokee ~ 1866 ( " " 947)
" " Iowas — 1854 ( " “ 528)
" 8 Kaskaskia _ 1854 ( N u 636)
" 5 'Mianis 9 1855 ( " " 631)

The record contains evidence of continuing complaints because of the
provision in the treaty that the proceeds of these lands were to go to
other tribes and not to the Osages. and with efforts to correct the matter.
Reference is made to petitioner's Exhibits ll, 12. 13. 18, 15, 16 and 17.
dealing with repeated efforts before Congress. Bills providing for payment
to the Osages of the proceeds of the sale of their lands in excess of $300,000
and cost of gurveying and sale have been introduced in Congress on several.
occasions. In several instances these bills have passed one House of the
Congress but failed to reach consideration in the other. Every committee
of Congress. both House and Senate. considering the facts. concluded that
the Indians had not been treated fairly and approved appropriations in satis~
faction of their losses. or of bills giving the Court of Claims jurisdiction

to hear the claim. No one single instance is shown of committee or of House

1 Ind. Cl; Comm. 43 i?“ . . ' . L y " 'i , _ —_ r'106,i

or Senate action adverse to a recognition of the claim of petitioner as being

meritorious. .g

onIinally a.bil1 was passed by both Houses. and became law. authorizing
the Court of Claims to consider petitioner's claim.’ The Court of Claims
found, upon substantially the same evidence as has been introduced in this
case (save and except the unratified treaty of l863) that “They (the psage
Indians) would not knowingly have agreed to the application of any of their ‘
funds to the benefit of such.hostile tribes or of any tribe other than their
own." It found. however; that under the restriction of the jurisdictional L
act under which it was considering the case. it could not go behind the.
unambiguous language of the treaty and. therefore, was required to disnissr
the case (66 Ct. 013. pp.'6!+., 72)._ "

It is shown that the Osage language had no word eouivalent to hcivi1ization"§—no word eqivalent to "fund". and it is in evidence that by the

use of the word "Indian" they would ordinarily think that their own tribe

was meant. and that to refer to other Indians it would be necessary to call

the names of the other tribes. !' -' -‘ ',

The rule of construction laid down for Indian treaties is that good
faith demands that construction be given which was understood by an unlettered and dependent people. It is said that "the language used in treaties
with the Indians should never be construed to their prejudice“ and that "how
the words of the treaties were understood by this unlettered.people. rather
than their critical meaning. should form the rule of construction.6 ‘(6 i

Peters 582; 8 L. Ed. 508——a1so Jones vs. Meehan, 175 U.S. #9.)

This language is used by the courts when the wording of a treaty is

ilrnd-c1.r'-comm..4s  * - . :-——1.2- C I ‘  .107

lanbiguous. and does not under the rules of lan or equity warrant an interpretation of a treaty absolutely contrary to its plain language: and for
that reason the Court of Claims had to deny the right of the petitioner
(The Osage Tribe vs. U.S.. 66 Ct. Cls. p. 64), because that court's rights
Fdo not extend to reforming, amending or making over a treaty; and where.
as in this case, its language is unambiguous, however much the facts may
appeal to the ethical sense of the court. it has no option but to enforce

the treaty as it finds it." This Commission is authorized to $50 behind"

the language of a treaty and consider "claims which would result" if a

.treaty "were revised on the ground of * * ? mutual or unilateral mistake.

either of law or fact." Upon going behind the plain language of the treaty
here involved and in the determination of whether or not its execution was
due to a mutual or unilateral mistake, it seems to me that all the evidence
to which I have referred. and much more in the record. when viewed in the
light of the respective situations existing as between the United States
and the ignorant and illiterate Indians and the yery high degree of fiduciary duty owed by the-Government to the Indians compels the conclusion

that the treaty was not fully or truthfully explained to the Indians and

that they did not understand it.

It is argued that because the Indians. in 1863 treaty, had agreed to.

sell this land for $300.000. and as they were getting that much for it under

the terms of the 1865 treaty, they had no concern with and were not interested

in any proceeds over and above that amount that the Government might get from

its resale. I cannot agree to this contention, because I can well believe.

in the light of the evidence, that the Indians might have been willing to

I1 Ind. ci. Comm. 43  1o3

. ‘.13 u
give the excess direct to the Government. but he unwilling to give it to
other Indians. _

It is also in evidence that at the time of the signing oi the treaty
the Osages were hostile to certain other tribes. among them the Pawneer
Cheyenne and Cherokees. i I

Regardless. however, of any attitude which the Indians may have had

toward the treaty proposed in 1863, it seems clear from the evidence in the

irecord that they did not understand the "civilization fund" provision of

the 1865 treaty, which is the instrument and the provisions of which;‘upon
which this claim is based, and that that clause did not reflect the intention

or the understanding of the Indians of their agreement with the United States;

As to adequacy of the consideration
In the majority opinion my colleagues argue that the purchase price

of $300,000 was not inadequate at the time of the cession in September. 1865.
or under any view of the evidence so palpably low as to shock the conscience
and make the consideration unconscionable. _In reaching this conclusion they
suggest that "the cost of administering the cession during the first sixteen
years the Government was disposing of the land" should be given consideration.
It appears that according to the custom prevailing that in these lend transactions eith Indians. as disclosed by treaties. the only deductions made

from the proceeds of sales before crediting the balance to the tribes conveying have been the cost of surveying and of selling. as contended for in
the instant case. The costs of administration have been generally assumed

by the Government.

5
t . ;

It is in evidence that the acreage involved was fine land. and pr05&b13

1 Ind. c1. .Comm. 43 “ ‘ -- 1‘+ -     ~ 1099

better than average of Kansas land; that it was better than most of the
so called trust lands which the treaty provided should not be sold for
less than $1.25 per acre.

The Commissioner of Indian Affairs. in his annual report for 1866;
referred to the lands of the Indian reservations in Kansas as being the
best land in the state. The United States, by treaty with the Delawares
of July 2. 1861. paid that tribe $1.25 an acre for its land. and by another
treaty in 1866, $2.50 per acre; by treaty with the Seneca, Shawnee and Quapaw
September 23. 186?, $1.00 per acre, together with other valuable considera~
tions; by treaty with Choctaw and Chickasaws April 28; 1868, $1.00 per acre;
and existing laws required public lands to be sold at no less than $1.25
per acre. However. it would seem that the value of the land at the time
of the taking, is not an issue because the defendant Government. in its
request for findings of fact and brief. page 51, says:

"There is little. if any. occasion for lengthy discussion

as to the value of the land ceded. There is no evidence that

the land did not sell for what it was worth, and hence it would

seem. without argument, that that sum was its value. It has

been agreed that the net proceeds deposited to the ‘civilization

fund‘ amount to $776,931.58. To this amount there should be

added the expenses of the sale, amounting to $3al5l.53s and the

$300,000 advanced to the Osages. making a total of $1,080,083.11.

Since it has also been agreed that there were 865,930.31 acres

of land ceded, it is merely a mathematical calculation to

determine that the old sold for $1.257} per acre."
After reimbursing the United States for the $300,000 advanced. together with
the cost of surveying and selling the land it was agreed that there was a
balance Of $7?6.742.03 spent for the benefit of other Indians (see R. 465—~
Defendant's request for Findings of Fact and Brief, page 15).

In view of the agreements made it would seem that there is no dispute

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43 _     110
.  '

as to the value of the land, nor as to the amount of the proceeds from its

sale over and above the proper deductions.

Conclusion

Believing as I do that the great preponderance. if not all the evidence
to_which any weight should be given. shows that the Indians did not underu
stand that the treaty in question provided that the proceeds from the sale
of lands conveyed over and above deductions authorized should go to the
benefit of Indians other than themselves. but, on the contrary. believed
the treatv provided for such excess to be used for their benefit. I an of
the opinion that petitioner has a meritorious claim based on the treaty if
it were revised on the ground of mutual or unilateral mistake. ’(As authorized
by clause (3) of Sec. 2. Claims Comm. Act.) I think. therefore, petitioner
is entitled to a judgment for $775.742.O3.

II think that the United States owes a very high degree of fiduciary
duty to Indian tribes (Report No. 2693. p. 6. House. 79th Congress. 2d
Session); and that (quoting):

"The courts of the United States. without a single exception.
have approached the adjudication of Indian'rights arising under
Indian treaties with the fundamental principle of law in view.
that the Indian tribe, unlettered and subordinated to a superior
power, were entitled to have all doubts_resolved in its favor.
and that the parties to the treaty were not in all respects
upon an equal footing. What the representatives of the Indian
tribe understood with regard to their rights was a vital factor
in determining the scope and effect of treaties. The Indians
looked. as long ago said, ‘to our Government for protection‘;

* * * * No court has ever held that the Indian tribes, parties
to treaties with the United States. were in all respects ggi
juris. or to be treated as such. * * * * The competency of
the parties to fullv comprehend their rights is an important
factor in characterizing conduct."

(Blackfeet. et al. vs. U.s.. 81 Ct. Cls. 101. 125» 125)

I therefore an of the opinion that the petitioner has a meritorious
claim based.upon fair and honorable dealings (as authorized hy clause (5):
Sec. 2. Comm. Act). and that by reason thereof (regardless of whether it
has a.clain based on the treaty if revised) is entitled to a judgment in
the amount of $776,7h2.03; being the amount the land was worth in excess
of what the Indians received for it.

I do not think the petitioner has a claim based upon a state of facts

that entitles it to interest.

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 43 ' g 112
IAPPENQLE ’ ‘

 

Qgrisdictig_ of the Indian Claims Commission. as;g§ggidgd_by H13. 4422 (which

1|-ntiuuu-I---n—-I-11-.--—-nu —-9-1.4-.4-pan-——-a-u.-u—'..-u—-q.----1.-1.-u-—|p-Z: -~—-—-t—-—Iio-—b-In--|m-&--In—bu—-—---—-n--n—n-—w—-——-1became Eublig_L§w Z26 creating_the Indian Claims Commission) as it firsggpassed

 

 

._...1..-_..--u——-.5 —.u-n—u-——n-———-—----—--1-my-q-——u—1-:1-nu--II1-nu-————-.ins.§enss_ssdsnsninis_iQs_§sneis_£2r_sensissreiisnn

 

"Jurisdiction"

“Sec. 2. The Commission shall bear and determine all claims of
every nature whatsoever against the United States on behalf of any
Indian tribe. band. or other identifiable group of American Indians
residing within the territorial limits of the United States or Alaska.
Such claims shall include. but shall not be confined to. (1) claims
arising under the Constitution. laws. treaties of the United States
and Executive orders of the President; (2) claims whether sounding
in contract or tort or otherwise. with respect to which the claimant
would have been entitled to redress in a court of the United States
if the United States were subject to suit; (3) claims which would
result if the treaties. contracts. and agreements between the claim—
ant and the United States were revised on the ground of fraud.
duress. unconscionable consideration. mutual or unilateral mistake.
whether of law or fact. or any other ground cognizable by a court
of equity; (4) claims on account of any breach of duty committed to
the injury of the claimant by any officer or agent of the United
States while acting within the apparent scope of his authority:

(5) claims arising from the taking by the United States. whether
as the result of a treaty of cession or otherwise. of lands owned
or occupied by the claimant without the payment for such lands of
compensation agreed to by the claimant; and (6) claims of whatever
nature which would arise on a basis of fair and honorable dealings.
even though not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity.
No claim accruing after the date of the approval of this Act shall
be considered by the Commission.

“No claim shall be excluded from consideration on the ground
that it has become barred by law or any rule of law or equity. or
that it is barred by any statute of limitations or by laches, but
no claim shall be considered by the Commission, where a final determination.upon an issue of law or fact involved has been made on the
merits of such issue by any court of the United States in a proceeding with respect to such claim.

"The Commission. in determining whether a claimant is entitled
to relief on legal grounds. shall apply with respect to the United
States the same principles of law as would be applied to an ordinary
fiduciary. In determining the quantum of relief the Commission shall
make appropriate deductions for all payments made by the United
states on.the claim, and for all other offsets. counterclaims. and

eetion 1&5 of the Judicial Code (36 Stat. 1136; 28

L
) '-n 'aT'r".'.'3'Hr:"-."~..-'3 ’Ip?'1:'*.I-,_ """'rn paw-W‘ cu-u-°~  as
9 and -I14--‘-~uv‘-A-Q “Ad-4 \._.- U-'-C4 \.-'\..L-.1-33.1. .;.-:.LOIl w 4.--on-.53 ‘L3

U
C1aims'nder
(:3

1' 1''‘ I‘
Joulvvos S

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43 -— 2 - 113

that the claimant is entitled to relief, in whole or in parts solely
on the grounds specified in clause (6) of the first paragraph of this
sections it shall inquire into all expenditures or grants of money or
irproperty. including gratuities. made by the United States for thc

benefit of the claimant. and shall make such deductions on account
qthereof. in addition to the deductions required by the preceding
Sentence. as it finds the entire course of dealings and accounts between the United States and the claimant in good conscience warrants.
In making such finding the Commission shall take into account the
economic and social conditions of the Indians involved. the extent

to which they are possessed of resources adequate to permit‘them to
become self—supporting at a standard of living comparable to that enjoyed by the citizens of the United States generally. and their ability
to support necessary public services." c (79th Cong.. lst Sass.» H.Ra 4497)

~l‘3Ii§§_i.<'£§.i£3.€1__Q‘§__§l1.<i._I.&‘3.L.i.e~.I}._C1ai1DS Coemissiaunaanrovided ‘W H3» L” as the
same passed the Senate the first time. I

 

"Jurisdiction"

9 w

"Sec. 2. The Commission shall hear and determine the following
claims against the United States on behalf of any Indian tribe, band,
or other identifiable group of American Indians residing within the
territorial limits of the United States or Alaska, (1) claims in law
or equity arising under the Constitution, laws, treaties of the United
States: and Executive orders of the President;

W(2) all other claims in law or equity, including those sounding
in tort, with respect to which the claimant would have been entitled
to sue in a court of the United States if the United States was subject to suit; and (3) claims based upon fair and honorable dealings
that are not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity. No
claim accruing after the date of the approval of this Act shall be
considered by the Commission.

WAll claims hereunder may be heard and determined by the Commission notwithstanding any statute of limitations or laches, but
all other defenses shall be available to the United States.

"Whenever the Commission shall determine that a claimant-is
entitled to relief it snall inquire into and consider all counter—
claims and set~3ffs and demands that would be allowable in a suit
brought in the Court of Claims under section 145 cf the Judicial
C0d€ (35 Stat. 1135: 28 U.S.C. 250); as amended; as well as all
money or property given.to or funds expended gratuitously for the
benefit of the claimant.” '

I run In , " 1. r"g7yth Cong. 2d Sees.» h.R. 4&9/. Calendar
No. 1751, Report no. 1'?15.)

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43   3 114

With reference to the meaning of the provisions of section 2 the following statements. among many others. were made during the course of the consideration of the legislation by the House Committee and the Senate Committee. to wit:

Epuse Qgmmittee Hearings

 

(Hon. Henry M. Jackson: Chairman)
(pp. 67. 68)

"Chairman Jackson: we are very much concerned. and we do not want
any loopholes in this act. We do not want someone to say: ‘This
is not final as far as existing claims are concerned.‘ that exist
after the limitation period in this act has expired. and that they
can still come in.

“Mr. Cohen: I think we want to plug all the loopholes.

"Chairman Jackson. And, of course. we want to give the Indians every
consideration in presenting their claims.

"Mr. Fernandez (M.C.). And one of the holes I would like to be sure
is closed is that we do not open the door again——when we close this
door it means closed as to future claims of that nature. In other
words. when the Indians have presented their moral claims that they
have hereafter, they should depend on the laws of the country for
the protection of their rights. which would be litigated in the
courts on legal grounds alone without their having separate rights
that we do not have to bring in claims such as. for example, the
one mentioned the other day. the claim of the Indians against the
Government for the reduction of livestock. There is no such legal
claim on the part of anybody. That is a moral claim.

"Chairman Jackson. This is a claim that the Government will want
to be assured is final. In other words. the very purpose of this
act, the reason we are coming to Congress. is that we are being
harassed constantly by various individual pieces of legislation.

I do not want to act on separate legislation and Congress is being
told to act on those bills. without knowing the facts. and the
purpose of this legislation.will be to dispose of all those routine
claims and let the Commission decide what the obligation is of this
Government to the Indians; * * * *."

(p. 88):

"Mr. Wilkinson. And I would add there. {unconscionable consideration.
or any other grounds reccgnizable by a court of esuity.'

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43 I\. ~ h u 115

"Let me give you an example of what I consider an
‘unconscionable consideration.‘ (He then states the facts of the
Klamath case.) ' '

(15. 151+):

"The Chairman. We have got to confine it to legal and equitable and
fair and honorable considerations that should be extended to Indians
because their aboriginal nature is so different.

N=t=*#=!=

_ "It must be remembered that this legislation.will
not mean very much. even after it is enacted and the Commission set
up: if they come back with preposterous claims to the Congress in
asking for money. Why, the Commission will soon be out of existence.
It has to stand the test of reason and common sense. and. regardless
of what we put in this legislation, it will not mean much unless the
Commission uses good sound discretion in disposing of these claims.

he s s a son
' ‘ (Hearings before House Committee on
’i Indian Affairs on H.R. 1198 and

H.R. l3Ula 79th Cong.. lst Sess.e
held March 2. 3. 23. June 11. lug

19b5,)

Excerpts from a report of the House Committee on Indian Affairs accompanying

¥i%1    ¢——2 

a favorable report on the g£i§inal~§.R. Magi,

 

(Hon. Henry M. Jackson. Chairman)

“It (the Bill) would require all pending Indian Claims of what~
ever nature. contractual and noncontractual, legal and nonlegal, to
be submitted * * * * and would outlaw claims not so submitted. (House
Report No. 1466, 79th Congress. lst Sess. p. 3.)

"iggisdigtigg. In order that the decisions reached under the
proposed legislation shall have finality it is essential that the
jurisdiction to hear claims which is vested in the Commission be
broad enough to include all possible claims. If any class of claims
is omitted, we may be sure that sooner or later that omission will
lead to appeals for new special jurisdictional acts. * * * *. and
the chief purpose of the bill, to dispose of the Indian claims
problem with finality. will have been defeated. Accordingly, your
Committee has thought it wise to be most explicit in setting out
all the classes of cases——even though they may be mutually over1apping——which have heretofore received congressional considera~

tion in the form of special jurisdictional acts. * * * *

1 1nd. c1. Comm. 43 r 5 4 I 115

"Six categories of cases; all recognized in past jurisdictional acts. are specified in the statement of the Commission's
jurisdiction: (each classification is then disCussed.)!h (House
R9P0I't- N06   COngo!  E0330!  

Statement as to the sixth classification is as follows}

“The sixth classification; supra. pernits Indian tribes to

ssert any claim which would arise on the basis of fair and honor-able dealings: even though not recognized by any existing rules of
law or equity. This extension of jurisdiction is believed to be
justified by reason of the fact that we have always treated the
Indian tribes as non sui juris and have set ourselves up as their
guardians. In this relationship many claims. not strictly legal»
but meritorious in character have developed. which the Congress
has recognised in a few special jurisdictional acts * * * *. As
a protection to the Government. however. in this class of cases:
the bill provides that if an award should be made based solely
on.unfair or dishonorable dealings on the part of the United States.
not otherwise actionable in law or equity, the Commission is auth—
orized to deduct gratuities previously given the claimant by the
United States." (House Report 1u66, 79th cong., 1st sess.. p. 12.)

In discussing the proposed bill. Honorable Lindsay C. Warren. Comptroller

General of the United States, in a letter to the members of the House of Representatives says:

"The bill, H.R. Uh9?, would greatly broaden the basis for
possible claims by Indians * * * *. and would open the way for the
filing of any and all claims which any tribe or group of Indians
may have against the United states and for reopening every Indian
claim which heretofore has been acted on by the Congress or ad»
judicated by the Court of Claims or otherwise disposed of—~* * * *
the proposed legislation would establish a new and more liberal
basis for determining the Indian claims."

The Attorney General said (p. 5411, ib1d):

"The jurisdiction to be conferred on the Commission would
embrace not only claims of a legal or equitable nature but also °
those claims which are based solely on moral or ethical grounds
and are not ordinarily justifiable in a court."

In discussing the legislation before the House of Representativess.

lhairnan Jackson of the Committee recommending the bill said.(p. 5#l3. ibidli

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43 117
_ 5 “In order to make sure that we have included all possible
claims within the jurisdiction of the Commission. we have gone
over the various special Indian jurisdictional acts that Congress

V has passed in recent years and put together the various phrases
that are used in these different acts. we might have condensed
this language but we thought it best even at the risk of some
duplication or overlapping to make sure that we had covered every

sort of case which Congress has in recent years considered worthy
of a hearing. * * * *.

"(p. 5414) Many of these claims are not necessarily legal

obligations but they are moral obligations of the Government of
9 the United States."

Congressman Mundt said (pa SUl7. ibid):

"I am.satisfied that the objectives of this report cannot be
realized unless we give the Commission the broadest possible jurisdiction to consider every Indian grievance. real or fancied, and to

provide Congress with a final and objective appraisal of all these
alleged claims."

Congressmen Robertson and Stigler (p. 5418. ibid) and Congressman Case

(p. 5420»21. ibid) made similar statements.

Exce ts from the Heari

' of the Senate Committee on Indian affairs considerin
assed the House.

     
 

(Senator Joseph C. O‘Mahoney, Chairman)

"Mr. Wilkinson (as to the sixth classification~~being he. (5) in the
enacted law): with respect to that particular cause of action, the
sstatute provides that the Commission could, if it thought it equitable,
take into consideration and set off gratuities * * * *.

"Since you are creating a new kind of cause of action not recognized
by any existing rule of law or equity: the authors of this bill thought
the Commission should have authority in that situation to take into consideration and set off gratuities given to the tribes.

"The cause of action is liberal but, on the other hand, the offset provision is liberals” (ppo ll~l2)

"Mr.‘Williams (from the Ibpartmcnt of Justice}: There has been a
great deal said about the amount of money involved in these claims.
I am sure this committee understands that the Court of Claims in

1 Ind. C1. Com. 43 ' . _ 7 ' 118

Indian litigation has already rejected nearly $3.000,000,000 worth

of claims. These have not all been adjudicated on the merits. I

see no reason why these will not be filed again before the Commission.
They are principally based on moral considerations." (P. 15)

(Senate Committee Hearings on HoRo 4497:
79th Cong. 2nd Sess... June 1-12.
July 13. 1946.)

There was subsequently considered by the Senate Committee a rewrite of
the House bill. in which the jurisdictional section was made to contain only
three categories~—category No. 3 of which being in the exact language of what
became category No. (5) in the law as passed. Category No. 1 of the three was
in the exact language of category No. l of the bill as passed.q Category No. 2

of the submitted rewrite contained the exact language of category No. (2) in

the bill as passed. The other categories of the House bill were eliminated.

TYW  an/V114-an
all-an.-up ul-...a-my \iIu¢n-§,J\ui"a--33‘)

-rte Committee of this proposed threecategory Senate bill. the following statements were made;

"Mr. Chambers (from the Department of Justice): The way section 2
was drafted in the bill originally it contained a great deal of
language which we thought might be subject to litigation as to its
meaning. and consequently we suggested that the section be clari—
fied; at least, we thought it would be clarified if it included or
if it was so amended as to give jurisdiction to the Commission.
first of all. over all claims in law or equity arising under the

the Constitution. laws. treaties of the U.ited States. and Executive
orders of the President. That is very general: ‘include all claims
in law or equity.‘ Those would be legal and equitable claims.

"And secondly, in order to play absolutely safe. so that we
would not exclude any claims such as those sounding in tort. * * *
(category 2 was included).

"80 it (then) seemed to us that no one could possibly contend
that the Commission would not have complete authority in all casesi
in law and equity on the basis of those two categories.

“Now. the third, the claims based.upcn fair and honorable

dealings. was already in the bill. l believe. as No. 6, but the
only change that we propose there is to indicate that those claims

1 Inds_C1. Comm. 43
' ...a’..

‘were in addition to the other two. that is to say. ‘that are not
recognized by any existing rule of law or equity.‘ Consequently.
we felt that the Commission then would have jurisdiction over all

legal and equitable claims and over all that might be called moral
claims.

"The Chairman: And what have you excluded?

"Mr. Chambers: we have excluded~—we think we have excluded nothing.
but removed questions of interpretation."

Mr. Chambers followed this with a statement:

"we figured that if you allow claims in tort with respect to
which the claimant would be entitled to sue if the United States
were suable. * * *. So that (3) and (4) (being in the House bill
and not carried in the Senate proposal) were. it seemed to us.

covering somewhat the same ground. and it would be simpler to pro—
vide in the way we did." ' '

“Mr. Wilkinson: Mr. Chairman. I appreciate the explanation of
Mr. Chambers. in particular his comment that they do not think

they have eliminated, * * *. any of the causes.wor any of the suitsq
that the Indians have." (pp. 53_5u)

After general discussion Mr. Chambers says:

“* * * * if a claim in law or equity is not in the case of
a treaty that is not ratified, if the land was taken, then there
might not be a claim under items No. (1) or No. (2); but if upon
the basis of fair and honorable dealings the Indians are entitled
to recover they have item No. (3)." (pp. 56—57)

Mr. Chambers again: (p. 58)
"I cannot understand why, if we provide, as we proposed here.

to take in all cases in law and equity. including cases. to be safe;

arising in tort, and then we say ‘all moral claims‘~—why anybody

should have an objection on the ground that we have not included all
types of claims.

"Mr. Cohen.(from the Department of the Interior ~ p. 59): May I
suggest that it seems to me * * *. that some improper inference
might be drawn from the legislative history that we had rejected
the House language and therefore intend to give the Indians something less than the House gave them. might be remedied by simply
including in the committee‘ report a statement that it is the
understanding of the committee that this language is clarifying
and not designed to exclude from the consideration of the COm~
mission those cases which the House intended to include?

S

119

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 43 120

l 9 - '

"The Chairman: That is a good suggestion.

"Mr. Chambers (P; 62): Now: I venture the prediction that virtually
every one of those claims that has been denied by the Court of Claims

as a legal or equitable claim will be filed as a moral claim."

(Senate Committee hearings on H.R. 4497:
79th Cong.. 2nd S9850! June 1-2: July 13:

19b6,) ’

The Senate Committee reported the House bill with section 2——the jurisdictional section«—carrying only the three categories that were discussed

in the Senate hearing. and in the Committee‘s report accompanying said bill

J.

the following language appears, to wit:

Senate Committee Report
Creating an Indian Claims Commission

“Report No. l715—~Reported by Chairman O'Mahoney)

"Principal differences between the bill as amended by the Committee
and the bill as passed by the House.

"1. Jurisdiction of Commission.-By the first three amendments

section 2. which deals with the jurisdiction of the Commission. has
been clarified. As amended: the section confers upon the Commission
jurisdiction.to hear all claims in law or equity arising under the
Constitution, laws, treaties of the United States. and Executive
orders of the President. as well as all other claims in law or equity
including those sounding in tort. It also covers claims based upon
fair and honorable dealings. The language stricken on page l. and
through line 23 on page 2 in section 29 is not clear and it is
believed that if it is not eliminated litigation would be necessary

to determine its meaning. The charge has been made that the stricken
language might be interpreted to establish new rules of substantive
law which would have the effect of prejudging the merits of particular
cases. The committee is interested in providing a forum for the
Indian claimants to assert their claims and not. of course; in pre—
judging particular claims against the Government. This amendment

is recommended for purposes of clarification and there is no intention on the part of the committee to deprive claimants of the

right to invoke the jurisdiction of the Commission in any case which
would have been cognizable under the language of the bill as it passed
the House." (p. 5) C

(Senate Report l7l5. Calendar no. 1751»
79th Cong.’ 2nd Session.)

‘Tl.Ind. c1. Comm. 43 ' V 121

A Joint conference committee to consider the differing bills reported

the bill in the form in which it became law.

The section dealing with jurisdiction was made to carry the five categories in the law as enacted instead of the original six which were in the
House bill and instead of the three which had been in the Senate bill.

In the statement of the managers on the part of the House which accompanied the conference report submitted to the House the following state—

ments are made. to wit:

“The bill as passed by the House of Representatives

enumerated six classes of claims cognizable by the Commission.

The Senate. in the interest of simplicity, reduced these to

three. being careful to state in its report. that the change was
not intended to deprive the claimants of the right to invoke the
Jurisdiction of the Commission in any case which would have been
cognizable under the language of the bill as it passed the House.
Out of an abundance of caution the conferees reinserted two of

the classifications struck by the Senate because they wanted to
make sure that if any tribal claimant could prove facts sufficient
to make a case under either of these classifications. the C0DHiSSi0n
would have authority to make an award to such claimant." (p. 5)

lAfter discussing the two classifications referred to in the above statement as having been reinserted “out of an abundance of caution", the statement

further says:

WBoth of the classes of claims reinserted by this amendment
may fall within the category of ‘fair and honorable dealings.‘

To set them forth explicitly helps to clarify the contents of that
category."

The conference report carrying the bill as it became law was passed by

the Senate without discussion.

It was passed by the House after only a few general remarks landing it

as giving the Indian a new day.

(Conference Report 2693, House of Repre—
sentativesa 79th Cong. 2d Sess.s p. 5)

