7' Ind. c1. Com. 86L; - - - 878
BEFORE ma IIGDIAN CLAIMS comm ssrom

THE OS.-'-LEE NATION OF INDIARS,
I ' Petitioner,
es, Docket No. 126

_'ms U1‘3ITED'S‘l‘.iLTES or AMERICA,

Defendant.
p Decided;. July 30, 19596

Appearances:
Del.'nas'.E. Martin, with 1.-zhom were
. Paul M. Niebell and Warren Watkins,
Attorneys for Petitioner.
"Frederick C. Ward, J r". , with when
' was Mr. Assistant Attorney General,
Perry ‘'17. Morton, e
.- Attorneys for Defendant.
0PI1‘JI0N:Z._}_1_7‘_ THE COMMISSION

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion ofthe Commission.

The petitioner in this case, The Osage Nation of Indians, ‘is the "
successor to-the Great. Osage and Little Osage Tribes of American Indians
 is a tribal organization recognised bythe Secretary of the Interior
as having authority to represent the Osage Indians. The,Com:nission has
found in this case, as it hasin the previous action of The Osage Elation

of Indians V. The United States of America, 1 Ind. Cl. Cor:::r1.,lz3, that

njn 

petitioner is entitled to maintain this action before the Commission.
Petitioner seeks a recovery of the sum of $1,092,338.71, which

amount represents payments ..roza the Osage Tri...e's oil and gas royalty

.._...-_.-__..__..:—-........ _.. — - -'‘'‘'‘V-;- ..

7 End. Cl. Com. 85h ts’ ;- 879

funds to the County of Osage, Oklahoma, for use in the construction

and maintenance of roads and bridges in that county. The petitioner
originally alleged that the claim set forth in this action was one in
law and equity as well as a claim based upon fair and honorable dealings
not recognized by any existing rule of law or equity. However, the

Court of Claims had found in Congressional Referral Case No. 17763 that
‘the Osage Tribe had no legal or equitable right to recover the claimed
sum (The Osage Tribe of Indians v. The United States, 102 c. Cls. 5145)
and petitioner stated at the hearing in this matter on November 2h, l9S8,
that the claim is limited to one based on fair and.honorable dealings
under Section i, Clause Slof the Indian Claims Commission Act (Tr. p. 3).

.,h_

Briefly, the pertinent facts, which are largely agreed to by the

 

parties, are as follows.
The Osage 'i‘ribe of Indians sold their lands isrzansas and bought

from the Cherokee Nation a tract consisting of some l,h70,SS9 acres

of land which now comprises Osage Countf in the State of Oklahoma.
Fajment for the tract, in the amount of $l,099,l37.hl,‘was made to the
Cherokees from the proceeds of the sale of the Kansas land and.on

dhne lb, l883, the land was deeded by the Cherokee Nation to the United

States to be held in trust for the use and benefit of the Osage and

.‘ ;

Kansas Indians.
The Osage Indians occupied the acquired lands in common until

they were allotted to the members of the tribe pursuant to the Act of

June 25, 1906, hereinafter referred to as the 1906 Act. gThat?§ct provided, among other things, that the surface of all the land belonging

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 865 859

to the Osage Tribe of Indians in Oklahoma Territory with the exception

of an insi«.ificant amount, should be divided among the members of the
tribe but that the oil, gas, coal, and other minerals upon said allotted
lands should be reserved to the use of the tribe for a period of 25 years,
at the expiration of which they should be the property of the individual
owners of said land unless otherwise provided for by Act of Congress.

The Act further provided that the royalties received from oil, gas, coal
and other mineral leases should be placed in the Treasury of the United

States to the credit_of the members of the Osage Tribe of Indians to be

,distributed, after certain allowances for schools and an emergency fund,

to the individual members of the tribe. Pursuant to the provisions of

the 1906 Act the tract was allotted to the members of the Osage Tribe

which then numbered 2,229, with each person receiving an average of
about 657 acres.

glhereafter leases for oil and gas purposes were made by the Osage
Tribe, through'its tribal council with the approval of the Secretary of
the Interior. Producing oil and gas wellsvere drilled on the Osage

lands and royalties were paid to the members of the tribe. .The royalties

' were modest in amount for the first few years, but, commencing in 1917,

became rather substantial, amounting to $8,090 per headright in l920.
In the report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for the fiscal
Year ended June 30, l920, it is written, "In the northeast corner of
Oklahoma is the Osage Indian Reservation, belonging to about 2,100
Indians, who have been called the richest people, per_capita,.in the

world. This section of the great State of Oklahoma is one of the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. BEL 331

wonderful oil producing fields in the country, and its wells daily

pour great wealth upon these Indians.” (Oef. Ex. 8, p. L1). The large
sums which accrued from the oil and gas royalties were then required

pto be paid quarterly to each member of the tribe, and it was reported

to have led the Osage Indians into a life of extravagance and reckless
spending. Ihany of the tribesmen became deeply involved in debt and
merchants and professional people took advantage of the Indians‘ ignorance.

In 1920 identical bills were introduced in the Senate and House of

Representatives to provide, among other things, that the minerals covered
by the lands of the Osage should be reserved to the tribe for an additional 25 years and that the State of Oklahoma should be:authorized to
levy a gross production tax upon all oil and gas belonging to oil and ‘

gas lessees produced in Osage County and that the Secretary of the ‘

iilnterior be authorized and directed to pay to Osage County 3% of the

Osage tribe's royalties, such money to be used only for the construction
and maintenance of roads and bridges in Osage County; at the lengthy
hearings by both Senate and House Committees, theelndians expressed their
approval of the 1:111 and its passage was reeeaéneaeed by the Indian office
and the Secretary of the Interiorg

The House Committee on Indian.Affairs, having-receivéd.mnch evidcnce that the Osage Indians had been receiving fabnlousésums of money
from their oil and gas royalties and leading a lifeiof-ertravagant
°Pe“din8, amended the proposed legislation to limitgroyalty payments.
50 Osages who did not have certificates of competency and.provided that

the surplus income should be invested under the supervision of the

an

-E
4

N
on!
In:

p consent and for purposes not beneficial to the Tribe.

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 86!.» 882

Secretary of the Interior for the benefit of such individual Indians.

The House Committee stated that it also amended the taxation provision

of the bill to provide "that the Osage Tribe shall be taxed . . . as

are all other citizens of Oklahoma under the laws of that State” and to
provide that an additional sum of 1% of the Tribe‘s oil and gas royalties
should be paid to Osage County to be used for said County only for the
construction and maintenance of roads and bridges therein. The bill, as
amended, passed both the House of Representatives and the Senate and
became the Act of hareh 3, 1921. It will hereinafter be referred to as
the l92l.Act.

_Under the provisions of Section 5 of the 1921 Act, the Secretary

of the Interior paid to Osage County the required 1% of the oil and

gas royalties until that provision was removed by the joint resolution

,of,April 25, l9hO. iDuring that period the sun of $l,O92,338u7l was

paid to Osage County. It is this item.for which the petitioner now seeks

-:recovery-from the United States.

rfmjlt is;petitioner’s contention that this payment of 1% of the Tribe‘s

oil and gas royalties violated the standards of fair and honorable
dealings between the United States and the Osage Indians." Petitioner
maintains that this 1% "levy" was an unjust and unnecessary disbursement
from.the Tribe*s trust funds which “levy” was made without the Tribe’s

‘ As a result, it

is alleged, the United States gave away a portion of the Osage's trust

funds in a manner which was not calculated to and did not benefit the

:9

Indians and as such constituted a course of unfair and dishonorable dealing

‘U

C

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 86h ' I 883

In considering the question of whether the requirement that 1% of
the Osage tribal royalties be paid to Osage County for the maintenance
and construction of roads and bridges in that County was an action
which violated the standards of fair and honorable dealings referred to

in Section 2, Clause (5) of the Indian Claims Commission Act, we must

examine the many factors which led Congress to enact the complained of  

provision. For as the Court of Claims stated in the case of The Snake

or Piute Indians of the Former Malheur Reservation in Oregon v. The

 

United States, 125 c. Cls. 251, 270:

 

"A determination of whether or not a course of dealing
by the United States with and in relation to bands or a
tribe of Indians was in the last analysis fair and honorable, can be made only'after a very thorough and careful
consideration not only of what was actually done, but also
of that which was not done and the motives and circumstances

surrounding and underlying the overt acts of the parties, a ~

and their intentions, etc. It is often the case that an~~i
action which, on its face, appears to be cruel or shocking
to the conscience, may, when examined and analyzed in its

, complete context, be found to have some moral justification
which either mitigates or eliminates entirely the apparent’
cruelty of the action. The evidentiary facts based on the
circumstances establishing such justification, or the lack
of it, are facts as indispensable on the issue of fair and

honorable dealings, as the bare facts of the dealings themselves." T

The Commission, overruling defendant's objections, has admitted in
evidence and considered all exhibits introduced by'petitioner.
“ Upon a careful and thorough examination of all the facts as revealed by the record in this case, the Commission cannot agree with the
contentions of petitioner that the United States acted unfairly'and

di3h°n°Tab1Y in this matter; The evidence establishes that,the Osage

Indians were receiving a very substantial income during the years

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h 885

immediately prior to the passage of the l92l Act. However, they were
not receiving the full benefit of their income because of the great
extravagance and reckless spending habits of the Indians and the fact
that they were easy prey for the unscrupulous merchants and professional’
people who took advantage of the Indians’ ignorance. It was clear that

the Osage Indians were in a position to utilize some of their funds to

effect material improvements which would provide a more useful and

lasting benefit to themselves. It was certainly desirable that the

moneys realized from the Tribe*s mineral resources be used for the better-'

ment of the Osages instead of unjustly enriching the unscrupulous persons
who were eaploitingthe lndians._ In such a situation it was natural
that Congress; in the exercise of its right to legislate'with respect
to the_Osage;funds;should attempt to utilize the ample funds for nore
beneficial:pro5ebts.i

Ofthefallottedlandsin Osage County approximately oneethird represented theselected homesteads of the individual members of the tribe.
The homesteadsguere, by specific provision in the 1906 Act, non-taxable.
Thus the choicest one-third of the Osage«County lands here contributing
nothing to local improvements. Further, as to the remaining lands, they
had been non-taxable for three years following their allotment to the
-individual Indians. By decision of the Supreme Court the state was unable
totaxany of the oil and gas production in Osage County_because the _
lhinerals were under the protection of the Federal Government.l Indian

Territory Illuminating Oil Co. v. State of Oklahoma, 2&0 U. S. 5223‘

neg. 011 iCo."v. Howard, 228 U. s. SL9.

? Ind. Cl. Com. 86L O . 885

,—q.._

Section 5 of the l92l Act gave the State of Oklahoma authority to
collect a gross production tax from both the oil companies’ and the
Osage Tribe*s shares of the oil and gas production. Under the State
law a portion of that tax was returned to the County. ‘However, Congress
was undoubtedly aware that Osage County had, prior to 1921, suffered
from a lack of sufficient tax funds to develop its public facilities.

Congress had, during the course of hearings on the proposed act,
been informed of the poor development of the roads and bridges in Osage
County. In fact the Osage Tribal Council in a statement to the House
éubcommittee stated that there was much heavy truck hauling over "the
very bad rough roads in Osage Countyu“ (Def..Ex. 18, p. hO8). It was

pointed out that Osage County required larger road and bridge funds

 

than did other counties and that additional funds spent for such purposes would aid oil and gas development in the county and would add to
‘the land values in the county. The House,Committee in commenting on

f the 1% provision said, "It is believed that this provision, if properly
3PDlied, will enhance the value of all Osage property, on the principal
that 800d roads and bridges enhance the value of‘propertv in every other
section of the county; and, since there is plenty of money for the
F“?P03e, it certainly will be a great advantage to the Osages themselves
43 well as to those who must carry on business relations with them?

(995 5% 14. p. 3). - O  

The Commission has found that the $1,092,338.71 expended by Osage

.u‘ . r ‘ ‘ In 0 o
H"! «O1 too sole purpose of construction and ma;ntenanoe_of roads

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h 886

and bridges in Osage County was a distinct benefit to the Osage Tribe.
As the Court of Claims stated in the Osage case:

“% n e we think that there is merit in the Government‘s
contention that the Tribe received a special benefit from
the expenditure of its funds % % %. The construction and
maintenance of roads and bridges would increase the value
of the minerals % % e to whatever extent additional.pro—
duction on existing leases has taken place or will take
place because the properties are more accessible by reason
of improved highways, the Tribe has received a benefit %'% *.
In 1921, then, most of the lands of the county'were_probably
still owned by the Indians, who were the same persons who,
as a Tribe, owned the oil and gas royalties. The benefits
of more convenient use and of increases in value of the
land in the county, which would result from improved highways, would, then, go principally to the Indians, the persons who, as a Tribe, owned the royalties." The Osage Tribe
of Indians V; The United States, lO2 C. Cls. bhg, 5p§-ESE.

   

The Commission recognizes that, of course, other non-Indian persons
in Osage County benefited from the expenditures from the Tribels oil
and gas royalties. But this does not render the government's course of
action in this matter unfair and dishonorable. The fact remains that
the Osage‘Tribe did benefit and that their contribution was one which‘

they could well afford. The facts do not support petitioner‘s contention

ihthat the Tribe’s funds were unnecessarily expended for'the benefit of

others.“ The extent of the benefit to the Tribe is not capable of exact
measurement nor is it material in this instance. Perhaps the sane amount
as involved in this case could have been spent for greater tribal benefits
but there is no need to speculate on such a possibility. Congress found _
a situation in existence in 1921 where the great natural resources of

the Osage Tribe were being depleted while the substantial royalties

therefrom were being wasted in a manner which the House Committee

u-I"-'d'r

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 86h ' 887

described as “almost criminal." The intent of Congress in passing the

1921 Act with the 1% provision of Section 5 was to benefit the Indians.

‘Recognizing that the Tribe had “plenty of money for the purpose"

(Def. Ex. h, D. 3), Congress chose the roads and bridges of Osage

County as facilities in the county upon which this small percentage

"of the Osage Tribe's royalties would be spent. This coincided with

the Tribe's own statement of what it considered a.necessary area of

improvement and for which they urged expenditure of the Tribefs contribution, as originally provided.
Petitioner argues that the question of the Osage's financial status

should not be considered in this case. The Commission does not agree

_but rather feels that the fact that the Osage Tribe did have considerable

wealth is a most material factor to be considered in determining the
fairness and honorableness of the government*s course of dealings with
them. The course of the government‘sdealings with impoverished tribes
cannot be adopted as-the measure of fairness required with tribes
P°3S€$8ing substantial assets.

The action of Congress in imposing the 1% provision on the Osage
:ribe'3 r°Y8ltieS,when considered in the light of the eristent circumstances: does notshock the conscience of the Commission or appear in
any Way to havebeen a cruel or unjust imposition on the petitioner.
The COUYSE Ofdealings by the government with the Osage Tribe, as revealed by thecvidence in this case, did not violate the standards of

‘ I1
‘at ‘.3

k
;'.‘.i.

7 Ind. 01. Com. 865 585

fair and honorable dealings within the meaning of Section 2, Clause (5)
of the Indian Claims Commission Act. Accordingly, the petition should

be dismissed and we shall so order.

wm. M. Holt

 

Associate Commissioner

I concur:

Edgar E. wit;

Chief Commissioner

