*1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 553 p _ p- _ . 553

ennonn THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION.

Tm cnocmw IIATION,
_Petitioner,
1;‘. Docket No. 55

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

 ~.....r~...r--urs.../,

Defendant.
Jém 1 1 

FINDINGS OF FACT

an-1 tans-‘uni

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact:

1. .The Choctaw Nation, petitioner, is an Indian tribe residingi.
within the territorial limits of the bnited States, and is now, and e

in has been, recognized as such by the administrative officials of the
United States at all times pertinent to this proceeding.

2. Petitioner seeks judgment against defendant for moneys diszbursed by the defendant during the period from July l, 1898 to June 30,
.1929, from funds helonging to petitioner and held in the custody of
the defendant, in the sum of $753,6o9.1.L1. (Amended to $753,bo9.u1.
jsee IDeft's. Requested Finding Ho. 9, as agreed to by petitioner,
Suppl. Brief 13. 6.)

,3. It is the contention of the petitioner that the said moneys
eo charged to the defendant were items of expense that under the terms
of what is known as the Atoka and Supplemental Agreements made between

petitioner'and defendant, as represented by defendant and understood

by petitioner, should have been borne by the defendant and were not

.-_ ._.‘.L'

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 . . 554

‘properly chargeahle to the petitioner.i

M. Representatives of petitioner and defendant concluded what
is known as the Atoka.Agreement on.April 23, 1897; same was ratified
and confirmed by the General Council of the Choctaw Nation on No+
vember M, 1897, and thereafter ratified hy the members of the Choctaw
Nation.on.Angust en. 1898.

5. Representatives of petitioner and defendant concluded what
is known.as the Supplemental.Agreement on March 21, 1962. This was 9
ratified and confirmed by the Congress of the United States on July 1,
1902, and thereafter ratified by a majority of the members of petitioner
tribe in strict compliance with the provisions of said Agreement.

6. The amount for which petitioner sues in the instant case in

the total sum of $753,609.91 consists of various items as follows,

to—wit:
1. Ihpenses of sale of'una1lotted lands $230,079.66 '
2. Expenses of segregated coal and asphalt

land 1o3,223.6n
3. Ehpenses of making per capita payments 126,805.31
M. Expenses of appraising improvements 4,299.07
5. Pay of miscellaneous employees 67,542.20
6. Miscellaneous agency expenses. 877.95
7. Expenses for roads 9,202.35
8. Investigating tribal warrants and claims 5o5l6al9
9. Pay of Indian police 8.59l.7M
10. Expenses of sale of tribal buildings 251.82
11. Expenses of making equalization payments i 201.56
12. Expenses of medical attention 1,089.60

13. Empenses of investigating coal and
. asphalt deposits 38,Ml6.27
lh. Expenses of office of supervisor of mines 5,H39.9h
15. Expenses of Choctawachickasaw Sanatorium 3,93l.0h

a. Pay of miscellaneous employees $ 297.25
b. Roads and grounds 3,633.79

.1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 553% 5 , . - 555

i 3 _

16;“ Expenses oi‘ appraising timber $ 22,189.33 "

17. hpenses of sale of town lots ' 15,157.32

18. Ikpensesof collecting cattle tax 5 23,881l~..l3

19. Expenses of collecting tribal revenue 5 86, .
 09% J.

.-"-'-KL‘-'7. ':-In the" instant case the petitionerxalleged that the
-defendant,-1..-iacting through the Danes Commission, in order to induce
and persuade petitioner to enter into the Atoka and Supplemental
Agreements; represented, that said Agreements contemplated and provided for the placing of each tribal member in possession cflhis
individualallotmentand-for the liquidation of p the entire tribal

‘ estate without cost to petitioner; and that-had petitioner and its
“membership understood that said Agreements did not contain provisions
‘--placing each tribal memberin. possessionjof his entire interest. in
the tribal estate without cost to him, said Agreements would notthave
been voluntarily entered into petitioner nor ratified by its tribal

member map.

8. Congress, by Section 16 of the Act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat.

612, 6u5) authorized the President to appoint a Commission to enter

into negotiations with the five civilized tribes. The purpose was the extinguishment of the national or tribalotitle to lands then held by

I them, either by cession of. same or some part thereof, to the United

States for disposition for the benefit of the Indians, or by allotment and division of same in severalty among the Indians of such
nations and tribes, respectively, as might be entitled to the same,

or by such other method as might be agreed upon between the several

. 
1 5... .-..ir..:s-11;»... -u.-rt---"u

1 Ind. (31. Comm. 553 - 555

i ; h donations and tribes, or each -of them, with the United States; with a

tiew to such an.adjustment upon the basis of justice and equity as

.might9 with the consent of such nation or tribe so far as might be

necessary, be requisite and_suitable to enable the ultimate creation
of'a state or states oi the Union to embrace the lands within the
Indian'Territory;g.

. The primary pnrposes-intended and designed to be accomplished
by the making of the Atoha and Supplemental.Agreements were for the
‘United §tates to take over the management, control;.and administration of the.propertp, affairs and funds of the Choctaw Ration’
theretofore exercised.by the tribal government; to continue the tribal
government only for limited pnrposes, and to administer and dispose of
the property from fundsoi the Choctaw Hation for their benefit.

The only provision with reference to expenses is the one found
in the Atoka Agreement whichprovided

“That no charge or claim shall be made against

the Choctaw or Chickasaw tribes by the United States

for the expenses of surveyingtand platting the lands

and.town sites, or for grading, appraising, and allotting the lands, orffor appraisingiand disposing

of the town lots as herein providedo”

The Atoka.ngreement provided for the allotment of “all the
lands within the Indian Territory” and.did not provide for the saleor disposition of unallotted lands; this latter was provided for in
the Supplemental Agreement in which.allotments of limited acreage to

the members of the Eation were provided for which would result in a

residue of unallotted lands. The Atoka.Agreement did provide for the

llnd. Cl. Comm. 553 ‘ p — 557* ; 5 sale of town lots therein specified and7imposed the expensemof.their
sale upon the government.
The Supplemental Agreement contained no provision as to who_

should bear expenses incident to the management,-control and dispo}sition of the property and funds of the Fation.= Said.ngreement, hows

ever, did provide for the sale of the residue of lands not allotted or
otherwise disposed of, and that 330 much of the proceeds as may be
necessary to equalising allotments shall be used for that purpose."

The Atoka.Agreement provided “that the United States shall put
each.allottee in.possession of his allotment and remove all persons
therefrom objectionable to the allottee.“ The Supplemental Agreement
contained a similar provision.

9. The petitioner in the instant litigation, to-wit, the Choctaw
Ration, sued the defendant in the Court of Claims, in Case No. X-260
(91 C. Clms. 320) for reimbursement of the same items (together with
others) for which.reimbursement is sought in the instant case, as shown
by its pleadings and by Findings of Fact made by that Court in its
Findings Nos. 2, 3, 5, b, 7, s, 9, 10, .L.!., 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 and
21, and in.the Court's opinion. (Defendant's Ex. No. 4, pp. 2 to 21
and #2). tThat the parties in the Iormer case are the same, and the
items sued for are the same as in the instant case are admitted by
petitioner in its response to defendant's motion for summary judgment.

In said litigation in the Court of Claims petitioner sued for

other items, among them one for $63,M23.ll, based on a claim for

1 Ind. C1. Com. 553 - 558

improper reduction of interest allowed petitioner (Court's Finding_

no. 6) for which claim, and for which claim alone, the Court in its
judgment allowed petitioner to recover;'denying liability of defendant
as to each and.all other~claims, including the items sued for in the‘

instant case. :(Defendant‘s Ex. No. H,?pp. he to #7, 50 to 5%, 57,'58,

’59;‘7h to 77. so);

Said judgment of the Court was made on April 1, l9M0; and reads as
followssi
"Upon the foregoing Special Findings of Fact
which are made a part of the judgment herein, the

Court decides as a conclusion of law that plaintiff
is entitled to recover $63,h23.ll.

"Th8 dF!'f_'E!1"1!_3_-‘1i_._3f‘_l,'l_‘. Q1‘; fi_'l_'.g nm1*n+.a'r~.....n‘ln4«m -to as-._

hrw-an-nawqar ‘I-in--oh-Uclucdm -1-LJ NI-i..L""'

titled to an offset against the claim of plaintiff
of gratuity disbursements amounting to $3,57M,E39.65.

“The plaintiff is not entitled to a judgment
~against the United States; and the petition is

therefore dismissed.“ (Deft's. Ex. no. M, p. 33).

10. In the Court of Claims case the petitioner alleged that the
defendant, by the representations and preliminary proposals made by'
the Danes Commission, led the plaintiff Nation to believe that no
administration expenses incident to the disposition of the common properties would be charged to the Nation, but had improperly charged the
petitioner with administrative and other expenses, (the items heroine
above set forth in Finding No. 6) for which that suit was brought.
(Deft's. lad N00 2, p. ll).

11. The Brief in the trial record in the Court of Claims case

calls the Court‘s attention to the negotiations leading up to the

' 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 553 _ ' 559

__7._.

treaties in the following language, to--wit:

“ * '“ The preliminary proposition submitted
by the Dawes Commission and the two treaties that
followed show that it was never contemplated that
the Indians would ‘be called upon to bear any administrative expense. '9, ' s

In the Motion for New Trial filed in the Court of Claims, the
following argument is made:

We have, in one of our original briefs, quoted
word for word from the proposition submitted by the
Dawes Commission as a ‘basis on which to write the
Atoka Agreement. Can it ‘be, in the light of these
positive assurances fromthe United States, and the
agreement that immediately followed, that it was
contemplated that the Indians were to bear any of the
expenses with which the Court is now concerned? Under.

* all the rules of interpretation of contracts, the pre.' liminary negotiations are competent. evidence to show
the situation of the parties, the general subjects to

the -dealt with, and the.o'b,jectives toward which they
were striving,"

12. The Court of Claims, in its decision, held the petitioner
obligated to bear the expenses in question, and used the following.
language explaining its interpretation of the written agreement:

"It is the duty of the Court, in ‘order to

decide upon the meaning of a written instrument,

to look not only to the language employed but to
the subject-=-matter and the surrounding circumstances.
(Cases citedi, The intent -of the contract must

‘be deduced from the entire instrument, from its
sub,ject—n:atter, from the purpose of its execution,
and the circumstances of the parties when they made
it must prevail over any careless recitals therein,
unless the intent so gathered runs counter to the
plain sense of the binding words of the agreement.“
CUnderscoring supp1ied)._ (Deft's. Ex, No, M),

‘It is elsewhere stated in said opinien that.

“Nothing specifically was said in the agreement
as to whether the term ‘proceeds' as used therein meant

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 ’ - 560%

.p__g _

gross proceeds or the proceeds less the cost of sale.
Neither was anything said in the.agreement'with reference to who should bear the expense of administering
the other provisions of such agreements°' In the first
place we think it is obvious that the term *proceeds'
as used in.the agreements means, and.was intended to
mean, the amount of money produced, less the expenses
of sale. This is the ordinary meaning usually applied
to the term in.agreements of this kind where there is
' nothing to clearly indicate a contrary intention.”

Finally:
“For these reasons we hold that the'United States

(was not obligated under the agreements to bear the era
penses incident to carrying out the provisions of the

agreements and that the plaintiff is not entitled to

recover the amounts herein claimed which.were disbursed

by the defendant from.plaintiff‘s funds for such.purposes.”

13¢ Considering the entire record in the case, the evidence is
not sufficient to establish that in the negotiations leading to the
execution of the Atoka and Supplemental.Agreements, representations
were made to the effect that the defendant would assume the payment
of any expenses other than those as set out in said Agreements, as
construed.by the Court of Claims in the Choctaw case herein previously
mentioned.

1%. Considering the entire record in the case as presented herein,
the evidence is not sufficient (l) to establish.duress or coercion on
the part of the-Commissioners who negotiated the Atoka and Supplemental
.Agreements, or (2) that there was any mutual mistake of law and fact
between one party and the other, or (3) that there was a mutual mistake

of law; or (M) that the Choctaw Indians did not understand the meaning

and intent of the parties to the Agreements, or (5) that the language

‘1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553   ' V 551

‘used in said Agreements with reference to the expenses to be borne by

the defendant was intended to include the expenses for which suit is
brought, or (6) to justify the belief on the part of any of the members
of the petitioner tribe that the defendant contemplated or intended to
bear any of the expenses for which suit is brought.

15. dThe record discloses that the Choctaw delegates who met with
members of the Commission in the negotiations resulting in the execution

l of the.Atoka and Supp1emental.Agreements were highly educated and extremely

capable men._

June ll, 1951

.- . ....,_ . __,....,...._......  ...am%. -...-an-..—.._.— u . .-.

