7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 282

BEFORE THE INDIAK CLAIH5 COME SSION

THE'HASHOE TRIBE OF THE STATES )
OF NEVADA AND CALIFORNIA, )
Plaintiff, %
V. i Docket No. 288
THE UNITED STATE.S 3
Defendant. 3

Decided: March 20, I959

Appearances:

John.Lewis Smith, Jr.

with whom were C. T. Busha, Jr.
and George F.'Hright,

Attorneys for Flaintiff

Ralph A. Barney and

Bernard Newhurg, with whom

was My. Assistant Attorney

General Perry'W;iHorton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION _§ LEE COHEEISSION
0’Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commissions

The petition in this case was timely filed with the Indian Claims
Commission. The petitioner is the Washoe Tribe of the States of Nevada
and California, which was formally organized under the provisions of the
‘Wheeler-Howard Act (b8 Stat. 98b) and a corporate charter was issued to

it by the Secretary of the Interior in 1937. As such, petitioner is an

7 Ind. C1. Com. 266 ' 283

identifiable group. of American Indians, entitled to maintain this action
under the Indian Clams Commission Act, 60 Stat. 1019.

The claim presented herein by petitioner included alleged exclusive use and occupancy to lands not only in the State of Nevada but also
the State of California. Since California lands were claixred the case
was consolidated for the purposes of trial with Docket Nurrbers 31 and
37, the "Indians of California," and certain other cases seeking recovery for the loss of lands in California allegedly held by aboriginal title in the respective petitioners (Order of Commission, November
19, 1953). The Commission, on January 20, l9S8, in an opinion held that
petitioner herein was entitled to present the claim of the Washoe Indians
relating to lands in California and that petitioners in Docket 31 and
37 did not have the exclusive right to present claims relating to lands
in that State (6 Ind. Cl. Com. 86).

The lands claimed by petitioner are located in western Nevada and
eastern California. The claimed area described in the petition was reduced by petitioner during the hearing in this case (Pet. Ebc. 9-l; Fdg.
5). Generally speaking the area now alleged to have been exclusively
used and occupied by petitioner‘s ancestors was located with Lakes Washoe
and Tahoe in its center. To the north, petitioner claims it held Indian
title as far as Honey Lake, California; to the west, to the crest of 
Sierra Nevada Mountains; to the south, to Sonora Pass; and to the east,
to the crest of the Pine Nut Mountains, and northerly from said IU.OIlT1"i;;«€+;f.i_L'?-:E7
to just east of Reno and Carson Cities, Nevada, and thence to Honey Lake.

The irfashoe Indians, being located to the east of the Siema Nevada

7 Ind. c1. Corn. 255 28h

Mountains, their culture had strong affinities with that of the California area and also with the culture of the Great Basin area. gwashoe
culture was more closely allied to the latter, however.. While long
considered a distinct linguistic family, the Washoe Indians may be an
aberrant Hokan group geographically separated from Hokan-speaking people west of the Sierra Nevada Mountains.

The Washoe Indians lived in and ranged over a small, narrow tract
of country. The rugged Sierra Nevada Mountains to the west with deep
snow for a great part of the year limited the'Washoe movement in that
direction. To the east were the Northern.Paiute Indians who in historic times restricted the eastward movements of the Washoe. In the
valleys, such as on the upper Carson and.Truckee rivers, and the Little
Truckee River, the Eashoe found shelter and.relief from the extreme
‘winters and for the most part made their homes. The pine nut was one
of their main sources of food which was supplemented by fish, roots,
grass seed and game.

These Indians were what may be called semi-sedentary. They lived.
in small communities or villages normally containing ten or less huts.
The'Washoe had few, if any, horses and thus their range in search of
sustenance was also limited by this fact. In aboriginal times the social organization was primarily based upon the family unit and apparently
there was no approach to a tribal organization. Chiefs, in the sense
the title is used in orthodox tribes, were in practice “bosses” who arranged communal rabbit or deer hunts, or were in charge for social purposes when the Washoe would gather on occasions.

7 Ind. 81., Corn. 266 285

On the basis of what evidence is available the Washoe Indians
numbered approximately ILCOO people. According to the ethnologists there
fxere three divisions, (IL) the “Southerners" between the forks of the
Carson River near Woodfords, California, (2) the "Valley Dwellers”, near
Minden and Gardnerville, Nevada, an (3) the "Northerners" apparently
in the vicinity of Reno, Nevada. Indian Agent J. Dodge, in l8S9, reported there were three “bands“ of Washoe Indians which observation
seems to confirm the division or groups found by the ethnologists.

Dodge reported a band in the vicinity of Carson, Washo and Eagle valleys
and Lake Tahoe; a second band in Little Valley between the east and west
forks of the Carson River; and a band living in Long Valley, southeast
from Honey Lake.

Historical material with respect to the Nashoe Indians in the way
of reports of Indian agents, officials, trappers, traders and others is
scant. The Washoe were apparently a peaceful people who made little demand on, or trouble for, the Government or the whites who came into their
-country. No treaty was ever made with these Indians and the need of a
strong political concept in this identifiable group never appears to
have developed in historic times although some semblance of leadership
within the geographically located divisions appears to have existed 
Dodge visited one of the divisions in 1859. The lands where the three
groups or divisions of T;-Eashoe Indians lived were contiguous and all
Washoes were free to obtain from these lands their sources of subsistence.

-1- T1’

Defendant does not take issue with the fact that aashoe Indians were.

to be found living within at least a part of the claimed area when the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 286

territory involved was acquired from.Kexico in l8h8 by the Treaty of
Guadalupe Hidalgo, 9 Stat. 922. Defendant contends that the customary
range of the Washoe Indians did not encompass the large area claimed by
petitioner. According to defendant, the customary range of these Indians
extended on the north no farther than the valleys of the Little Truckee
River and the Truckee River; on the west, the valley floors east of the
Sierras, with occasional sorties into the higher slopes, from the Little Truckee River south to just below Echo Pass; on the south to about
Hawkins Peak; in the east along the crest of the Pine Nut Mountains;
thence northward just east of Carson City and continuing northward along Steamboat Valley to a point just east of Reno, Nevada.
While defendant contends that the record shows the above to be

the customary range of the Washoe Indians, defendant urges a number of
reasons why it believes the petitioner should not recover before this
Commission. Defendant states that petitioner has failed to prove the
existence of a Washoe tribe which was capable of holding Indian titleo
According to defendant‘s reasoning if there did not exist aboriginally a.washoe tribe, which would have to be a functionary society, a
political unit, a landuconscious people in defendant‘s concept, then
the petitioner, the organized Eashoe Tribe, is not identical with or
the successor of the aboriginal'Washoe Indians. This position advanced
‘by defendant has been squarely met by the Commission in the Puget Sound
cases already determined by this Commission wherem itvhas been held
that the lack of political cohesion, in itself, was no defense where

it was shoun that among the autonomous villages in a small area there

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 287

existed an identifiable group of American Indians with strong ties of
kinship and friendship and close cultural ties. In.those cases, as in
the instant case, it was also shown that there were areas of land used

in common by all the people of the group. The Muckleshoot Tribe of In 

dians V. United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Com. 658, 67h, 6753 The Nooksack

   

Tribe v. United States, 3 Incl. c1. Com. LL79, h9h; The Lummi Tribe v.

 

United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Com. S25, 5h6e

 

It is the further contention of the defendant that the area within
the customary'range of the Eashoe Indians was not exclusivelf'used and
occupied by the Washoes. This contention is based on two points. ‘Defendant urges first, that other Indians used parts of the area, and
secondly, that the Washoe Indians "had no idea of the actual ownership
of the soil or the subsoil, and were interested only in the resources
they could obtain from it. In other words, even if the Washoe Indians
had had an organization capable of exclusively using and occupying the
whole of a defined area of land, their manner of life was such that no
exclusive use and occupancy could result." There is-no substantial evidence of record to show the use and occupancy by other Indians of any’
of the territory in which this Commission has determined Indian title
to have been.in the Washoe Indians. On the other hand, the Cowmisaior
has found substantial eridence that certain sections of the c ;I an
area were used or occupied by other than Washoe Indians, or usgf
common, such as Sierra Valley and the upper or northern part oi.Long
Valley: and has eliminated such parts of the claimed area in determiwirg

the Hashoe boundaries. Whether the Washoe Indians had any cvv::~'

7 Ind. Cl. Como 256 288

actual ownership, as white men use the term, although the family right

3

to pine nut patches aonarently i

‘--&

rdicates gone such concept, is not imDportant. Indian title is the right of exclusive use and occupancy and
if the Indians exercised this right in their every day life, then, what
their concept, if any, of this use or occupancy was in legalistic terms
is immaterial.,

The area of land claimed by the T.-iashoe Indians was included in the

lands ceded to the United States by I-Eezcico by the Treaty of Guadalupe

Hidalgo in l8L18. Defendant contends that this treaty gave the ‘izashoe
Indians no more rights than they had under the sovereignty of Mexico.
According to defendant the Washoes, being uncivilized Indians, could
derive no rig..ts from Spanish or I-iexican law, and “that the idea of

aboriginal title was in fact contrargr to that law." The question of
whether lands within the Iiexican Cession can now be made the subject
ofa claim such as in the instant case based on Indian title was determined affirmatively in favor of the petitioner in the I-Eohave Tribe

 

V. The United States, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 2l9, by this Commission, and the

 

same reasoning stated therein applies in this case.

As previously pointed out, the historical data pertaining W
Washoe Indians is scant indeedo Ethnographic material with respect to
the habitations or specific areas used by the Efashoe is also meager
when compared with source material for many other hdian tribes, bands,
or goups. This sparsity of.‘ uiformation has made it difficult to determine the area acclusively used and occupied by the E-Eashoe Indians.

Most historical material only located these Indians in a general way.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 266 289

Some historical data, such as Agent Dodge‘s report, more specifically’
place the three divisions, as do several ethnographic studies. But
Dodge,who visited but one of the divisions or “bands” in the vicinity
‘if Carson City, in his report places a Northern Paiute band as staying in “Carson Valley at the forks of the River," thus causing some
skepticism as to the overall validity of his report since no one else
has ever mentioned Paiutes as living in this area. To determine the
boundaries of Washoe territory with reasonable accuracy in.view of the
nature of the country, its resources and the subsistence economy of the
Washoe Indians necessarily involved a thorough study of the limited
material pertaining to these Indians and to the material of record in
these consolidated cases referring to their Indian neighbors. Such a
study resulted in the elimination of Sierra Valley from the Washoe
claimed territory and the upper part of Long Valley because there was
not exclusive use or occupancy in these sections in the'Washoe Indians. The extreme southern part of the claimed area was also eliminated
because there was no substantial proof of exclusive use and occupancy’
in that section.
Petitioner contends that the lands of the Weshoe Indians were te%s5
from them over a period of tim beginning in l8hB and ending by 18639
As stated within the findings of fact herein made (Finding l? (b)) the
date of taking of the California lands which were aboriginally ew~l

-up-a

sively used and occupied by the Washoe Indians occurred for all intents

I

and purposes on March 3, 1853. The date of taking with respect to the

7 Ind. Cl. Como 266 290

lands in what is now the State of Nevada cannot be determined from the
evidence now of record (Fdg. 17 (a)). The Commission does not agree
with defendant that there has not been a "taking" of all of'Washoe
country. At some date, or dates, at least prior to 1863, there was
sufficient disruption of the Washoe way of life and interference with
the overall use and occupancy of their lands to constitute an extinguishment of the Washoe. Indian title in their lands. A further hearing shall be held to determine the date the Indians were deprived of
their lands unless the parties may agree on such a date that will enable the Commission to determine the value of the Nevada lands.

The Commission concludes that petitioner has the right to maintain this action for and on behalf of all descendants of the Vashoe
Indians. The Commission further holds that petitioner has proven Indian title to the area of land described in Finding l6, and that said

Indian title was acquired by the United States from the'Washoe Indians,

without the payment of compensation therefor. The case shall now proceed to a determination of the date of acquisition of the'Hashoe lands
in Nevada, the value of the lands in California and Nevada found to
have been exclusively used and occupied by the Washoe Indians for which
they are entitled to recover, less the amounts of offsets, if any, including money or property given to or funds expended gratuitous_y for

7 Ind. C1. Com. 266 291

petitioner, to be allowed defendant under the Indian Claims Commission

Act.

/s/ LOUIS J. 0*}-EARR
Associate Commissioner

we concur:

/s/ EDGAR £3. ‘='.—u’ITT
Chief Commissioner

 

/s/ mm. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

 

