7~Ind.Cl. Con. 31 49

BEFORE THE INDI£N CISIES COEKISSION

THE QUIIEUTE TRIBE OF INDIADS, on
its own behalf and on behalf of
the HOH TRIBE OR BAND OF INDIANS;
HOH TRIBE R BAED OF INDIANS, on
relation of and represented by
SCOTT FISHER, on its own behalf,

Petitioners,

v. Docket No. I55

THE UNITED STETES O? AHERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: December 1, I958

Appearances:

Kenneth R. L. Simmons,

Glen A. Wilkinson,

Donald C. Gormley, ~ttorneys

for Petitioner

Donald R. Earshall, with whom.

was Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry'W. Horton, Attorneys for
Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COEHISSION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, deliverediimzopinion of the Commission.

Petitioners herein, The Quileute Tribe of Indians, on its own.bew
half, and on behalf of the Hon Tribe or Bamic£'Indians, the latter else
on relation of and represented by Scott Fisher,'tinely filed this suit
under the provisions of the Indian Clainstkmmnssion not of August 13,
l9h6. (C. 959, 60 Stat. lOA?, 25 U.S.C. W0). Petitioners seek addi—

tional compensation for land ceded by theéhnleute and Hon Indians

7—lnd.Cl.Con. 31 50

under the terms of the Treaty with Quinault, etc., l855, (l2 Stat. 971;
II Kappler 719 . Petitioners allege that Quileute and Hoh Indians
held aboriginal possession, use and occupancy of said lands and charge
defendant obtained same by such treaty cession for a grossly inadequate
and unconscionable consideration. In the alternative, petitioners
charge defendant with unfair and dishonorable dealings in obtaining
such cession of such lands. Petitioners allege said lands contained
approximately 725,760 acres.

This Commission at the beginning of the trial of this case approved stipulations as presented by counsel for petitioner and defendant, and established the following order of procedure:

a. This case, Docket l55, shall be tried and

heard jointly with Docket 2&2, the Quinaielt Indian

Tribe, et al., vs. The United States. All evidence

adduced in either of such cases shall be available

in the other.

b. Defendant‘s original answers shall be considered answers to all amended petitions as may be
filed in either of said cases.

c. The issues for determination in this stage of

these proceedings shall be limited to the questions of

(l) capacity and rights of petitioners to maintain this

action under the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat.

lOh9) and, (2) what aboriginal areas, if any, did petitioners’ ancestors exclusively use and occupy. (Tr. pp.

3-6)

The defendant admits that a "so-called Quileute Tribe and other
tribes and bands entered into a treaty, known as the Quinaielt Treaty
with the United States, on July 1, 1855 or January 25, l856 (12 Stat.
971, II Kappler 719).” (Def. Ans. par. 9), sometimes called the

‘Treaty of Olympia”.

7 End.Cl.Com. 31 51

Although it was not until l855 when Territorial Governor Isaac I.
Stevens entered into treaty negotiations at a council held between the
United States and those tribes and bands living along the Pacific coast
between Gray's Harbor and Cape Flattery that it was learned that there
were some Indians residing there who were different from their Salishan

speaking neighbors. There was a distinct dialectical difference in the
speech of two young observers from the other Indians present. Governor
Stevens directed further investigations be made and learned that these
previously unknowns were Chimakuan speaking Indians residing mostly at
the mouths of the Kwilleyute and Hoh rivers. (Our Fdgs. J and 3)

The natural barrier of their coast-line without land-lodced harbors substantially prevented any further extended white contact with
them until long fter their treaty cession. As late as the twentieth
century there were no roads and mail was brought by canoe and trail
from Neah Bay on the Strait of Juan de Fuca. This area is one of the
largest unspoiled areas of natural scenery in the United States.

The recognition of the petitioner tribe as an identifiable group
of American.Indians is established by the Government records introduced in evidence in this case. Furthermore, the Quileute and Hoh
Indians were recognized by the defendant in the Treaty with the
Quinaielt, etc., 1855, sometimes called the Treaty of Olympia (cit. Ki},
both in the preamble and among the Indian signatory parties of the
Quinaielts, Queets, Hohs and Quileutes. '

Some record of the census of their membership has been reported
by the Government‘s Indian agents and tribal officers from treaty

times to recent decades. The Interior and Insular affairs Committee

7—Ind.Cl.Com. 31 52

of the House of Representatives (82d Congress) authorized and directed
a study of the bureau of Indian Affairs. On page 168, the records
of Quileute are described in the report of this study, 18 follows:

* * *Quileute: ~ There is no up-to—date collection

of tribal documents. Each council officer keeps

those records pertaining to his office. Currently

minutes are fully kept. Previously they were not.

There is no established procedure for keeping records and no safe place for their preservation.* * *.

The Government records in evidence here show the existence of
the Quileute and Hoh Indians. Gibbs estimated their population as
not more than 300 in 1855, Rooney reported their total as 295 in
1907 (Fdgs ic and 2f). These records show repeated efforts of the
Government to remove the Quileute, and also the Hoh were removed,
to reservations and away:from their ancestral habitations COHCSH7
trated along the mouths of the respective rivers bearing their
names since treaty times. The first discovery of this identifiable
group of American Indians, the Quileute and Hoh, is discussed in the
journals of the Governmentrngptkmkms for a cession of their lands.
(Fdg. lo)

Defendant‘s plea of res judicata is not a valid defense to
petitioners‘ claim, first, because neither petitioners here were a

party to such case in the Court of Claims styled (Duwamish, et al.

vs. United St tes. (No. F~275,79 C. Cls. 530). This defence has

 

been raised on numerous other occasions against other claimants who
were party litigants in the Duwamish case and afterwards brough;suit
before this Commission under the lndian Claims Commission Act. This

Commission has consistently rejected such plea of res judicata. The

7~Ind.Cl.Con. 31 " 53

Skokonish Tribe V. United States, 6 Ind. Cl. Conn 15A, The Suouamish
I§ib§_v. United States, 5 Ind. Cl. Com. l58, The Snokomish Tribe v.
United States; A Ind. Cl. Com. 5&9, The Kuckleshoot Tribe V. United
States, 2 Ind. Cl. Com. A2A, The Nooksack Tribe v. United States, l
Ind. Cl. Com. AZL. Because of the reasons set forth in those prior
cases, and the similarity of the claim asserted here, the judgment

rendered in the Duwanish case is not a bar to the present claim.

Petitioners alleged certain boundaries of the area to which
they made claim in their original petition. On January 6, l953

petitioners filed a motion to amend their petition, which amendment included amendment of their boundary description. By order ofthis
Commission, dated February l2, 1953, the motion was granted and the
description in their amended petition reads as follmgs:

Commencing at a point on the Pacific Coast approxe
imately 6 miles south of the Ozette River; thence easterly to the west shore of Czette lake; thence easterly
across Ozette lake following the crest of the watershed
between Big River and Crooked River; thence easterly
along the crest of the watershed between.Herman Creek and
Ellis Creek; thence easterly along the crest of'the'watershed between Pysht River and Beaver Creek; thence southerly along the crest of the watershed between West Tndjz
River and the Sol Duo River to Eount Miller; thence southeasterly along the crest of the watershed between Crescent
lake and the North Fork of Sol Duo River to Boulder Peak;
thence southerly along the crest of the Olyapic Mountains
to Bear Pass; thence westerly to the crest of Mount Olynrpus; thence westerly along the crest of the watershed between the south fork of Hoh River and Quests River; thence
westerly along the crest of the watershed between Hoh River
and Clear Water River to Mount Octopus; thence westerly
along the crest of the watershed of Eoh River Uy'the mouth
of Steamboat Creek on the Pacific Coast; thence northwardly
along the Pacific coast to the place of beginning.

These petitioners maintain they were defenseless, dependent,

ignorant Agerican Indians, who, at the tine of the treaty cession

7—Ind.Cl.Com. 3l 54

of their lands, July l, 1855, were uneducated, unable to read and
write, and without knowledge of the nature and legal effect of the
agreement which they entered into with defendant; that, without any
knowledge or understanding of money or market values of land, petitioners‘ predecessors in interest relied at all times with implicit
confidence upon the fairness and honesty of the United States and
its agents as their guardian and trustee. Under such alleged circumstances they, together with the Quinaielt Tribe of Indians, ceded

their land to defendant for the alleged unconscionable total sum of

$25,000.

Alternatively, petitioners allege such cession of their lands
was procured by duress in that defendant's treaty representative and
agents lead them.to believe there was no alternative but to sign such
treaty.

There is no evidence of any treaty language or Act of Congress
which expressly creates a fiduciary relationship between defendant and
petitioners. We conclude, therefore, that such legal relationship of
guardian and ward, or other duties and obligations as a trustee were
not created between the defendant and these Indian parries, and has
never existed.

In the opinion of Gila River Pima Haricooa Indian Community vs.

United States, lAO F. Supp. 776, the applicable principle here was

 

firmly stated:

Whether or not the legal relationship of guardian
_and ward exists between a particular Indian Tribe and
the United States depends, we think, upon the express
pro¥ision5>f the particular treaty, agreement, executivc order, or statute under which the claim presented
arises.

7—Ind.Cl. Com. 31 . 55

The same principle was again asserted by the Court of Claims

   

in The Sioux Tribe of Indians, et al. v. United States, 1&6 F. SUPP-229
The same principle was controlling on the fiduciary question in the

opinion of this Commission in The Omaha Tribe of Nebraska, et al.

   

v. United States, 6 Ind. Cls. Com. 68

 

We further note in passing upon petitioners‘ alleged grounds
of recovery that whatever may have transpired in the minds of the
respective signers to the treaty cessions, no evidence of acts or
other conduct amounting to duress is shown from.the journal and
other accounts of the negotiations. However, the petitioners‘ allegations of right or recovery on the basis of unfair treatment and/or
unconscionable consideration may or may not be established by reason
of substantial disparity, if any, between the $25,000 consideration
and the market value of the land when ceded to defendant. (l2 Stat.
971, II Kapp. 719)

There is no doubt in our minds that the Quileute and Hoh Indians
spoke a common language distinct from their neighbors, that they
constituted a land—using unit of American Indians subsisting upon
fish, roots and berries, along the environs of the Quillayute and Hoh
rivers, respectively, in pre-treaty times. (Findings 1, 2, 3 and l2)

The substantial controversy arising in this case concerns the use
and occupancy of three separate portions of the tract of land to which
petitioners claim Indian title, namely: the area around lake Ozette on
the north (Finding l0); the area of the Olympic Rountains.on the east

(Finding ll); and the heavily forested land areas upland and bet"

1
(D
(D
C5

such river valleys (Finding l2). The evidence establishes that the

Quileute and Hoh Indians lived, fished, hunted and gathered roots and

....,..._.._...._...,.... ...._—....-n—-—--——-v-—--- *- '

7-lnd.Cl. Com. 31 ' 56

berries in the Quillayute and Hoh River valleys and along the contiguous river valleys which bear their names. Their winter lodges
were concentrated at the mouths of the Quiilyute and Hoh rivers,
respectively. (Finding l2)

We shall take up first that area of land north of the Quillayute
river valley extending some twelve miles up to the middle of lake
Ozette. we held special bearings upon this question of the “overlap
area" between Makah and Quileute land. Petitioners‘ able anthropologist, Dr. Verne R. Ray, prepared some 85 pages of research material
consisting of la maps dated from l838 to 1955 and some 20 documents,
letters, and extracts from ethnological publications. (Pet. Ex. 125)
Dr. Ray concluded that Dr. Herbert Taylor, ethnologist who testified
in Docket 60, Makah Tribe v. United States, was in error in his conclusions that the whole of Ozette lake area was occupied by Ozette
Indians, a sub~tribe of the Nakah. Dr. Ray admitted that his findings
were unusual in that as a general proposition only one tribe or group
of Indians used a lake to the exclusion of others, except permissive
users, in this region, but that while there were some tensions over
the use and occupancy of Re Ozette and its prize blue-back salmon,
yet he found that t-e Quileutes utilized all but the north end of
lake Ozette, very near to the aboriginal Ozette village which was situated on the Ozette River, a comparatively short river connecting lake
Ozette with the Pacific Ocean.

The documentary evidence bearing on this Question is indeed fragmentary; Such material as does exist, fails to treat precisely with

7-Ind.Cl.Con. 31 57the controversy before us; that is, did Quileute Indians during

and before treaty times, l8S5~l856,e3xclusively use and occupy that

area or strip of land about ten to twelve miles in width between.the
middle of lake Ozette and the Quiliayute River Valley south of Cape

Johnson?

This northern portion of the claimed tract has been excluded
from our finding of Quilleute territory. (Finding lh). ‘We conclude that the cession boundagy ‘between Makah—Ozette and the Quilleutes in all probability referred to Ozette, the village, north of
Lake Ozette and was included within the tract of land ceded by petitioners to defendant.

The prime purpose of Governor Stevens was to extinguish Indian
title to the whole of the area north of Gray‘s Harbor and west of
the Cascades except that designated for Indian reservations. Such
was the stated poiicy of the defendant‘s Office of Indian Affairs.
(Pet. E3; 129. The method employed by Governor Stevens in accom»
plishing this purpose is evident upon examination and comparison of
the land descriptions contained in the several treaties affecting
such extinguishment. He adroitly avoided leaving any vacancy by
simply quoting verbatim the cozmon boundary used in the treaty'cesw
sion with the adjoining tribes. The expedience of accomplishing
this purpose of extinguishing all Indian title undoubtedly accounts
for his use of the ambiguous description,3f "Ozett" as_the common
corner of the Makah—Ozette south boundary end in identical language,
the Quileutes north boundar*. Neither Governor Stevens nor his
advisers had reported any knowledge of the existence of lake

Ozette. Such ambiguous description gave rise to controversy as fr

7-Ind. Cl. Com. 31 58

the true aboriginal boundary between the Makah and Quileute tribes
was above, below, or through lake Ozette and is evidence that the
usually thorough Stevens'was not well informed on the locations of
the aboriginal boundaries between the Makah and Quileute Indians.

Although the Osetts are referred to as a "village of the Makah
Tribe“ in the preamble of the Treaty with the Makah, 1855, (12 Stat.
939, II Kapp. 682) and such village is situated at the north end
of lake Ozette, while the principal winter village of the Quileute,
IaPush, is l7 miles south of the Ozette village and more than 7 miles
from.Iake Ozette, yet in both the treaty with Makah and the treaty
"with Quileute, such lake area was included within the Quileute territory, notwithstanding that the Osett village, associated with the
Makah Tribe, were the only Indians with a permanent winter village
on lake Ozette.

Iahe Ozette was not shown on Dr. Gibbs‘ map of the area in question although it is a.much larger lake than the Quinault ke which
‘was shown.by Gibbs‘ map. Gibbs was present at the negotiations and _a
‘was a principal adviser to Governor Stevens. Lake Ozette was in, at
least, the near proximity of the Makah-Quileute boundary. ‘We can only
conclude that the size and locations of lake Ozetteeame not definitely
known.to Stevens and his advisers, (if even vaguely known to him)_

Dr. Ray‘s compilation, contained in Petitioners’ Exhibit l25,
P0ints up the fact that the respected authorities are in sharp disv

agreement as to what grou of Indians, if any, maintained possession

an

of this area in aboriginal tines.

7-lnd.Cl. Com. 3]. 59

The treaty cession boundaries define this area as Quileute
territory; However, the area‘s physical location, near Osset
Village, tends to show it in Makah territory. The prized blue-back
salmon found only in lake Ozette was a choice fish of the Indians
of this region according to Dr. Verne Ray's testimony. We conclude
that lake Osette was not an isolated, but a.nuch used subsistence
area in aboriginal times. There is evidence of tension over the use
of lake Oeette between the Makah and the Quileute. All of the fisheating lndians of this area were by habit and custom generous in
nature as to sharing with neighboring groups and tribes.

‘We conclude that the Quileute Indians did not exclusively use
and occupy Iake Ozette during treaty tines, rhich is the only time
pertinent to this inquiry. The treaty”cession boundary was of expediency and not based on fact. The great weight of the evidence
is almost entirely based upon events long subsequent to the time of
the treaty :essions. Such evidence fails to establish that the
southern part of lake Ozette, to which petitioners lay claim, was
an area used and occupied exclusively by Quileute Indians. IExclusive use and occupancy is the standard required to establish Indian
title to an.area of land. While the Quileute seasonally fished on
lake Ozette they did not use this lake to the exclusion of otkyr
tribes, exyecially the Makah and Ozette Endians. (Findings lOa Fm
CJd‘)eJf) 5 and h) ‘Secondly, petitioners claim their aboriginal areas, exclusiwsw

ly used a:n_occupied by the Quileute and Hoh Indians inolxf

?—Ind.Cl.Com, 31 60

sizeable portion of the Clynpie Mountains on the west side of such

, lands. We have noted in the S‘Klallan, Skokomish and other cases

that this Olympic range was used by all the tribes and bands of
Indians to hunt deer, elk and bear. thnologist Erna Gunther and
others have noted that this area was a free range for anyfuho
would use.it. (Finding ll)

Thirdly, defendant urges that petitioners did not hold Indian
title to "non-village areas“; that all the Indians of this region
had, at most, a very loose sense of property ownership and no concept of land boundaries whatever outside their respective villages.

Defendant further contends that the ease of fishing prevented
them from engaging in the arduous pursuit of game, that the root
and berry gathering areas were free to all who would use then and
the forests of this area'were among the most dense in the world,
traversed only by a limited.use of game trails. (Dft. Req. Fdg.
19) It is a fact that the major portion of their livelihood and
sustenance was drawn from the sea and the rivers. But they also
<depended upon roots and berries from the prairies and supplemented
this diet with elk, deer and bear killed or driven from the upland
areas into the prairies and_river valleys. These were the primary
purposes for which Indians of this region used land in aboriginal
times. This constitutes use and occupancy in the sense of "Indian
title". '

Defendant contends that these nonrvillage areas were"free-use
areas” to all Indians and that such use and occupancy was not exclusive as to Quileute and Hon Indunn as they had no concept of land

7—Ind.c1.com. 31 . 61

ownership. It is sufficient to observe that the government men
experienced considerable difficulty and delay in removing these
Indians from their ancestral river valleys onto Indian reservations
(Finding 7) and their reluctance to be joined with other tribes and
bands on other reservation lands. (Finding le) Also, the Quileute
and Hoh spoke the Chimakuan language which was unintelligible to their
neighboring Indians. (Finding lc)

In our Finding 13 we have defined the natural boundaries encomr
passing the several use areas of the Quileute and Hoh Indians, inr
cluding not only their winter villages but also the rivers, valleys
and prairies used and occupied by them.

Thus, we find and conclude to defendant‘s first question, listed at page 203 of its brief, affirmatively, that petitioners have _
established that a particular historical tribe, the Quileute Tribe,
of American Indians did aboriginally and exclusively hold and occur
py from.time immemorial, a specific and definable area of land in
western'Washington. (Finding 13)

As to defendant's question 2, whether any of the petitioners
have established that anyone of them.was aboriginally a tribe of
American Indians, we find and conclude that defendant recognized
and treated with them as sudl, both in the treaty cession and that
government men and writers have described their existence as an ethnic group in their journals, reports, correspondence and maps for a
Century. (Finding 1)

Defendant's question 3, with reference to the legal succession
or continued existence of petitioners as a recognized entity, is not

easily answered from this record. We have noted that the Quileute

'7-Ind.Cl. Com. 31 52

Tribe was incorporated under the Wheeler—Howard Act, 193A (Finding 3g),
and such Charter, Constitution and Bylaws were approved by the Secretary of the Interior after ratification by the required number of members. Reservations were established for the aEoor':'\gina_'L tribe. Defendant
has approved their charter. We conclude that petitioners have established
by prima facie evidence that petitioners are the legal successors and
representatives of the aboriginal Quileute and Hoh Indians, and in the
absence of evidence to the contrary, we affirmatively answer defendant's
question A, that petitioners are successors in interest of an identifiable tribe of American Indians.

Defendant’s question 5, as to whether the petition states a claim
upon which relief can be granted, we find that such demurrer is not
well taken since petitioners have alleged jurisdiction, capacity,liability and damages, the necessary allegations to properly plead their cause
of action. ’

Based upon.the record as a whole, and upon the findings of facts
herein made, this Commission concludes that the Quileute Tribe of Inr
dians, including their subdivision, the Hoh Indians, had aboriginal
Indian title to the lands described in Finding l3.

The treaty with the Quinaielt, etc. (including Quileute), lS55,
was ratified by the United States Senate on Karch 8, 1859. Such rat—
ification date constitutes the date of taking by defendant.

The parties stipulated that initial; proceedings would be limited

to issues of capacity and rights of petitioners to bring this action

7-Ind. Cl. Con. 31 63

and to what aboriginal areas, if any, were petitioners vested with
Indian title. Further hearings will be required on the questions of
the adequacy of the consideration paid, the acreage and value of
said lands and the rights retained in said lanis by petitioners or

their ancestors.

9
1

_§d_g_a_z:_ _E. 1‘! itt
Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring:

louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

inn. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

