42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 434

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE POTTANATOMIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, THE PRAIRIE ) Docket Nb. 15-D
BAND OF THE POTTAWATOMIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, ) '

Plaintiffs,

HANNAHVILLE INDIAN COMMUNITY, FOREST COUNTY Docket No. 29-B

POTAWATOMI COMMUNITY,

Plaintiffs,

CITIZEN BAND OF POTAWATOMI INDIANS OF Docket No. 311

OKLAHOMA, and POTAWATOMI NATION,

Plaintiffs,

Docket Nbs. 313 and
314-A

THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA,
on behalf of the KASKASKIA, WEA, and

PEORIA NATIONS,

Plaintiffs,

THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF KANSAS, THE KICKAPOO Docket No. 315

TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA,

Plaintiffs,

Docket Nos. 15-D and
29-B

POTAWATOMI INDIANS OF INDIANA AND MICHIGAN,
INCORPORATED,

Intervenor,
v.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\../\.J\./\./\—J'\-l\./\/\p’\/\.l\.J'\.’\/\.’\.J\./\../\/\J\/K./\..J\.J\./\..J'\—l\..J'\../\/\.J\-./\-’

Defendant.

Decided: August 25, 1978

FINDINGS OF FACT ON VALUE AND CONSIDERATION
The Commission makes the following findings of fact which are supplemental to findings numbered 1 through 37 entered herein on April 4, 1973,

30 Ind. C1. Comm. 42, 87 (1973).

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 435

39. Historical Background. From the last quarter of the 17th
century until the close of the French and Indian War in 1763, all of
the tracts involved in this proceeding were French territory. Explorers
such as Joliet, Father Marquette, LaSa1le and Hennepin, who traveled
extensively through Illinois, reported on the beauty and navigability of
the many rivers, the fertility of most of the soil, the great abundance
of fruit bearing trees and bushes, the variety of wild game and fur

bearing animals,and the excellent fish and wild fowl which inhabited the

innumerable rivers, streams and lakes in the area. These explorers

also remarked on the generally healthy and temperate climate and

stated that these lands would prove to be a great asset to France.

French fur trappers,traders, explorers, and military

and trading posts built by the French dominated the territory.

.A chain of military and trading posts were established from the upper
Great Lakes region extending southward along the Illinois River and into
the Mississippi Valley. Other military and trading posts were established
in western Indiana along the Kankakee and the Wabash river valleys.

When the French and Indian War ended with a British victory in 1763,
the British attempted to create a strong and friendly alliance with their
late Indian enemies in the old Northwest Territory. Pursuant to the
Proclamation of 1763, settlement by members of the colonies in lands west
of the Appalachian Mountains was forbidden. Despite this prohibition and
the British attempts to enforce it, large numbers of Virginians crossed

the mountains and settled in Kentucky and southwestern

Pennsylvania,and a few reached Illinois. Some of the older French

42 Ind. C1.

380

Treaties, cessions, valuation dates, and acreages.

Comm.

354

The areas

ceded by the plaintiffs, the treaties involved, and the valuation

dates, were determined in our title decision, su ra.

The areas to

436

be valued in this proceeding are Royce Area 48 in Illinois and Royce

areas 98 and 100 located partly in Illinois and partly in Indiana.

Because of overlaps between these and other cessions, the areas were

subdivided into various tracts as an aid in identifying title interests.

Tracts A, A',B,C,D,E,G,H and I involved in this phase of the case

are described in our title decision (30 Ind. Cl. Com. 42, 50 through

53) and are mapped in the same decision as appendices I and II. S

map» APPendix A, infra.

The following table sumarizes the Royce areas, the tracts,

the owning tribe, the total tract acreage, the particular tribe's

interest in the tract, and the valuation dates.

 

ROYCE AREA TRACT TRIBE TOTAL ACREAGE INTEREST IN TRACT VALUATION
DATE
48 A Kaskaskia 6,279,118 all 12/12/1803
48/110 A‘ Kaskaskia 3,824,842 one-half 12/12/1803
Kickapoo one—half 1/13/1821
110 B Kickapoo 5,117,115 all 1/13/1821
110 C Kickapoo 2,193,176 all 1/13/1821
110 D Kickapoo 890,014 one-half 1/13/1821
110 E Kickapoo 844,794 one-half l/13/1821
110/98 G Kickapoo 402,870 one-third 1/13/1821
Potawatomi one—third 10/2/1818
Wea one-third 10/2/1818
1lO/180 H Wea 51,384 one-third l0/2/1818
Kickapoo one-third 12/13/1821
98 I Wea 351,756 one-half 10/2/1818
Potawatomi one-half 10/2/1818

ee

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 437

settlements on the Mississippi River and in the 0hio'Va11ey 1n.southern

Illinois survived the British takeover and retained their French flavor, but
they lost some of their importance as trading centers. Pittman, a
British engineer who surveyed portions of the area in suit between 1765
and 1768, praised the secure anchorage available for large bateaux at
Kaskaskia in Tract A of Royce Area 48, noting that it was dangerous for
boats to remain in the Mississippi River because of caving banks, vast
numbers of logs and trees carried down stream by the force of the rapid
current, and the heavy gales which occurred in the winter. He also
praised the Kaskaskia River as a good site for the construction of
mills and noted that a fine mill and a brewery were already located
there. He reported that the old Jesuit plantation had been sold

and that as part of one year's harvest, had supplied 86,000 pounds of
flour to the King. The village of Kaskaskia then had some 65 families
in addition to numerous merchants, casual visitors and an unknown
number of slaves.

Gordon, another British officer who published his travel journal
in 1776, described the lower Wabash and the Mississippi River area
bordering Tract A in Royce Area 48. He commented on the strategic
location of Fort Massac (Royce Area:27, not included in this suit but
located nearby); on the large number of buffalo present; on the
salt which could be easily obtained at the neaby saline; on the rich,

luxuriant soil in the southern portion of Tract A between the Ohio and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 433

Mississippi rivers. He reported that the Kaskaskia River was navigable
for some 52 miles from its mouth and that Kaskaskia was a prosperous

village of some 80 houses. He praised the rich soil of the area and the

large number of cattle and hogs owned by the settlers.

Following the colonial victory in the Revolutionary War (1783), lands
west of the Appalachian Mountains including the old Northwest Territory,
became the property of the new Federal Government. In accordance with
Article II of the Jay Treaty of November 19, 1794 (8 Stat. 116, 117),
the British finally agreed-to abandon their military posts along the
border between the United States and Canada and to have their soldiers
out of such posts by June 1, 1796. As a result of the loss of British
military and other support, the Indians in the Northwest Territory,
defeated at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794, were persuaded to sign
the Treaty of Greenville on August 3, 1795 (7 Stat. 49), and to cede to
the United States approximately two-thirds of the present state of
Ohio, a small part of southeastern Indiana, plus a number of enclaves
located in their retained territory. In the same treaty the United States
recognized the title of the Indian treaty parties to their lands north

and west of the so-called Greenville Line. The small enclaves acquired

by the United States in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois, were for the purpose

of establishing a chain of military posts.

Even before the Treaty of Greenville, a large number of American
settlers had moved into Ohio and later into Indiana. By the Act of

August 7, 1789 (1 Stat. 50), Congress provided for a government for the

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 439

Northwest Territory. By the Act of May 7, 1800 (2 Stat. 58), the Territory
of Indiana was formed and on March 1, 1803, Ohio was admitted to the Union.
By 1812, approximately 250,000 people had settled in Ohio and many were

moving into the Indiana Territory which by 1805 had convened a legislature.

New settlements developed rapidly along the Mississippi River in southern
Illinois and by 1809 Illinois was made a separate

territory (Act of February 3, 1809, 2 Stat. 514). Indiana was admitted
as a state on December 11, 1816, and Illinois on December 3, 1818.

In 1787, General Harmar described the Post of Vincennes on the
Wabash (about 30 miles southeast of Tract C in Royce Area 110) as a
thriving village of 400 houses and a population of 900 French and 400
Americans. He reported that in August of that year he marched with 31

men 160 miles from Vincennes to the village of Kaskaskia, crossing prairies

where they suffered from heat and poor water supplies. He noted that the
prairies were excellent for grazing and that they abounded with wild

game such as deer, buffalo, bear, etc. He described Kaskaskia as a
handsome French village containing 191 men and the chief of the Kaskaskia
tribe. He observed that the elevation was low and the place subject

to inundation. He visited the formerly French villages of Prairie du
Rocher and St. Philip, and small stockaded settlements of American
squatters at LaBelle Fountain and Grand Ruisseau, all in Tract A of

Royce Area 48. He spoke of 30 more Americans settled on the rich,
fertile Mississippi River bottomlands also in Tract A. He was received

hospitably at the village of Cahokia. This village, about 50 miles north

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 440

of Kaskaskia, was founded by French Canadians in 1699 and was located in
what became present day St. Clair County. There were then between two
and three hundred persons living in Cahokia. Harmar observed that it
was only 4 miles to St. Louis which he described as a more prosperous and
"genteel" Spanish village on the west bank of the Mississippi River.

Collot, publishing in French and in English concerning his visit
to Illinois in 1796, described Illinois as perhaps the only spot respecting
which travellers had given no exaggerated accounts. He wrote of the beauty,
fertility and good climate of the area; the majestic rivers which flowed
through and around it and the many smaller navigable rivers and creeks
which abounded in the area. He mntioned that access to Kaskaskia and
to Cahokia was by two roads, one open the year around and the other
passable only in summer. He wrote of the luxuriant vegetation and the
splendid soil in the area.

The War of 1812 which broke out subsequent to the Kaskaskia cession
of Royce Area 48 (1803) but prior to the other cessions in suit, brought
a temporary halt to the western movement of settlers. Because the
settlers in this area believed that the British had been encouraging
the Indians in the uprisings led by Tecumseh, they supported the war
which ended in 1814 with the Treaty of Ghent.

The British gave up their claims to trade south of the Canadian

border and withdrew whatever support they had been giving to the Indians.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 441

There was then no further impediment to the westward expansion of the
American frontier to the Mississippi River and beyond, and the Federal
Government continued its policy of land purchases from the Indians east
of the Mississippi. By 1821 most of Indiana, Illinois, Michigan and Ohio had
fallen into the hands of Americans and there was a large movement of
settlers westward into those regions.

Contemporary accounts of the area in suit following the close of
the War of 1812, included that of Schoolcraft, a geologist who recorded
his observations of the western border of Tract A in Royce Area 48 in
a journal published in 1819. He reported large beds of good coal and
some native copper along the Big Muddy River. He wrote of the beauty of
the landscape, the bleak rugged cliffs near the rivers, the verdant
forests, limestone rocks, rich alluvial American Bottom and some poor
lands which were strewn with flint. He described the American Bottom
as being from 3 to 10 miles wide and 100 miles long. He stated that this
land was the finest in the western country, producing all kinds of grain
and fruits in perfection and abundance.

In 1819, Mr. Ernst, a wealthy German seeking a site for a colony,
traveled through portions of Tracts A, A’ and B. He described Edwardsville
in Tract A (ceded in 1803) as an attractive town surrounded by a fertile
region with fine farms, very productive soil, luxuriant peach trees,
apple orchards, melons and pumpkins of unusual size and quality. He

reported that the soil was too rich for potatoes which could not be planted

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 442

until July, but that corn, wheat and oats grew well. He was interested

in purchasing land at Vandalia which was about to be laid out, and mentioned
a good road from Edwardsville to Vandalia northward across the Great

Prairie of Tracts A‘ and B which he traveled in order to inspect the

lands along the Sangamon River in Tract B. He observed that the high

degree of fruitfulness of the land had induced farmers to trespass upon
Kickapoo land with the risk of being driven out or killed by the Indians.

He noted that although the 1818 Kickapoo cession had eliminated danger

from the Indians, the land had not yet been surveyed and that when it was

surveyed and offered for sale several years hence, anyone would be at

liberty to outbid the squatters. He concluded that all of these factors

were proof of the desirability of the land and predicted that it would

be quickly settled.

40. Topography, Soils, Vegetation, Climate, Drainage.
(a) Topography — Soils. The topography and soils of Illinois

were largely determined by two glaciers which ground their ways southward
during the Pleistocene Age. They left two differing soil areas, each
of which influenced the settlement process and subsequent economic
developments.

The first glacier, the Illinoian Drift, covered the state as far
south as the Ohio River, leaving behind as it receded, rugged hills
littered with glacial debris and compact clay soils marked by the absence

of sulphur, potassium and nitrogen.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 443

White pipe clay, potters clay, brick clay, fire clay, plasterers

sand, sandstone, limestone, marble, galena, iron, copper, copperas, zinc
and natural gas were present in varying quantities throughout the area,
although the extent to which they were known at the valuation dates is not
clear from the record. The clay material was known and used. Mineral
springs and salines were present and were valued by the settlers.
The low swampy lands and the wet prairies in the tract were infested

with mosquitos. Malaria and other fever illnesses were common. Even

the American Bottom, the most fertile and valuable portion of the area

in suit, was not a particularly healthy place in the 19th century.

when possible, early settlers avoided the lowlands and the swampy areas.
However, many settlers were willing to brave the risks and discomforts

in order to take advantage of the rich and fertile bottomlands.

The second glacier, the Wisconsin Drift, pushed down from the

north at a later date, grinding down hills into smooth prairies and
leaving behind a level countryside and a light loam soil rich in the
humus and chemicals needed for fertility. The Wisconsin drift did not
benefit all parts of the area equally. The southernmost advance is marked
by the Shelbyville Moraine consisting of a generally east—west ridge

of earth carried by and pushed ahead of the glacier. Shelbyville lies

in the southern portion of Tract A’ which is the northern part of Royce
Area 48 and the southern portion of the overlapping part of Royce Area

110. The moraine begins in the east of Tract C near Paris, Illinois,

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 444

and sweeps in a southwest curve through the town of Kansas, south of

Charlestown, Matoon and Windsor, and then north through Macon in Tract A‘.

The Shelbyville Moraine is one of the most important natural

boundaries in Illinois. Early settlers were quick to note the difference
between lands lying to the south or north of this dividing line. North
of the moraine the countryside was level, the soil deep and the swamps
numerous. Once drained, the swamps formed humus-rich fields of imense
productivity. South of the moraine the rugged hills and the glacier

strewn waste discouraged settlement by frontiersmen.
(b) Vegetation. The prairie portions of the subject lands were

covered with tall grasses with Big Bluestem dominant. :These fields

were frequently interlaced with forest areas or "groves" of the oakhickory forest association which followed most of the river courses.

The dense grass coverage of the prairies contributed to the richness

of the soils, the fertility of which was caused primarily by the organic
material returned to the soil by the grass and rotted roots. Parts of
the subject land were heavily timbered, sometimes in commercially
exploitable quantities and quality. There were many fine fruit trees

and an abundance of fruit-bearing bushes. The particular types of trees
and the ratio of timber land to prairie land will be described in
findings dealing with individual tracts to be valued.

(c) Climate. The climate in the subject lands was generally

of the humid continental type with hot summers, cold winters and short

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 445

transitional seasons. The average annual temperature ranges were from
50° in the northern portions, to 60' in the south. January was usually
the coldest month with mean temperatures ranging from the mid-20's in the
north to 36° F. in the south. Mean temperatures in July ranged from
the mid 70's in the north to 80° F. in the south.

Average annual precipitation ranged from 32" in the northern portion
of the area in suit, to 47" in the southern part. Although total
precipitation was greatest in southern Illinois, that which fell during

the growing season (April to September) was about the same throughout

the state.

The average number of frost—free days ranged from 160 in the northern
part to over 200 in the south. Although the growing season was shorter
in northern Illinois, crop varieties and corn hybrids with shorter
maturity periods were used and frost damage was not a serious problem.

On the whole,the climate in Illinois was temperate and healthy
and this fact was well known to early settlers.

(d) Drainage. The area enjoyed generally good natural drainage

and only a few areas required tile or ditch drainage. Excellent stands

of timber were found along the many watercourses in the area in suit.
Fruit trees, berry bushes, luxuriant grasses and grain crops were

common. Even the marshes, swamps and wetlands were valuable because

of the wild game and fur bearing animals which thrived in these areas.
Many of the first non-Indians in the area were hunters and trappers

and skins and furs were an important source of income to the early

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 446

settlers. The salines found in the area were greatly prized by the settlers.

41. Transportation and Access.

(a) Water Transporation. Transportation through and 3CCe55 t0

the subject landsvere unusually good because of the network of waterways
to the eastern and western states and from the Great Lakes to New Orleans.
River and stream routes long used by the Indians were followed by the

non-Indians beginning with the French in the 1600's. These water routes

were an essential element of the fur trade and of colonization and settlement by the French, Spanish, British and Americans.

The major streams and rivers were the Illinois River, formed by
the merger of its headwater tributaries, the Kankakee and the Des
Plaines rivers, the Mississippi River, the Ohio River and the Wabash
River. Also important were the Iroquois tributary of the Kankakee, the
Vermillion, Mackinaw, Sangamon, Macoupin, all tributaries of the Illinois
River; the Kaskaskia, Shoal, Big and Little Muddy and Cache, tributaries
of the Mississippi; the Saline tributary of the Ohio; and the Embarrass,
Vermillion and Tippecanoe, tributaries of the Wabash River.

An important route to the Illinois portions of the subject lands
was by way of the Great Lakes to Chicago, up the Chicago River and by
portage to the Des Plaines River, and down the Des Plaines to the Illinois
River at Tract D. Upstream from this point, the Kankakee River and its
tributary, the Iroquois River, gave access to Tracts D and E. Access

from Lake Michigan was possible by ascending the St. Joseph River and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 447

by portage to the Kankakee River. The Illinois River formed the northern
border of Tract D and the northern and western borders of Tract B. Tracts
A, A‘ and B all met at the confluence of the Illinois with the Mississippi.
The Mississippi in turn constituted the western border of, and gave

access to, the rich American Bottom lands of Tract A.

The Great Lakes route was not widely traveled until 1825 with the
opening of the Erie Canal from the Hudson River at Albany, New York, to
Buffalo on Lake Erie. Overnight the canal became the most important route
to the west with thousands utilizing it to carry themselves and their
household goods westward.

The most important water route to the subject lands until 1825 was
down the Ohio River from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, along the borders of
West Virginia, Ohio, Indiana and Kentucky. By ascending the Wabash
tributary of the Ohio River, direct access was gained to the entire
southern part of tracts G and I. The Vermillion tributary of the Wabash

River formed the border between and gave access to tracts C and G. The
Tippecanoe tributary of the Wabash formed the eastern boundary of Tract
I and gave access thereto. The eastern border of Tract C paralleled
the course of the Wabash River and was relatively close by. The lower
reaches of the Ohio River formed the entire southeastern boundary of
Tract A. To the south, the Mississippi River gave access to New Orleans
where ocean transport was available to the east coast and abroad.

The descent down the Ohio, past Royce Area 48, to New Orleans was

first made by a nontlndian in 1742. Fort Pitt was already in existence

as the nucleus of the future traffic west and south from Pittsburgh.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 443

The Mississippi River was navigable by large shallow draft vessels
at all tims. The other rivers were navigable by canoe and some by

flatboat. The bark canoe in use in the subject areas ranged in size

from a one man-vessel to vessels 30 feet in length and capable of carrying
3,000 pounds of cargo and a 12-man crew. The canoe was light in weight

and easily repaired and portaged. The raft, pirogue, barge, bateau,

(a keeless flat bottomed boat) and keelboat, followed the canoe. Propulsion
was by current, oars, sweeps, poles, sail and tow ropes. Flatboats were
most comon. The keelboat was in use on the Mississippi by 175L.when a
fleet ascended from the mouth of the Ohio about 75 miles to Ft. Chartres
in Tract A. The journey took about three months. All of the above

boats were in use on the Ohio and Mississippi rivers following the
Revolutionary War. The journey from Pittsburgh to New Orleans took

about three weeks. Keelboats and barges could manage the return trip with
difficulty in from three to four months. Flatboats could not make the
return trip. Immigrants to the subject tracts from.points upstream could
sometimes sell their vessels to persons going further downstream, or

the vessels could be dismantled to supply the market for sawed timber.

The first steamboat on any western river left Pittsburgh in November,
1811, on a voyage down the Ohio River past Tract A and thence down the
Mississippi to Naches and New Orleans. In 1812 the first steamboat
went up the Mississippi from New Orleans. Other steamboats appeared in

1813, 1814 and 1815. In 1816 the Washington, a steamboat of advanced

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 449

design and the first two-decker, passed over the falls of the Ohio to
New Orleans. The return voyage was made in 25 days, less than 1/4 the time
required for barges and keelboats. Steamboats appeared on the Wabash in

1820 and traversed the entire length of Royce Area 98, Tracts G and I,

and seven miles beyond to Delphi, Indiana.

(b) Roads and Tracts. Overland travel was necessary to reach
most of the interior of the subject tracts. Shortly after 1700 the French
made a trail from Kaskaskia in Tract A through Danville in Tract G,
to Detroit. When George Rogers Clark passed through Tract A in 1778,

a French trail existed from Kaskaskia to Prairie du Rocher. Two trails

led from Kaskaskia to Cahokia, and a well defined trail led from Kaskaskia

to Vincennes in Royce Area 63. The Territorial legislature enacted authority '

to lay out roads as early as 1792. The first road in St. Clair County,

Tract A, was recorded in 1806. By 1811 there were 17 road districts

in that county. Three routes from Kaskaskia to Belleville were established

around 1816.

Other than the above mentioned roads, overland travel in the subject
tracts was accomplished over Indian trails, game traits and a few blazed
trails referred to as "traces". Annual migrations of vast herds of
buffalo from the western plains to the salt licks of Kentucky and the

Allegheny feeding grounds left well beaten trails that were used by

Indians and non-Indians. The old St. Louis Trace, believed to be the

first overland route used by Americans on their way to Illinois was such

42 Ind. 01. Comm. 354 450

a buffalo trail. Known also as the Vincennes Trail, it extended from the
falls of the 010 River at the present site of Louisville, Kentucky, to
the Wabash River near Vincennes and westward across Tract A of Royce

Area 48, to St. Louis. To the east it extended to the Wilderness Road
and the Great Valley Road to Richmond, Virginia. Buffalo paths also
extended northward and westward from the vicinity of Fort Massac in Tract
A.

Indian trails radiated in various directions from several focal
points: near the present site of Metropolis on the Ohio River in Tract A;
near the mouth of the Kaskaskia River in Tract A; near the site of
Danville in Tract C and Tract G; at the confluence of the Des Plaines
and Kankakee rivers in Tract D; and to the north at Chicago.

Early settlers often made their own trails. In the forests, trees
and stumps were removed; small streams were forded or bridged, and
corduroy roads of logs were laid across swamps. On the prairies, roads
sometimes followedr1dges‘between sloughs and lakes. When necessary
because of obstacles, wagons were unloaded, taken apart, and with their
contents, carried over the obstacles. They were then reassembled and

reloaded.

42. Royce Area 48 — Tract A. Tract A of Royce Area 48 in Illinois
1/
contains all or part of the following present day counties ranging from

l] The references in the above material to counties is to facilitate
location of the areas being discussed. At valuation dates, most of the
present day counties had not been organized. The record contains a number

of Illinois county histories from which some of the facts recited in our
findings have been taken.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 451

the southern portion northward: Alexander, Pulaski, Union, Massac,

Johnson, Pope, Hardin, Jackson, Williamson, Saline, Gallatin, Randolph,
Perry, Franklin, Hamilton, White, Monroe, St. Clair, Washington, Jefferson,
Madison, Clinton, Marion, Bond, Fayette, and Effingham. The tract contains 6,279,ll8 acres of which 352,000 acres were American Bottom lands
described below. The balance of Tract A consisted of 3/4 timber lands
and 1/4 prairie.

A. American Bottom Lands. The American Bottom is a strip of rich
alluvial soil along the eastern bank of the Mississippi River. It
was 100 miles long and from 3 to 15 miles wide with an average width
of from 5 to 6 miles. It stretched from the mouth of the Illinois River
on the north to the mouth of the Kaskaskia River on the south, extending

from north to south through the present day counties of Madison, St.

Clair, Monroe, and Randolph.

The soil of the American Bottom reached 25 feet in depth and was

described by 19th century authors as of unsurpassed fertility, the

finest body of land to be foud in the "west" (now the mid-west), and by
far the most beautiful and fertile tract in the "western" country. It
was believed to be capable of supporting more people than any other
tract of equal size in what was then the United States.

The American Bottom.was enclosed on the east by a ridge of highlands
which rose abruptly from the plain, in some places becoming rocky
precipices, in others beautiful sloping hills, and everywhere crowned

‘with trees. A number of streams flowed from the bluffs and many fine

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 452

springs issued from the limestone rocks. The smaller streams formed ponds

and lagoons well supplied with fish and frequented by millions of wild

fowl. There were also larger lakes teeming with fish and wild fowl.

On its western edge, along the banks of the Mississippi River, the
American Bottom was covered for about a mile eastward with lush, almost
tropical forest, which, in addition to timber, contained fruit and nuts

in abundance. Between the forest and the bluffs marking the eastern edge,

there was an undulating meadow with belts of timber along the lakes, ponds,

streams, and reedy marshes.

This area was heavily used from time immemorial by American Indians.
The opulence of the area attracted white settlers from the moment it was
discovered by non—Indians. It was the original seat of the French settlements of Kaskaskia around 1700, Prairie du Rocher in 1722, Port Charles,
Cahokia, in 1699, and Prairie du Pont in 1760. The French made no attempt
to displace the Indian inhabitants.

American settlement of the American Bottom began in 1779. In 1783
Piggot's Fort was established. In l786 New Design was founded and in
1800 Bellefontain, Whiteside's Station and Goshen. For a number of years

more than three.fourths of the population of Illinois lived in the

American Bottom area.

B. Tract A - Portions not Containing American Bottom Lands. While

the portions of Tract A.which contained the American Bottom lands were the
finest in the tract and the first to be settled, in some cases long before

the 1803 cession date, the remainder of the tract contained much excellent

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 453

and desirable land. Present day Jackson, Union and Alexander counties
were bordered on the west by the Mississippi River. They all contained
fine arable lands, rich bottom lands, large stands of timber and few
areas of-the prairie-type land avoided by early settlers. There were
many streams, lakes and marshes where fish and wild fowl were plentiful.
White pipe clay and potters clay were abundant and useful to the settlers,

and in these and other areas, there were surface coal deposits.

Present day Pulaski, Massac, Pope, Hardin and Gallatin counties
were on the Ohio River. They contained rich soil, a great deal of excellent
timberland fruit trees and were easily accessible by water. Brick clay,
potters clay and limestone were present in parts of these areas and
there were plenty of building stones for the settlers’ use. White County,
just north of Gallatin, was bordered on the east by the Wabash River
and was quite similar to Gallatin.

The interior areas of Tract A contained areas which were rolling,
sometimes broken and hilly. Little was too broken for successful
cultivation. Drainage in these areas was generally good because of the
small streams which traversed the land and emptied into the large rivers.
Heavy stands of timber covered much of the land and there were no large
areas of prairie. There were some thinly timbered areas known as "oak

openings". The small prairies and the surrounding uplands were excellent

places for the growing of grapes and other fruit, wheat, oats, corn,

tobacco, castor beans, cotton, timothy and clover. Often the soil was

th1¢k and black and highly productive. All of this country was well

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 454

watered by small creeks and by larger rivers such as the Big Muddy and its
tributaries. In some areas there were mineral springs, and easily mined
surface coal and clay. The northern part of Tract A.was traversed by the
Kaskaskia River and drainage was good in these parts. Transportation

to and from the interior areas was not as easy as in the lands bordering
on the navigable rivers, but none of the lands were impassable and settlement of these areas, though slow at first, was steady.

43. Royce Area 48 - Tract A’. Tract AF is located in central Illinois
and is overlapped by Royce areas 48 and 110. It contains 3,824,842 acres
of land of which about 3/4 consisted of prairie lands and 1/4 timbered
lands. The Kaskaskia Indians ceded this area in 1803 and the Kickapoo
treaty ceding the same land was effective in 1821.

All or portions of the following counties are in Tract A‘: Jersey,
Madison, Bond, Fayette, Effingham, Macoupin, Montgomery, Shelby, Sangamon,
Christian, Moultrie, Coles, Logan, Macon, Piatt, Douglas, Champaign,
Dewitt, McLean and Ford.

Much of the land in this tract was located in the so-called Grand
Prairie portion of central Illinois. The soil was rich black loam well
suited to the growing of a large variety of crops. The topography was
not as hilly as that of Tract A and the area was not as accessible by
means of large rivers. The timbered areas were primarily in the vicinity
of smaller rivers and streams which criss-crossed the tract, and it was

to these places that the settlers first came. The northwestern portion

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 455

of the tract was not far from the towns of Peoria and Pekin from which
supplies could be brought into the tract without much difficulty. The
climate in the northern part of the tract was excellent with short winters
and long pleasant summers.

Settlement in Tract A‘ commenced later than in Tract A and the
population growth was slower. Americans explored Madison County in 1790
and founded the Goshen settlement there in 1800. In Bond County which
was further inland and to the east of the Mississippi, settlement began in
1811. Settlers came in greater numbers after the conclusion of the War
of 1812.

The first settlers in Fayette County which lies midway between the
Mississippi and Wabash rivers, arrived in 1815. In Montgomery County,
the first non-Indian settlement was established in 1816. The first

permanent settlement in Shelby County occurred in 1818. In Christian

County the settlers arrived in 1820 and in Macon County settlement did not
commence until 1828.

Wild game was plentiful in some portions of the tract, particularly
deer, bison, elk, wolf and bear. Some of the considerable deposits of
coal in this tract were visible from the surface. All sorts of clays

used in building were available in the tract. Drainage was not a problem

in this tract.

44. Royce Areas 96a and 110 - Tract B. Tract B is in north-central
Illinois and is overlapped by Royce areas 96a and 110. It includes all

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 456

or part of the following counties beginning in the southwest corner of

the tract: Jersey, Green, Macoupin, Scott, Sangamon, organ, Cass, Menard,
Logan, Dewitt, Mason, Tazwell, McLean, Woodford, Livingston, Marshall,
Putnam and Lasalle. The tract contains 5,117,115 acres approximately 60%
of which were prairie and 40% timber. The valuation date is January 13,
1821.

The southwestern and western portions of the tract are bordered on
the west and north by the Illinois River which flows into the Mississippi
River in Jersey County. The lands drained by the Illinois River and
its tributaries were exceptionally fertile. The bottom lands, particularly
those which were above high water mark, were considered by the Indians
and later by the non-Indians as the best land imaginable for the raising
of crops. The bluffs along the river were covered with fruit trees and
grapevines and contained quantities of clay used by the settlers in
building. These areas were predominantly timbered which made them
attractive to settlers who commenced coming into the area prior to the
extinguishment of Indian title, i.e., as early as 1815. In most of this
area there was little or no flooding and the climate was pleasant.’ The
usual mineral springs were present and were valued for their medicinal
properties. Even the occasional barrens or hickory flats could be used
for growing wheat, and there were grasses which were useful for cattle
grazing. In a few places, particularly in the northern part of the tract
along the Illinois River in Marshall County flooding occurred and some

of the area contained swamps. Even in these places the wild game was

plentiful.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 457

Those portions of Tract B not on the Illinois River were well drained
by the Sangamon, Vermillion and Mazon rivers and by Salt Creek. There
were fine stands of timber along all of the many watercourses in the
tract and the prairie lands were either rolling or level and were exceedingly fertile. In the few places where drainage was poor, cereal crops
could be grown profitably and there was usually an abundance of wild game.

Settlement commenced in Jersey County in 1815, prior to the 1821
valuation date. The first grist mill was built in the county in 1821
and the first blacksmith shop in 1824. The first settlement in Green
County was also in 1815 and immigrants began to pour into the county
immediately after the Kickapoo cession treaty was signed in 1819. The
first settlers came to Sangamon County in 1816, having heard much of the
desirability of the land in this county. Settlers began arriving in Morgan
County in 1816 and in greater numbers in 1819. There were a few non-Indian
settlers in Cass, Morgan, Scott and Woodford counties prior to 1821.

After the valuation date, settlement continued at a swift pace.

45. Royce Area 110 - Tract C. Tract C of Royce Area 110 contains

2,198,176 acres located in east central Illinois. The valuation date

is January 13, 1821. This area was ceded to the United States by the
Kickapoo Indians only. Two thirds of this tract consists of prairie land
and one third is timbered. It includes all or part of the following
counties beginning at the southwest corner of the tract: Shelby,

Cumberland, Jasper, Crawford, Clark, Moultrie, Coles, Douglas, Edgar,

Champaign, Vermillion, Ford, Livingston and Iroquois.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 453

Most of Tract C was well drained by numerous creeks and by the
Embarrass River which flowed through much of the area and was navigable
by flatboat. This river contained an abundance of fish such as base,
catfish, pike and buffalo fish. Timber grew along the river and the creeks,
and flooding was not a serious problem. There were some swamps but they
usually dried out sufficiently in summer to permit cultivation. Clay was
found in most areas and was used by the settlers in building. The prairie
areas were very fertile and had thick black soil which was excellent for
growing corn, wheat and grass. Most of the timber was hardwood and the
timbered areas were settled first. The Wabash River was not far to the
east of Tract C and provided drainage and transportation. In addition
to the Embarrass, the Kaskaskia River, also navigable, ran through part
of the area providing transportation, access and drainage. Other rivers
which benefitted this area were the Little Wabash, the Kickapoo, the
Sangamon and the Vermillion rivers.

The earliest non-Indian settlemnt in Tract C was by the French.
American settlement commenced in 1816 and continued at a slow rate until
after the 1821 cession by the Kickapoos. Because the Kickapoos did not
leave the area immediately following the cession, settlement was slow until
about 1828. Settlers found that the land in portions of this tract was so
productive that it was not necessary to practice rotation of crops. In
areas where fruit trees did not grow well, there were berries and other

bush fruits.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 459

46. Royce Area 110 - Tracts D and E. Tracts D and E of Royce Area

110 are in the northeastern. portion of the 1821 Kickapoo cession. Tract
D. contains 890,014 acres, 98% of which are prairie lands and 2% timbered
lands. The tract's acreage is located in all or part of the following
counties: Livingston, Ford, Iroquois,_Kankakee, Lasalle, Grundy and Will.

Tract D is bordered by the Illinois River on the north and the
Kankakee tributary of the Illinois on the northeast. It is also drained
by the Mazon River, the Vermillion tributary of the Illinois, and by

numerous other streams. Timber occurred on broken areas of the high

plateaus and along the Illinois River where speculators early bought the fine

stands of timber. There was also good timber along the Vermillion River.
The first and second bottom lands along the Illinois in this tract were
described as having inexhaustible fertile alluvium and as being nearly 2

miles wide, enriched by annual floods which sometimes caused damage.

The upper bench terraces along the river were sandy loam. Portions of Tract

D were of black prairie mold and mucky soil which held water for periods of

time. In the late 1820s coal, which was visible, was in use by blacksmiths.

Travel in the tract was easy over well defined Indian trails which paralleled

the Illinois River and led to Chicago some 40 miles beyond the tract. Since

1812 there had been talk of a canal linking Lake Michigan with the Illinois
River and that canal was actually copleted in 1848 to the great benefit of

this area.

Tract E contained 844,794 acres of approximately 80% prairie land and
20% timbered land. This tract included all or part of the following

counties: Livingston, Iroquois, Kankakee, Ford and Vermillion.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 460

The tract was drained by the Iroquois River, the Vermillion and Kankakee
tributaries of the Illinois River and by numerous creeks. The bu1k of

the tract is located in Iroquois County (which also extends into tracts D

and C) and was the former bed of Lake Kankakee. Most of the land was
exceedingly fertile with black vegetable mold 1-1/2 to 2 feet deep. In the
1830's Tract E was traversed by two main thoroughfares: Hubbard's Pack

trail from Danville, Illinois, in Tract G, to Chicago; and the Butterfield Trail.

The Kickapoos remained in the area after the 1821 cession and non-Indian
settlement did not commence to any degree until 1828.
47. Royce Area 110 and 98-Tracts G and I. Tract G, containing 402,870

acres, constitutes the western portion of Royce Area 98 and is overlapped by a
portion of the Kickapoo cession of Royce Area 110. The tract is partly in
Illinois and partly in Indiana. The Kickapoo, Potawatomi and Wea tribes each
has an undivided one-third interest. The Potawatomi and Wea interest are
valued as of October 2, 1818, and the Kickapoo interest as of January 13, 1821.
Tract I contains 351,756 acres wholly in western Indiana. The Wee and Potawatomi each have an undivided one—half interest. The valuation date is

October 2, 1818.

Tract G includes portions of the following counties: Vermillion, Illinois;

Warren, and Benton in Indiana. Tract I includes portions of Warren,Benton,

White and Tippecanoe counties in Indiana.

The Illinois portion of Tract G is drained by three forks of the Vermillion

River and its tributaries and by the Little Vermillion. These watercourses were
bordered with timber in belts of from one to three miles in width. The

prairie land in the area was of black, dense, mucky soil of variable depth.

Good supplies of well water were obtainable at from 15 to 50 feet, including

artesian flows in the northwest portion of Vermillion County. An important

Indian saline in the county was in great demand by settlers. Early pioneers

42 ind. C1. Comm. 354 461

preferred timbered portions of the tract although some settled on prairies
and river bottoms. A portion of the Grand Prairie in the tract formed a
treeless area dreaded by travelers. The climate was marked by great extremes
with hot, dry summers and severe winters.

The Indiana part of Tract G contained about 220 square miles and was
bordered on the west by the Illinois-Indiana line and on the east by the
Wabash River. The area contained rich bottoms and some terraces in the river
valleys. The terrace, or "second bottom? rose about 40 feet above the "first
bottom” and was from one to four miles wide. It furnished a broad stretch of
rich, well drained farming country. The soil of the second bottom was black,
sandy loam and produced very abundant crops. Rising from the second bottom
were abrupt bluffs reaching 120 to 130 feet above the river and forming the
border of the Grand Prairie which was in the central part of Tract G. The
bluffs and bottoms were timbered with oak, hickory, maple and walnut. Although
the first non-Indian settlers came to Tract G in 1816, the Kickapoos and
Potawatomies remained for several years thereafter.

That part of Tract G which lies in Indiana along the Wabash River is
extremely scenic. Its western and northern portions form a part of the Grand
Prairie with gently rolling land and a uniformly rich, sandy, loam soil.
Mineral springs were in various parts of this area. Some portions of the
prairie in the southwest part of the tract required extensive tile draining.
Banks of the Wabash were heavily timbered. The early settlers preferred the
timbered portions and considered the Grand Prairie to be poor land for settlement.

Tract I is in the vicinity of the Wabash and Tippecanoe rivers, and

includes portions 5” Rarrer hwr?.3. White and Tippecanoe counties in

Indiana. la is well drained by those Livtrb and also by Pine, lndian, and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 462

Burnett creeks. The Wabash at this point contained salmon, bass, red
horse and pike. Buffalo fish were found in the Tippecanoe River. Geese
duck and other game birds were abundant in this area. The Wabash
River was navigable by light draft boats.

The prairie portions of Tract I were very fertile and either level
or gently undulating. There was good timber land and were were mgny
wild fruit-bearing trees and bushes. Except for some inferior land in
the oak barrens, the soil of the timberlands was of excellent quality.

Settlement in Tract I comenced in 1820 and increased once the Indians
had left.

48. Royce Areas 110 - Tract H. Tract H lies in western Indiana

in Benton County and constitutes the overlapping portion of Royce Areas
110 and 180. The Kickapoo and Wea tribes each had an undivided onethird interest in this 51,384 acre tract. The Wee interest is valued as
of October 2, 1818, and the Kickapoo interest as of January 13, 1821.

Most of Benton county consists of gently rolling prairie dotted by
seven groves of oak, hickory and maple. land; of the surface soil is of
various silt loams ranging from clay to rich black loama The county is
drained by five major creeks and the headwaters of the North Fork of the
Vermillion River. However, certain portions of the county have small lakes
and wet ground requiring ditch and tile drainage to make the land fit for
cultivation. The early settlers arrived in the 1820's and kept to the
timbered portions or near them. The area was particularly well adapted to

the growing of corn and other grain. The first settlers in Tract H

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 463

arrived in 1820 and continued coming into the tract even though the
Kickapoo Indians were still present.
49, Population. The total population of the United States
' and of the states adjacent to the subject tracts at the pertinent times,
reflected a potential source of purchasers of the land and of its
products. Throughout the period.of 1790-1820 the total population
of the country was in its period of most rapid expansion and the
population of the immediate region of the subject tracts was rising even
more rapidly than in the country as a whole, a situation indicative of
a strong demand for this land.

In 1790 the estimated population of the Utitci §t&tBS was 3,929,000;
in 1803 it was 5,872,000; in 1818 it was 9,139,000; and in 1821 it was
9,939,000. Kentucky, imediately south of Illinois, was a source of
many of the early settlers. Kentucky grew from 73,677 in 1790 to
220,955 in 1800; to 406,511 in 1810; and to 564,317 by 1820.

The population in Ohio increased from 45,365 in 1800 to 230,760
in 1810, 250,000 by 1812 and to 581,434 in 1820. In 1800 Indiana
included areas which later became Illinois and Michigan.

Its 1800 population was 5,641 including 3,124 people in the
portions which later became Illinois and Michigan. ky 1810 the

population of Indiana which by then occupied its present day boundaries,
had increased to 24,520 and by 1820 to 147,178.

Illinois had 12,282 people when its first regular census was taken
in 1810. The population was located chiefly in the southern part of the

state. After the War of 1812 and the passage of the pre-emption Act of 1813,

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 454

a new era in western movement began. A land office was opened at
Kaskaskia in 1814. By l8l5,the Illinois population was about 15,000.

In 1818, the year in which Illinois was admitted to the Union, its
population was estimated variously from 30,000 to 50,000. By 1820

the population had risen to 55,200, a 349.5% increase since l8l0,in

spite of the fact that only small areas had been opened for settlement.
The percentages of increase in neighboring states for the same period were
500.2% for Indiana, 38.8%- for Kentucky, 236.6% for Missouri, and

152.0% for Ohio.

Between 1810 and 1820 Illinois gained in population at a rate of more
than 10 times the United states as a whole. Indiana had gained population
at ten times the national rate between 1800 and 1810, and at a faster
rate between 1810 and 1820. Between 1810 and 1820 Ohio and Kentucky passed
their peak rates of growth which were nearly equal to that of the United States.
and they and the eastern states became exporters of population to the "west".

50. Farming. Prior to American settlement of the lands in suit,

Indians were farming along portions of the Illinois River in Tract B and the

Wea Indians had extensive cultivated fields in the bottoms of the Wabash and

Tippecanoe Rivers along the borders of Tract I in Indiana. By 1700 the
Illinois Indians were farming in the American Bottom portions of Tract A.
‘The Piankeshaw farmed in the vicinity of Danville in Tract G. As noted

in earlier findings, the French farmed much land in the American bottom.

Most of the American settlers who came into the subject tract

arrived with a team of horses or oxen and a wagon, some household goods,

tools, and e 11£t1e money. Some arrived on foot with few possessions, and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 465

managed to exist and gain a foothold in the new land by working for
the more prosperous settlers. At first the settlers lived in lean-tos
which were replaced by log cabins. A relatively few settlers were wellt°‘d° farmers who arrived with substantial savings. Most settlers
tended to acquire as much land as their means would allow. They commenced
with subsistence farming and only later were able to produce excess
crops which they could sell at a profit.
Most of the early settlers preferred to settle in or along the
edges of the forested lands, preferably along the wooded banks of
the many streams that criss—crossed the Illinois lands. Timber furnished
material for their buildings, containers, furniture, tools, equipment, boats,
fencing, and fuel. . It also provided shelter from the heat, wind
and cold of the prairies. In the forest they found animals which

were useful for food, skins and furs. The forest provided fruits, honey

and nuts and forage for their hogs and other livestock. Probably

because they were not accustomed to prairie lands in their eastern

homes, they avoided the prairies for the most part unless they could

find areas where there was a good mixture of prairie and timbered land.

The early settlers did recognize the value of the prairies as pasturage

for their stock. The density and toughness of the prairie sod was the
most serious deterrent to settlement and farming because the early settlers
came with primitive wooden plows and harrows which could not make

such of an impression on the tough soil of the prairie.

Once the prairie sod was turned, it required a year to rot sufficiently

for cross plowing. A first year sod-crop of corn could be planted by

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 466

chopping through the sod with an axe to make a hole for the corn kernels.

Up to 10 bushels per acre could be obtained in this manner if the fields
were fenced from livestock. Thereafter, up to 50 bushels per acre could
be realized. Fencing was costly and difficult and in the absence of
wood it was necessary to fence with turf dikes or a combination of
dikes, hedges and ditches. The early settlers also considered the
prairies, unrelieved by trees, to be unhealthy. They were certainly
uncomfortable in the hot summers and the cold winters. Although these
prairie lands were later to be very valuable for the growing of grains and
czorn, the earlier settlers found it easier to clear fields from timberland.

The varying climate, terrain, drainage and soil conditions of the
subject lands permitted, with varying degrees of success, crops of corn,
wheat, barley, oats, rye, buckwheat, grasses, clover, Irish and sweet
potatoes, tobacco, castor beans, flax, cotton, apples, peaches, plums,
grapes, a variety of berries, melons and garden vegetables.
Farm production in the early days of settlement was mostly for
home consumption and labor barter;although where river transportation was
afailable, as it was on the borders of the subject lands, excess farm
produce could be sold at a profit and shipped to established settlements
such as New Orleans.

31, Banking and Finance. The First Bank of the United States was
chartered by Congress in 1791. It dominated banking in the United States
from its foundation until the expiration of its charter in 1811. The

capital of the bank was limited to $10,000,000. The bank's total debt

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 467

outstanding at one time, including its banknotes circulating as currency,
«as limited to $10,000,000 over and above the amount of its deposits.
The interest it could charge on loans and accounts was limited to six
percent a year. Its bills or notes payable in gold and silver were receivable
in all payments due to the United States. The Government pledged itself
to establish no other bank during the life of the Bank of the United States.
Its central office was at Philadelphia and branches were in New York,
Baltimore, Boston, Washington, Norfolk, Charleston, Savannah and New
Orleans. Only the central office could issue currency.

The Government derived four principal advantages from this bank:
safekeeping of the public moneys, transfers of public funds, collection
of revenue, and loans. The bank prevented undue expansion of

the currency but also served to drain specie from the west to the east,

and because of substantial foreign ownership of its stock, to Europe.
The bank did not enjoy a monopoly'on issuing currency and state banks
continued to issue currency except insofar as the new

Federal bank required specie payment of state banknotes. Its large capital

and its preeminence operated to give the bank a commanding position

in this country such as was occupied by the Bank of England among the other

banks of that country.

Congress refused to renew the charter of the First Bank and it went

out of existence in 1811. Thereafter both the citizens and the government

had to rely on state chartered or unchartered in8t1tUti003 f°r their

banking needs and, largely, for their currency. It became difficult to

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 453

make transfers of funds from one part of the country to another because
the notes of the banks in one section did not pass as currency in other
sections. 8

During the War of 1812 the country suffered from inflation which
persisted after the conclusion of the war in 1814. This was due to both
Congressional and State actions.

Banking in the "west", i.e., Kentucky, Ohio and Tennessee, started
with merchants and fur traders who often undertook the making of loans,
cashing drafts, and selling drafts, checks and bills of exchange for
their customers. The Kentucky Insurance Company, chartered by Kentucky
in 1802, appears to have been the first western chartered corporation
to issue currency. In 1803 the Miami Exporting Company was incorporated
in Ohio and had "banking privileges". By 1818 there were 43 banks in
Kentucky, 10 in Tennessee and 8 in Chic. By this time there were two
chartered banks in Missouri and a few unchartered private banks.

In frontier comunities in the early part of the 19th century,
banks were regarded as agents for the creation of capital. They were not

necessarily organized because there was capital seeking investment or

because existing business needed their aid, but rather for the purpose of
increasing the supply of money for further development through the

issuance and lending of their own bank notes without prior saving by the
comunity.
Between 1800 and 1810 a private unchartered bank was operating at

Vincennes. It was a bank of discount and deposit. Similar banks later

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 469

opened at Madison, Corydon and Lawrenceburg. By 1814 the Territorial
government formally chartered the Bank of Vincennes and the Farmers and
‘Mechanics Bank at Madison. Both banks prospered.
By law,only specie and U.S. Treasury notes were acceptable at

United States land offices, but in actual practice notes of sound

banks, such as the Bank of Vincennes, were accepted. After the establishment
of the Second Bank of the United States in 1816, land office receivers
could accept U.S. Bank, notes and other banknotes which were

acceptable for deposit at par in the United States Bank,. When Indiana
became a state in 1816, the legislature made the Vincennes Bank a State
bank and increased its allowable capital. New branches were established
at Brookville, Corydon and Vevay. Despite some very questionable
banking practices which resulted in suspension of the bank's right to
act as a Federal depository in 1819, the bank did substantially

increase the money supply of Indiana between 1817 and 1820.

The earliest bank in Illinois, the Bank of Illinois at Shawneetown
just outside the southeastern edge of Tract A, grew from a mercantile
business. The business commenced in 1804 and by 1813 the owner began
to accept deposits, to lend money and to issue bills of credit.
Afcharter was applied for in 1816 and the bank was well run and highly
regarded.
In January, 1818, a group headed by Senator (formerly Governor) Ninian

Edwards and Benjamin Stephenson, the receiver of public moneys at the

local U.S. land office, obtained a charter for the Bank of Edwarddville.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 , 470

This bank and the Bank of Illinois at Shawneetown were depositories for
Federal land office receipts and secured permanent deposits of Government
funds. These banks survived the financial panic of 1819. In 1821 the

Bank of Illinois at Vandalia was chartered. The existence of state

and private banks was uncertain and there were frequent failures‘

and suspensions.

The Second Bank of the United States, founded in 1816, was intended

tgrcongress to serve national purposes, particularly to establish a

sound currency and provide a safe depository and ready means of transfer
ofEedera1 funds. The Congress decreed that only specie, Treasury notes,
notesuuf the Bank of the United States and notes of such state banks as

were payable on demand in specie, could be accepted in payment of

amounts due to the United States. After first refusing to resume

specie payment, the state banks finally agreed on condition that the
national bank extend its discounts as they contracted theirs. The

Bank of the United States accepted this condition and allowed $30,000,000

of discounts in its first year which more than made up for the tightening of
credit by the state banks. During the crises of 1819, credits had to be
curtailed and branch banks were prohibited from accepting any bank notes except

their own and all state bank notes held by the Federal banks had to be

presented for payment at once. This policy helped precipitate

the 1819 panic by driving many state banks into bankruptcy.

The restrictive policies of the Bank of the United States resulted
in 3 business depression from which the country did not fully recover until

the 1830's.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 471

52. Public Land Laws of the United States applicable to Indiana
and Illinois at valuation dates. The Harrison Act of 1800 applicable

 

tx> public lands in Ohio and Indiana, provided-for public sale

at auction of surveyed public lands in 320 acre half sections for not
less than $2.00 an acre. Lands remaining unsold might then be sold

at private sale for $2.00 per acre. The immediate payment in specie

or evidence of indebtedness of the United States of one-twentieth of the
purchase price was required. Within 40 days, a quarter of the purchase
price (less the twentieth already paid) was to be paid-. Another quarter
‘was payable within two years, another within three years, and final
payment within four years. Six percent annual interest was to be charged
upon each of the last three payments except that a discount at the rate of

8 percent a year, calculated on the amount demandable on the due date, was
allowed for advance payment. The discount reduced the cash payment to

$1.84 per acre. If the first payment of one-fourth was not timely paid, the
land and all amounts paid were forfeited. If the first quarter price was

paid, the land was no longer subject to simple forfeiture, but one year

after the due date of the last payment, if not made, thirty days notice
<>f sale could be given and the land then sold for arrears. If the whole sum
due, with interest, was not bid and paid, the land reverted to the United

States and all sums paid by the putchager were forfeited.

After the admission of Ohio in March of 1803, the Act of March 26,

l804,extended the public land laws to the remainder of the Old Northwest

Territory including the lands in suit. Rectangular surveys were to be

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 472

extended over the area, private land claims adjudicated, certain areas
reserved, and the remainder of the land to which Indian title had been

extinguished was to be sold inua manner similar to that provided in the

1800 Act. The $2.00 minimum price per acre was retained but the land
could be offered at both public and private sales in 160 acre quarter sections.
other restrictions of the 1800 act were eased. United States land
offices were established at Detroit, Vincennes and Kaskaskia. In 1807
a land office was established at Jeffersonville, Indiana,and in Shawneetown,
I11inois,in 1812. In 1816 a land office with jurisdiction over lands in
Illinois was established at Edwardsville, Illinois and in 1320
land offices were established at Vandalia and Palestine, Illinois.
The Act of February 22, 1817, 3 Stat. 346, authorized the sale Of
80 acre tracts in six out of every 36 sections. The Act of April 24,
1820, 3 Stat. 566, required that all public land he offered in 80 acre
tracts. The minimum price of public lands was reduced to
$1.25 per acre and credit sales were abolished, full payment on the date
of purchase being required.
Since law applicable to Illinois and Indiana did not permit sale
prior to survey,and substantial periods were required to make surveys
of the Indian land cessions, the Government's total inventory of public
lands exceeded the supply actually available for purchase by the public.

53. Sguatters, Speculators, and Preemption Rights. Prior to 1830

American law did not recognize on a general basis any right of squatters

on the public lands to purchase the tracts containing their improvements.

Instead, the Act of March 3, 1807, c. 46, 2 Stat. 445, made it a misdemeanor

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 473

to remain on public lands without special permission of the register and
receiver of the local land office, after three months‘ notice from the

U.S. Marshal to quit. This law was little enforced. Moreover, a number

of statutes applicable to special areas or special classes of persons,
granted preferential rights to purchase, called preemption rights. The
Act of February 5, 1813, c. 20, 2 Stat. 797, granted a preemption right to
Illinois residents to purchase, at private sale for the minimum.price, not
more than one quarter-section of unreserved public land in that tract
which they had actually inhabited and cultivated prior to enactment of the

law. Preemption rights based solely on settlement were not granted in

Indiana prior to 1830.

Despite the law, settlers swarmed over public lands and even unceded
Indian lands in Indiana, Illinois, and elsewhere in the United States.
Sometimes they moved further west when their lands were put up for public
auction. At other times they stayed and were outbid. Frequently they
attended the land office auction and bid in the land they were occupying
for the minimum price.

The settlers, or "squatters" often arranged matters among themselves

prior to the sale. If two were interested in the same subdivision, one
would ask the other what he would take not to bid against him. If neither
would consent to be bought off, they would draw lots. If a speculator
should make a bid on land a settler wanted, he often would be driven from

the crowd. As early as 1806, it was reported that a considerable portion

of the botto land along the Ohio River, worth $8.00 per acre, had been

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 474

bought for the minimum price of $2.00 per acre through collusion of the
bidders. Later, organized societies of settlers, with written constitutions,
were formed for the purpose of mutual help in obtaining land from the
Government at the minimum price. Competitive bidding at Federal public land
sales in the area north of the Ohio River became increasingly rare and

‘was the exception rather than the rule after 1816.

Speculators buying public land as an investment continued in business
despite the opposition of settlers. One of their methods was to buy up at
private sale, following the close of the auction, lands surrounding the
settlers‘ small tracts. If the settler prospered, he would buy more land
from the speculator, at the latter's price. If he failed, he would be
forced to sell his tract with its improvements for what the speculator
offered. Where speculators bid against each other, the winner might pay
the losers less than the premium he had bid over the Government minimum
price, so that they would not bid against him again, and then relinquish
the land, to buy it for the minimum price when reoffered. The speculators
also had their associations. Their agents would obtain the numbers of
every valuable tract prior to sale and agree to bid them.off for a fraction
over the minimum price. After the Government auction, the speculators
would have their own auction, dividing the proceeds among themselves.
Speculators also used squatters as front men, particularly under the
preemption laws, to claim lands at the minimum price and convey over to
them at & pre-agreed markup.

In pre-industrial America, speculation in land was one of the few

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 475

outlets for any considerable amount of capital. But it was more than that;

on the frontier it was practically the only activity in which men could

give free scope to their business ability. Speculation played a large

part in the peaks in volume of public land transfers in 1818, 1824, 1836,

1838, and 1846. These peaks occurred in periods of marked business activity

for the country as a whole, and corresponded generally with the intensity

of speculative movement shown by other business indicators. Land sales

usually peaked before commodity prices, and bottomed earlier in a depression.
Great landowners moved west with, sometimes ahead of, the vanguard

of frontiersmen, following closely the footsteps of the surveyor. Great

holdings of land, sometimes running to a quarter of a million acres and

more, were acquired for resale to other speculators, to actual settlers,

or for rental to tenants. At every government land sale these men were

in attendance. At every land office town they maintained conspicuous

offices, their advertisements providing much of the patronage of the

struggling frontier newspaper. These landowners expressed their great

confidence in the future of the "west" by sinking great sums, in part

borrowed capital, in the purchase of unimproved land from the Government.
Speculators who bought . large tracts of choice land and held

them for resale at prices which settlers could not afford, were a serious

deterrent to the settlement of the subject lands.

54. Public Land Sales at Land Offices Northwest of the Ohio River.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 J 476

A. Sales under the Credit Sxstem 1800-1820; Earlier Sales

in Ohio. The following sales were made by the United States of its

 

public lands at land offices in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois from the
first opening of land offices (in 1800) through June 30, 1820, which was

the last day upon which credit sales were permitted and on.which the

minimum price remained $2 per acre:

 
 
 

OHIO
Year Acres Dollars Weighted
Average Price

Per Acre
1800 67750.93 135501.86 2.00
1801 . 497939.36 1031893.26 2.07
31802 ‘ ‘ ‘ ' ' "271080.37‘ "'532160.74 1.96
Subtotal 1800-1802 836770.66 1699555.86 2.03
1803 174156.04 349292.18 2.01
1804 398155.99 817270.50 2.05
1805 581971.91 1186562.09 ' 2.04
1806 501893.07 1045542.34 2.08
1807 194204.67 403902.61 2.08
1808 156357.78 384461.23 2.46
1809 110435.21 254698.15 2.31
1810 181532.00 398663.50 2.20
1811 380417.71 819308.16 2.15
1812 273776.61 601450.86 2.20
1813 410271.11 874980.51 2.13
1814 817714.40 1720895.05 2.10
1815 781846.71 1650689.29 2.11
1816 637555.25 1331422.25 2.09
1817 565016.74 1430035.67 2.53
Subtotal 1800-1817 7002072.86 14968730.25 2.14
~1818 558760.50 1123119.72 2.01
1819 298950.72 604011.01 2.02
First Half 1820 ___§6848.05 74301.06 2,02

Grand Total 1593247.53 32278505.2O 2.03

 

 

   

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354
Year Acres Dollars Weighted
7 Average Price

Per Acre
1313 391172.33 836785.67 2214
1819 151622.80 326037.88. 2.15
First half 1820 20820.22 44547.72 2.14

Grand total 7566288.71 16176101.S2 2.14 %
INDIANA
Year Acres Dollars Weighted
Average Price.

Per Acre
1307 4 51961.62 106247.55 2.04
1808 34230.99 68461.98 2.00
1809 39163.02 78326.04 2.00
1810 43431.91 86863.82 2.00
1811 53300.52 106601.00 2.00
1812 45027.58 90057.16 2.00
1813 59719.23 119758.46 2.01
1814 166312.13 332624.26 2.00
1815 187802.43 375604.84 2.00
1816 527257.54 1203713.45 2.28
1817 482588.54 966499.76 2.00
Subtotal 1690795.S1 3534758.32 2.09
1818 576112.01 1154934.08 2.00
1819 201153.18 402306.36 2.00
First half 1820 22675.47 45351.44 2.00
Grand total 2490736.17 5137350.20 2.06

ILLINOIS
Year Acres Dollars Weighted
Average Price

Per Acre
1814 158461.32 342047.92 2.16
1815 138197.19 279593.82 2.02
1816 116528.09 233692.34 2.01
1817 285501.66 571039.33 2.00
Subtbkal 698688.26 1426373.41 2.04

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 478

B. Sales under the Cash System 1820-1825. The following sales were
made by the United States of its public lands in Ohio, Indiana, and Illinois,

between July 1, 1820, when the minimum price was reduced to $1.25 per acre

and cash payment was required, and September 30, 1825.

 
 

 

Year Acres Dollars Weighted Ave.
Price Per Acre
OHIO
Second half 1820 54293.73 $ 67625.75 ‘$1.2456
1821 114946.85 150192.94 1.3066
1822 185172.40 235550.61 1.2721
1823 124735.32 155919.18 1.2500
1824 166752.01 209996.08 1.2539
1825 141928.61 175845.89 1.2390
Total 787828.92 $995l30.45 1.26 (5 1/2 year
weighted ave.)
INDIANA
Second half 1820 162490.82 $ 214533.79 1.3203
1821 264578.38 362197.77 1.3690
1822 252982.34 329066.71 1.3007
1823 165046.69 211157.30 1.2794
1824 154558.51 197111.40 1.2753
1825 162270.71 203306.47 1.2529
Total 1161927.45 $1517373.44 1.31 (5 1/2 year
weighted ave.)
ILLINOIS
Second half 1820 6699.99 8707.04 $1.2996
1821 50382.15 63568.85 1.2617
1822 27374.11 34268.80 1.2519
1823 60534.77 75797.22 1.2521
1824 43987.97 55119.47 1.2531
1825 45804.28 57784.80 1.2616
Total 234063.27 $295246.18 1.26 (5 1/2 year

weighted ave.)

55. Relief Legislation for Delinguent Credit Purchasers of Public Lands.
The Act of April 18, 1818, 3 Stat. 433, suspended forfeitures and sales

for overdue installments of purchase money (except the first installment),

until March 21, 1819. The suspension was extended until March 21, 1820.

42 Ind. 81. Comm. 354 479

More general relief legislation was enacted in the Act of March 2, 1821,
3 Stat. 612, which provided among other things, that debtors could relinquish a portion of the land they had bought and have all the payments
previously made credited to the land they retained. ‘All accrued interest due was
forgiven. Those who had paid only one-fourth of their obligations were
allowed to pay the balance in eight annual installments with other relief
provisions for those who had paid more. In cases where the purchase had
been made at the old minimum price of $2.00 an acre, the purchaser could
complete payment at the new $1.25 minimum. Extension of the relief
provisions of this act were enacted through 1823. It was not until well
after the valuation dates in this case that Congress authorized refunds of
amounts forfeited when public land purchases were not completed (1828).

56. The Il1inois'Milita;y Tract. The Illinois Military Tract contained approximately 5,360,000 acres of which about two-thirds, or
3,500,000 acres were reserved as bounty lands for soldiers. The tract
bordered Tract B in Royce Areas 96a and 110 (valuation date January 13,
1821). It lay immediately to the west of Tract B between the Illinois
and Mississippi rivers and occupied all but the northern fifteen miles
of Royce Area 77. This area had been ceded to the United States by the

Sauk and Fox in 1804 and is known as Royce Area 50. 7 Stat. 84. In 1816

the United States took a cession of much of the same land from.the Ottawa,

Chippewa and Potawatomi Indians. 7 Stat. 146.

The I11inoisIMi1itary Tract was established in fulfillment of various

acts of Congress offering bounties of 160 acrescn: 320 acres for troop

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 430

enlistments before and during the War of 1812. A.government survey of

the land was begun in 1815 and completed in 1822. The Ottawa, Chippewa

and Potawatomi Indians who lived along the Illinois River vigorously
opposed the survey until they ceded their interest in the land in 1816.

Even the Sac and Fox, who had ceded their interests in 1804, did not

relinquish their hunting rights in the land until the Treaty of August

4, 1824, 7 Stat. 229. Indians continued to roam this tract in large
numbers even after 1824 and fear of them was a deterrent to settlement.

As sufficient land was surveyed to satisfy bounty claims of soldiers,
the government began to issue military land bounty warrants in the latter
part of 1817. The bounty act provided that a soldier to whom a land
warrant was issued by the War Department was to deliver it to the General
Land Office where he was then entitled to draw by lot one of the surveyed
quarter sections in the military reserve. Mch of the good land in the
military reserve lay along navigable streams and, being fractions of
quarter sections, could not be drawn as bounty lands. A patent to the
land drawn would be issued in due course. The land was supposed to be
arable. Any soldier who drew land unfit for cultivation and who had moved
there intending to settle, was permitted, after 1830, to surrender his claim
and to locate another claim in any specified military land district. The

privilege did not extend to anyone who had acquired title to the land from

a soldier.

To protect the soldiers, the bounty act contained specific provisions

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 431

against the assignment or transfer of rights under the warrants until
after the patents were granted. All sales or mortgages, etc., prior to
patent for the purpose of alienating, pledging or mortgaging such claims
‘were declared null and void. Nevertheless, many soldiers, through the
granting of a power of attorney to another person to receive the land
patent, actually disposed of the land before patents were granted by

the government.

Very few of the soldiers who received bounty lands cared to settle on
them. The remoteness of the lands and the poverty of the soldiers resulted
in most of the lands being sold to eastern land speculators. The fact that
many of these purchasers were merchants suggests that the bounty lands
were accepted as payment of the soldiers’ debts. Many a fine section
was disposed of for a horse, a cow, a watch, a gun, a saddle, a pair of
shoes, or some other consideration of small value.

The climate and physical and geographical features of the Illinois
Military Tract were similar to those of the lands in suit although the
tract was more remote from established settlements. About two-thirds of
the tract, principally the northern part, was prairie land. The remainder
was well timbered. There were numerous streams and bottom lands, some of

which were subject to periodic overflow. Uplands lying 200 to 300 feet above

the main water courses comprised about 90% of the total area. So-called
"barrens" consisting of ridges unsuited for cultivation and covered with oak,
hickory, hazel and sumac, skirted the streams in the western uplands.

Some of the prairie areas were low and wet while others were dry for

42 Ind. Cl. Comm 354
' 482

considerable periods of time.

Most early settlers in the Illinois Military Tract were squatters
having no color of title. However, public opinion recognized the validity
of squatters‘ claims to the extent that later settlers were forced to
purchase any improvements made by the squatters before the settlers
could take possession.

Great confusion existed over the status of land titles in the
Military Tract. In addition to the bounty lands, the tract contained
1,860,000 acres of "Congress land" subject to pre-emption by squatters.
The latter land was not officially opened for entry until the middle
of the 1830's. Settlers had trouble determining which quarter sections
were bounty land and which were not. The various types of land titles
added to the confusion,and a settler who could locate an owner under one
tit1e,could not be sure that there might not be other claimants to
his property. Acts to quiet title were not passed until 1835 and
title suits were common.

The Military Tract lands in Illinois were not "comparable" to the

land in suit because of their very status as bounty lands. The soldier
recipients for the most part transferred their interests to speculators
and creditors, often under circumstances rendering the titles void.
The confusion over the location of several types of land, the several types
of titles, the tax status of the land, speculation at tax sales, redemption
of titles at sales for taxes and the problem of quieting squatters‘ rights,
left land titles very uncertain. The price-depressing trend of these

factors and the deterrent presence of Indians in the area was not compensated

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 483

by the fact that the lands were surveyed and purportably arable.

57, Sales Evidence of Plaintiffs in Dockets 15-D, 311, 313, 314-A
and 315. Counsel for plaintiffs in these dockets jointly employed as

their valuation expert, Dr. Roger K. Chisholm, Associate Professor of
Economics at Memphis State University. Plaintiffs‘ counsel rely on
sales data prepared by Dr. Chisholm and have also introduced in evidence
and have analyzed sales evidence of early sales in Indiana which
defendant's expert collected but which defendant did not introduce in

evidence. In addition, they rely on certain findings made by this

Commission in Miami Tribe v. United States, Docket 67, 4 Ind. Cl. Comm. 346

(1956), aff'd in part, reversed in part and remanded, 1&6 Ct. C1. 429
(1959), relating to Royce Area 99 lying immediately south of

Royce Area 98 in Indiana and involved in this proceeding.

A. Plaintiff's sales data prepared by Dr. Chisholm. In his report,

Dr. Chisholm gives a summation of 508 recorded land sales in six Illinois
counties in Tract A, Royce Area 48 and then writes a general discussion
of the land prices and their significance.

The general discussion notes that land values increased in Illinois
from 1786} that in 1814 auctioned land at very desirable sites was taken
up at "high prices",while less desirable tracts sold at the government
price for public land; that a year later, l815,lands near some insignificant
salt springs were bringing $6 to $8 per acre.

Professor Chisho1m's market sales analysis resulted from a systematic
retrieval of data from Illinois counties in which there were land sales

during and prior to 1820: St. Clair, Johnson, Randolph, Madison, Monroe

and Gallatin. Although the present day counties of these names are located

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 434

mostly in Tract A of Royce Area 48, the counties were larger at the time
the sales were made and thus constituted a larger portion of Illinois
than the present day counties of those names. Dr. Chisholm.eliminated
transactions involving governmental bodies, sheriff's and estate sales,
sales between parties with the same names, and sales for no, or for
obviously nominal, consideration.

The 508 sales used by Dr. Chisholm occurred over a 31 year period
from 1789 through 1820 except for one sale each in the years, 1821,
1822 and 1848. The largest nuber of sales took place in 1818 when 56
tracts were sold. The largest single tract sold was 5,724.68 acres while
the smallest was .01 acres. The per acre consideration ranged from 2 cents
per acre to $5,400 per acre. The highest prices ($5,000 per acre in
1810, and 1811, and $5,400 in 1812) were for sale of townlots in Harrisonville.

Dr. Chisholm obtained a weighted average price per acre of $2.38 by
dividing the mean total consideration of $575,872 by the mean acres sold
(242,885). The median value for the 508 transaction is $2.13.

Dr. Chisholm found that 42, or 8.26% of the 508 sales, were of 10

acres or less. Removing these sales from the sample resulted in a weighted
average of $2.32 per acre, showing that the effect of including the small
tracts in the computation effected the results by only $.05 per acre.

Dr. Chisholm noted that a number of speculators purchased large tracts
of 18,000 or more acres during the period included in his sample but he did

not include such sales in the 508 sales selected.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 435

.A tabulation of the six 1803 sales used shows that they totaled
2,534.75 acres which sold for a total of $2,920.50 giving a weighted
average price of $1.15 per acre. A recapitulation of 29 sales from
1798 through 1807 produces a weighted average price per acre of $1.17.

Similar treatment of 80 sales in 1818 resulted in a weighted
average price per acre of $4.05. A similar computation involving 25 sales
in 1820 and a single sale each in 1821 and 1822, produces a weighted
average price per acre of $3.66.

The evidence does not indicate whether or not any of the land
involved in the sales included improvements. Much of the rich American

Bottom land in Tract A was settled prior to the extinguishment of Indian

title and and may have contained some improvements placed on those 13nd3

by squatters.

B. Plaintiffs’ Analysis of Sales Data Collected, but Not Used, By

Defendant. Defendant's expert witnesses, Messrs. Harry and Everett Fenton,
commissioned a Mr. Thomas L. Keller, an appraiser, to gather pre-1833

sales data in 30 counties in Indiana. Data were gathered in counties
bordering Royce Area 98 on the south and in Warren and Tippecanoe

counties north of the Wabash River, extending into Royce Area 98.

The only sales data he submitted which involved sales taking place

prior to 1818 were in the area of Clark's Grant (Royce Area 25- Indiana)
on the southern border of Indiana. He submitted a number of sales in

this area between 1790 and 1802 for comparison with the 1803

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 486

cession of Royce Area 48 by the Kaskaskia Indians. There were a
number of post—l803 sales which Mr. Keller did not research.

None of the data collected by Mr. Keller were used by Mr. Fenton
or introduced in evidence by defendant because Mr. Fenton decided
that sales of 160 acre tracts, which many of Mr. Ke1ler's sales
represented, were not suitable for valuation purposes. He rejected
sales of land along the south bank of the Wabash in the 1820'!

as being too late to be comparable to the valuation dates for
Royce Area 98 (October 2, 1818). At the request of plaintiffs’
counsel, defendant produced the data on the 47 pre-1803 sales

in the Clark's Grant area and plaintiff introduced this material
in evidence as Plaintiffs‘ Exhibit Y 60.

In making the selection of 47 sales, Mr. Keller eliminated any town
lot sales,sa1es of tracts having small acreage; sales with extremely
long boundary descriptions,or descriptions which he found hard to read,
or from which it was difficult to compute a per acre price, and most sales
at $4 or more per acre, on the assumption that such sales must have
included improvements. He testified that he selected sales which were
easy to pick and which fell in the range of from $1 to $3 per acre.

He characterized such a price range at that time and place as "normal".

Plaintiffs eliminated seven sales which involved parties having the
same names and recapped the balance. In spite of the obvious bias
of Ke1ler's selection procedure which was guaranteed to result in the

lowest possible price per acre, the weighted average per acre price

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 437

thus obtained for the Clark's Grant sales in 1800, 1801, and 1802 were

$1.88, $1.91, and $1.76, respectively, and the overall weighted average

for all forty sales was $1.68.

C. Sales evidence in Miami Tribe v. United States, Docket 67, 4 Ind.

C1. Comm. 346 £19562 aff'd in part and Remanded for Further Proceedings
on the Matter of Value, 146 Ct. Cl. 429 {I959}. The Mimmi case involved

the valuation of Royce Area 99 consisting of 7,036,000 acres in central

Indiana immediately south and east of Royce Area 98 in this suit. The
valuation date was October 6, 1818. On remand, the Commission found the
land to be worth on the average, $1.15 per acre. 9 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 (1960).
58. Sales Evidence of Plaintiffs in Docket 29~B. Plaintiffs in

this docket have an undivided one-third interest in Tract G of Royce

Area 98 and Royce Area 110 in Illinois and Indiana, and an undivided 1/2
interest in Tract I of Royce Area 98 in Indiana. Counsel for the Hannahville and Forest County Potawatomis employed Dr. Helen Hornbeck Tanner, an
ethnohistorian, consultant and expert witness in a number of cases involving
Indian claims. She is a lecturer in the University of Michigan Extension
Service. Dr. Tanner used an historical approach to value the lands in
Royce Area 98 (Tracts G and I) and to value Tract H of the overlapping
portions of Royce Areas 110 and 180. She found her material in county
histories, most of which were written, as she pointed out, many years after
the valuation date, but containing much valuable and reliable data bearing
on the 1818 value of the lands in suit. She also used material from

Government census records and records of the federal land offices. Her

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 488

sales data came from the latter sources. She noted that it was about 10
years after the cession of the subject lands that sales in any appreciable
numbers took place in the tract. After examining the sales figures for
Indiana in the American State Papers, Public Lands VII, she observed that
tracts equal to the size of Royce Area 98 were sold within three or four
years in Indiana in the early 1820's and during any eighteen month interval
in the early 1820's. She examined the prices at which the Indiana commissioners offered Indiana Wabash and Erie canal lands for sale, i.e., from
$3.50 for 1st rate land to $1.50 for third rate land. The middle figure
set by the canal commissioners was $2.50 per acre. Dr. Tanner believed that
because all parts of Royce 98 were within a day's journey of the Wabash
River and because the relatively small tracts were of generally high
quality land having a diversity of local resources, a bonus factor estimated
at fifteen cents per acre should be added to the base figure of $2.50 per
acre for a final average valuation as of 1818 for the tracts in Royce Area
98 of $2.65 per acre. She did not think this price should be discounted
for size or for the period during which it would be held before sale, but
rather that the accessibility, quality and natural resources of the area
required that the base value per acre be enhanced.
59. Defendant's Sale Evidence. Defendant's expert witnesses were

Mr. Harry R. Fenton, an appraiser and a real estate consultant, and his son,
Mr. Everett Fenton, a real estate sales analyst and appraiser. Everett
Fenton was responsible for the historical research in the case and his

report was admitted in evidence over objections attacking his expertise as

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 489

an historian. The Fentons employed Dr. Albert Larson, a geography professor
at the University of Illinois, and Mr. Roy Brod, a cartographer at the

same University. Dr. Larson and Mr. Brod constructed a set of maps showing
the climate, soils, vegetation, population, etc., of the areas in suit.

The maps, while helpful, were somewhat incomplete and occasionally inaccurate.

A. Royce Area 48. Harry Fenton prepared the defendant's valuations,
relying upon Everett's report for his historical background. In valuing
Royce Area 48,he rejected sales data gathered by Mr. Thomas L. Keller, a
real estate appraiser,from 30 counties in Indiana, evidence which was
ultimately introduced by plaintiffs. Instead, Mr. Fenton relied on sales
in the Illinois Military Tract, and sales in Missouri and in Ohio. In
Finding 56, we concluded that sales in the Illinois Military Tract were not
comparable for the purposes of this valuation proceeding. Some of the
sales reported were recorded in Madison and St. Clair counties which were
located in the rich American Bottom area of Royce Area 48, but examination
revealed that the lands in question were actually located in the Illinois
Military Tract, in Missouri, and in Iowa, and hence were not comparable.
' Defendant's expert, Mr. Harry R. Fenton, theorized that land sales

on the American frontier, regardless of time, place, quality of land, or
other conditions usually deemed requisite to comparability, were all
"comparable", for the purposes of this valuation since the "frontier" was

a moving phenomenon which kept many of its characteristics intact. Accordingly, in reaching his valuation, Mr. Fenton and the defendant relied on
sales of 18 other tracts, none of which we find to be coparable to Royce

Area 48. These sales included large tracts of land in western New York

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 490

State sold in the late 1700's by the State of Massachusetts to individuals
or to land companies. Indian title had not yet been extinguished to much
of this land and the title acquired by the purchasers was clouded at best.
Other sales of Indian lands in New York and Pennsylvania made by New York
State in the late 1700's and by Connecticut in 1795 were not actual sales and
were certainly not comparable. Other sales relied on by defendant included
purchases of land in western Pennsylvania by the Holland Land Company
(1792-1793) from an undisclosed seller, and resales of lands included in
the large earlier purchases of lands in New York State. All of the sales
took place prior to 1800 and were highly speculative.

B. Royce Areas 110, 98. In connection with his valuation of Royce

Areas 110 and 98, Mr. Everett Fenton employed a Mr. Doug Foster, an

appraiser, to gather sales data from the Illinois Military Tract and
from areas around Albion in southeastern Illinois just east of Tract A in
Royce Area 48.

The data collected by Mr. Foster from the Albion area, were not
introduced in evidence by defendant who instead relies exclusively on sales
in the Illinois Military Tract as the basis for valuing the Potawatomi,
Kickapoo and Weas lands in Royce areas 110 and 98. In particular, defendant
relies on sales in Henry, Knox and Fulton Counties. Since parts of each of
these counties lie outside the Military Tract and there is nothing in the
record to show whether the sales relied on were in or’ out of the military
tract, these sales are not helpful in showing the probable value of the lands
in the Illinois Military Tract.

A study of over 1500 of the original military bounty land transfers in

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 491

or around 1819, shows that quarter section tracts in 14 of the counties
located within the Illinois Military Tract sold for an average price of

72 cents per acre. The sales data for Fulton, Knox and Henry counties, (in
or out of the Military Tract, as the case may be), shows average sales prices

of 68, 76 and 58 cents per acre respectively, in 1818; 74, 40 and 39 cents

per acre in 1819, the year of the financial panic, and 85, 54, and 72 cents
per acre in 1821.

Since we have concluded (Finding 56) that Illinois Military Tract
land sales were not comparable for the purpose of valuing the lands in this
suit, the sales figures mentioned above are of little help in valuing the
land.

60. Sales of Townsites, Town Lots and Commercial Sites. Land in or
near towns and adjacent to roads or other primary transportation locations,
were greatly enhanced in value in comparison to unimproved rural areas.
Speculation was frequently involved intnuasale of townsites, town lots and
sites for mills, ferries and other commercial enterprises. Such speculation
raised the prices of these sites and adjacent lands. Between 1810 and 1812
townlots in Harrisonville, Illinois, sold at prices ranging from $1,428.57
to $5,400 per acre. In Tuscarora County, Ohio, town lots were selling at
$30 to $1,000 for lots measuring 60 by 90 feet, and an unimproved millsite
near Zanesville, Ohio, sold for $50 an acre. There was active speculation in
town lots in Indiana just after the close of the War of 1812, particularly
along the Wabash River a few miles downstream from Royce Area 98; at Bloomington, Indiana; at places on the road from Vincennes to Louisville; on the

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 492

Ohio, and elsewhere in the state. In 1818 a townsite in.St. Clair County
(Tract A of Royce Area 48) sold for $13.03 per acre, or $1,700 for the 130.42
acres in the site. The buyer laid out the land as the town of Illinois and
began selling town lots therein that same year. Three lots were sold in

1818 for $289.47, $578.95 and $1,153.85. At Palestine, the first capital

of Lawrence County in southern Indiana east of Vincennes, 157 town lots
averaging 1/3 acre in size, sold in 1818 for over $14,000, averaging $90
per lot. Banks at Edwardsville in Madison County (Royce Area 48) and
Shawneetown (Royce Area 48) participated actively in the speculative boom
in town lots which swept Illinois in 1819. In the summer of 1821, town lots
at Greenville, Illinois (Bond County, Tract A of Royce Area 48), sold for
$44.60 a lot.

In 1821 competition was keen for land at the site of the city of Indianapolis, selected as the new capital of Indiana. Four sections of land
consisting of 2,560 acres, were laid out in the wilderness some 40 to 60
miles from the nearest settlement. Three hundred lots were sold at the
first sale in October, 1821, for a total price of $35,596.25, or $113.55

per lot on the average. Many lots sold for $500.00.

The agricultural settlement of New Harmony, Indiana, 100 miles south of
Royce Area 98, was established in 1813 on 24,734 acres purchased from the
Government for $2.50 per acre. This land was resold in 1824 for $182,000
or approximately $7.50 per acre.

A William Digby, first proprietor of the town of Lafayette, Indiana,
at the site of the old Wea Towns and Ouiatenon at the south central edge

of Tract I, purchased 80 acres in 1825 at the Government price of $1.25 per

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 493

per acre. He divided 50 acres into 148 lots which he sold three days later
for $4.80 per acre. Digby retained ferry privilege, and later sold the 20
remaining acres for $60, or $3 per acre. Digby's purchaser resold fiveeights of the odd numbered lots consisting of about 15 acres for $130, or
$8.66 per acre.

The town of Danville, Illinois, in Tract G, was laid out in 1827.

In April of that year 42 town lots were sold for $22 each. At Warrenton.
Indiana in Tract I, 7 miles up the Wabash River from.Wil1iamsport in Tract

G, town lots sold for $10 to $20 in 1828. In 1829 combinations of bidders
for the townsite of Pekin, Illinois, in Tract B just south of Peoria, managed
to reduce the initial bid. of $100 per acre to $1.25 per acre.

Speculation in townsites prevented the orderly settlement of land in
Indiana and Illinois. Speculators would buy land from the Government at the
minimum price and then keep the land off the market, particularly any land
within two or three- miles of a public road or other transportation site,
until it could be sold for high prices. As a result of this practice, the
land around Joliet, Illinois, north of Tract D, brought from $40 to $50 per
acre, sometime prior to 1838, the town lots sold for from $500 to $600 each.
The prevalence of speculative land buying in Illinois was evidence of the

optimism felt about the future of these lands.
61. Highest and Best Uses. Portions of the land in suit contained

cultivated pre-cession Indian corn fields and well established Indian
villages. There were also non-Indian villages, many established in the

1700's by the French, and some by Americans. There were a number of thriving

businesses such as mills, breweries, trading posts for trade with the

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 494

Indiana, farms and plantations. The well established non-Indian settlements
and businesses were chiefly in the American Bottom portion of Tract A. A
number of pre-cession non-Indian farms and businesses were in Tract B,
including a grist mill. Som pre-cession non-Indian farms and businesses
were also in tracts A!and C of Royce Area 110, but they were fewer in number
than in Tracts A and B. A.valuable Indian saline in Tract C was appropriated
and further developed by non-Indians prior to the cession date. Such properties
had imediate resale, lease or rental value for the indicated uses.

Timber lands had a highest and best use generally for farms and were
highly sought for that use because they furnished materials for building,
fencing, tools, containers and fuel and also provided shelter, fruits, nuts
honey, game and furbearing animals, forage and good water. In Tract D and
in some places in other tracts, the timber had an immediate commercial value.
In Tract C timber was used to build flatboats for the river traffic.

The prairies which were in the immediate vicinity of timbered lands
had a highest and best use at the valuation date for subsistence farming and
as pasturage for farm animals. Later they would become valuable for the
raising of grain crops. The balance of the prairies which were not located
in the immediate vicinity of timbered lands, were most valuable for hunting
and for their potential use for farms, grazing and in some places, for the
development of coal, other minerals, and iron.

All areas in suit had an obvious potential at valuation dates for

speculation in the sale of townsites, town lots and comercial sites for

mills, ferries, etc.

4] Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 495

Many of the early settlers who came to the lands after cession, saw
the area as ideal for subsistence farming in parcels of 40 acres or more.
Subsistence farming included the use of part of the land for the grazing
of cattle and other livestock and the growing of crops to supply the settler's
immediate family needs. Eventually, the land owner strove to raise a
surplus crop to be sold at a profit. Such surpluses from farms could be taken

down the Mississippi or other rivers or transported overland and sold at the

various villages which already existed in or near the subject tracts. Such

surpluses could also be sold to settlers who had not yet had the opportunity
to raise a crop or buy cattle.

In summary, the highest and best uses for the subject lands varied
from tract to tract but included subsistance farming, farming to raise cash
crops, townsite and town lot speculation, business enterprises based on
mill sites, commercially exploitable timber, and hunting and trapping for

profit.

62. Plaintiff's Valuation of Royce Area 48. The valuation date of the

Kaskaskia cession of Royce Area 48 is December 12, 1803. The Peoria plaintiff
in Docket 313, on behalf of the Kaskaskia Nation, bases its valuation on the
testimony of Dr. Chisholm.

Plaintiff's valuation is based on the physical characteristics of the
area, access thereto, population data, export sales, banking, natural
resources, soils, settlement, economic development and comparable land sales.
Dr. Chisholmls market sales analysis of 508 sales in six Illinois counties is

discussed in our finding 58-A. Plaintiff and Dr. Chisholm concluded that on

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 496

the basis of the sales data, land in Illinois between 1789 and 1820, was
‘worth from $2.10 to $2.35 an acre. The $2.10 figure was apparently derived
by rounding off Dr, Chishohda median sale figure of $2.13, and the $2.35
figure and roundingoff the weighted average figure of $2.32.
Recognizing that their sales data are not precise and deciding that a

value to the nearest dime would be the closest estimate of value

possible, Dr. Chisholm and plaintiff concluded that a value of $1.90 per
acre was reasonable for Royce Area 48 as of the 1803 valuation date.

Plaintiff computes the Kaskaskia interest in Royce Area 48 on the
basis of 100% interest in Tract A, which contains 6,279,118 acres; and an
undivided one half interest in Tract A? which contains 3,824,843 acres, making
a total Kaskaskia interest in 1303 of 3,191,539 acres. Applying the $1.90
per acre value, plaintiff reaches a valuation of $15,S63,924.l0.
63. vDefendant's Valuation of the Kaskaskia Interest in Royce Area 48.

The defendant did not adopt the valuation of its expert, Mr. Harry R. Fenton,
for Royce Area 48. A discussion of Mr. Fenton's sales data is in finding

No. 60. Mr. Fenton's valuation assumed that a hypothetical buyer in 1803
would be a speculator paying with cash in U. S. gold dollars or the equivalent
in specie, and would be buying to resell the land in smaller tracts. He
assumed that it would take 10 to 30 years for the buyer to resell the land
and make his profit and that the buyer would take a substantial discount for
this delay and subtract from.his purchase price the costs of surveying,
recording, quieting title, policing and defending the property, plus all

resale expenses. He concluded that the buyer would pay only a fraction of

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 497

the small tract per acre price and would resell at from 3 to 5 times his

initial cost.

Mr. Fenton believed that early sales of very large tracts of land on
the American frontier were comparable for the purpose of valuing Royce
Area 48 in Illinois in 1803. Accordingly, he calculated the average per acre
price of the GorhamrPhe1ps tract, the Robert Morris purchase, the Macomb's
purchase, and the Boston 10 Towns tract, all in New York State in the
1700's, at 9 cents per acre. Similarly he computed the average per acre
price of the Ohio Land Company lands, the Western Reserve land and the
Symmes tract, all in Ohio, at 18 cents per acre. He considered Tract A
of Royce Area 48 to be similar to the Ohio lands but worth a little less,
and on that basis valued Tract A at 15 cents per acre. He considered
Tract A’ to be worth two—thirds of the per acre price of Tract A, or 10
cents per acre.

Mr. Fenton applied the above values to the Kaskaskia'a 100% interest

in Tract A, consisting of 6,279,118 acres, obtaining a value of $941,868

therefor, and to the Kaskaskia's one-half undivided interest in Tract A‘

consisting of 3,824,842 acres, obtaining a value of $190,242 therefor,

for a total value of $1,133,110 which he rounded off to $1,135,000.
Defendant followed a different approach in its valuation of Royce Area

48. Defendant started with the proposition that Royce Area 48 was twothirds timbered and one-third prairie with the less favored prairie land

concentrated in the northern one-third part of the area. Defendant assumed

that a 1803 purchaser would expect to resell the land and that it would take

30 years to resell the southern 68% of the land in small tracts. Defendant

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 493

concluded that the average holding period for the southern portion would
be 20 years. Defendant then assumed that it would take 35 years to resell
'the northern portion of the area and that the average holding period would
be 25 years.

Defendant assumed that the purchaser could have made 10% per annum
on his money by investing it in some unspecified investment other than the
land in suit. On this premise, defendant justified the discounting of
comparable small tract sales figures to determine the then "present worth"
of such lands on a per acre price basis if payment were deferred 22 years
at 10% annual interest.

Defendant next considered three sets of sales figures. First, defendant
considered 68 of the 508 Illinois sales introduced by Dr. Chisholm for
plaintiffs. The 68 sales selected were of 40 or more acres each during
the period 1790-1809. Of these, the defendant selected 16 sales for the
years 1801-1803. They show an arithmetic average price per acre of $0.83
which defendant reduced to $0.102 by application of the "present worth"

factor. Present worth tables show that each dollar so deferred has a

Pre3°nt W°rth Of $-122.845. Defendant separately considered 31 sales_

of 400 acres each, included in Dr. Chisholm sales data for the years 1793
through 1809. Defendant appears to have assumed that these sales represented
military donation tracts. Whether they were such tracts or were improvement

grants under 1791 legislation, grants of either type generally sold well
below the market value of the land, especially in the initial sales thereof.

Defendant's weighted average per acre price of those 31 sales was $.88 which

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 499

defendant discounted to $.118 by applying the pregeuc north factor.
Second, defendant considered 39 of the 47 sales of small tracts
in the Clark's Grant area of Indiana. These sales, collected for Mr.
Fenton by Mr. Keller, were introduced in evidence by plaintiff.
The 39 sales considered by defendant excluded seven sales between
persons of the same name and one sale of less than 40 acres. Defendant
found a weighted average price for these sales of $1.68 which defendant
discounted to $.206 by application of the present worth factor.
Third, defendant considered earlier sales of large tracts of frontier
land by the State of Massachusetts in what 13 now New York State; by
the State of Connecticut and by the United States of lands in Ohio,
and of various other early private sales. Defendant found 9 cents per
acre was the average price for the New York lands, and 18 cents per
acre average for the Ohio lands as did defendant's expert, Mr. Fenton.
Defendant concluded that the fair market value of the 10,103,960
acres in Royce Area 48 in 1803, was 14 cents per acre. .
' Applying the 14 cents per acre value, defendant valued the Kaskaskia's
1803 100 percent interest in 6,279,118 acres in Tract A.at $879,076;
and the Kaskaskia's one-half undivided interest in the 3,824,842 acres
in Tract.A' at $367,736, for a total of $1,146,815, which defendant

rounded off at $1,150,000 as the value of the Kaskaskia's interest in

Royce Area 48.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 ' 500

64. The Commission's Valuation of the Kaskaskia Interest in
Royce Area 48. For the reasons given in our opinion, considering all
of our findings herein relative to this tract, and on the basis of
the entire record in the case, we find that the value of the Kaskaskia
Nation's interest in Royce Area 48 as of December 23, 1803, was
$5,776,800.00 for the 6,279,118 acres in Tract A, or an average per
acre value of approximately $0.92; and was $1,376,950.00 for the

Nation's undivided one-half interest in the 3,324,842 acres in Tract
A‘, or an average per acre value of approximately $0.72. The total

value of the Kaskaskia Nation's interest in Royce Area 48 in 1803
was $7,153,750.00.

65. The Kickapoo Plaintiffs‘ Valuation of Royce Area 110.

The valuation date of the Kickapoo interest in Royce Area 110 is
January 13, 1821. Because Royce Area 110 partially overlaps Royce areas
48, 96a, 98, 177 and 180, the portions of Areal10 involved in this
proceeding have been designated as tracts A‘, B, C, D, E, G and H.
Plaintiffs rely on the $2.13 median price per acre of the
508 sales gathered by Dr. Chisholm from 6 Illinois Counties from 1789

through 1848 as the basis of their valuation. Considering this price,

and the easy access of Royce Area 110, its fertile prairie soil, its
known natural resources and all of the other factors discussed in Dr.
Chisho1m's report, plaintiffs conclude that $2.00 per acre on the

average was the probable value of the lands in Royce Area 110 in 1821.

The Kickapoo had an undivided l/2 interest in the 3,824,842 acres

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 501

in Tract A‘; a 100% interest in the 5,117,115 acres in Tract B and in
the 2,193,176 acres in Tract C; an undivided 1/2 interest in the

890,014 acres in Tract D and in the 844,794 acres in Tract E; and an
undivided 1/3 interest in the 402,870 acres in Tract G and in the 51,384
acres in Tract H. Plaintiffs applied the $2.00 per acre value to

these interests to obtain a total value of $20,483,068 for the Kickapoo
interest in Royce Area 110.

56. Defendant's Valuation of the Kickapoo Interest in Royce Area
llg, Defendant has adopted the valuation of its expert witness, Mr.
Harry R. Fenton, of the Kickapoo interest in Royce Area 110. Mr.
Fenton based his valuation on the assumption that there would be a
single purchaser who was a land speculator, able to pay cash and
planning to develop the land and resell it in small tracts at a

profit to pioneer subsistence farmers. Mr. Fenton assumed that even though

his buyer would have had no discount tables, he would have known that
a dollar in hand in 1821 was worth more than a dollar to be received
at a later date and that it would take him from 10 to 30 years or even
more to complete the reselling of the land.
Mr; Fenton reasoned that the hypothetical buyer would estimate
the then diminished present worth of monies to be received on ultimate
resale and would deduct therefrom costs of surveying, recording, quieting
title, policing and defending the property plus the resale expenses and
would conclude that he could pay only 1/3 to 1/5 of the small tract price per

acre if he were to make a profit.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 502

To determine the small tract price per acre, Mr. Fenton examined
his data on sales in Fulton, Knox and Henry counties in the Illinois
Military Tract for the years 1817-1820 showing that in Fulton County

there were no sales in 1817; that in 1818-1820 the average prices per

acre were $0.68, $0.74 and $0.92, respectively. In Henry County, the
bulk of which was north of the Military Tract, the average prices per acre
in 1817-1820 were $0.47, $0.58, $0.39, and $0.79,respective1y.

In Knox County the average prices in 1817-1820 were $0.70, $0.76,

$0.40, and $0.74,respective1y. Mr. Fenton concluded from these sales
which we have found not to be comparable for the purpose of valuing

the lands in suit, that the small farm-sized tract vu1ue of Royce Area 110

was $.70 per acre. Mr. Fenton further concluded that the buyer would
discount this price by 80% to cover anticipated expenses, risks,
and profits on resale and would accordingly offer 1/5 of the $0.70, or
$0.14 per acre as the starting value of Royce Area 110.

To reach a net overall value for the Kickapoo interest in
Royce Area 110, Mr. Fenton started with a value of $1,865,387 based on
13,324,195 acres at $0.14 per acre. From this he attempted to deduct
the value of {ha non-Kickapoo interest in the several component tracts

to arrive at the residual Kickapoo value. This method presented certain

hazards.
Mr. Fenton believed that the land in Tract A‘ was worth only $0.12

per acre. To end up with the value of the Kickapoo l/2 interest in the

3,824,842 acres in Tract A‘ at $0.12 per acre, Mr. Fenton should have

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 503

deducted from his pre-calculated overall value of $1,865,387, one half of

$0.16 per acre as the non-Kickapoo l/2 interest in Tract A‘. Instead,
he deducted 1/2 of the $0.12 per acre for Tract A‘, thus inadvertently
leaving $0.16 per acre as the value of the Kickapoo interest in Tract A‘.

Mr. Fenton deducted from his overall valuation 1/2 of the $0.14
per acre value of tracts D and E and 2/3 of the $0.14 per acre of Tract G
to end up with the residual value of the Kickapoo 1/2 interest in tracts
D and E and the Kickapoo 1/3 interest in Tract G. However, to end up with
the 1/3 Kickapoo interest in Tract H, he deducted only 1/3 of the $0.14 per
acre value thereof from his pre-calculated total, thus inadvertently leaving
the Kickapoo with a 2/3 instead of a 1/3 interest in Tract H.

After deducting the non—Kickapoo interests (two of which were
erroneously calculated) from his overall valuation for Royce Area 110, Mr.
Fenton concluded that the Kickapoo interest in Royce Area 110 was worth
$1,492,260, which he rounded off to $1,500,000.00.

‘The defendant adopted Mr. Fenton's small tract valuation of Royce
Area 110 at $0.70 per acre based on sales in Fulton, Knox and Henry

counties in the Illinois Military Tract. Defendant also accepted Mr.

Fenton's conclusion that a buyer would pay only 1/5 thereof or $0.14 per

acre, and on that basis urged that the value of the Kickapoo interest in

Royce Area 110 was $1,500,000.00

67. The Commission's Valuation of the Kickapoo Interest in Royce

Area 110. For the reasons given in our opinion, considering all of our

findings herein relative to this tract, and on the basis of the entire

record in the case, we find that the value of the Kickapoo interest in

42 Ind. Cl. Comm 354
' 504

the various tracts located in Royce Area 110 is as follows:

Tract Kickapoo interest Value of Kickapoo Approximate value
Interest per acre

A’ one-half $2,141.9l2.00 $1.12

B all $6,140,538.00 1.20

C all $2,368,630.00 1.08

D one-half $ 511,758.00 1.15

E one-half $ 484,700.00 1.15

G one third $ 163,834.00 1.22

H one third § 21,958.00 1.28

Total $1l,833,330.00

68. Valuation by Potawatomi Plaintiffs in Dockets 15-D and 311 of
Royce Area 98; valuation by Peoria Plaintiff on Behalf of the Wea in
Docket 314-A, of Royce Area 98 and Tract H. The valuation date of

the Potawatomi cession of Royce Area 98 consisting of tracts G and I in
Illinois and Indiana, and of the Wea cession of Royce Area 98 and

the Tract H overlap of Royce areas 110 and 180 in Indiana, is October 2,
1818. The plaintiffs have submitted a joint proposed finding on the
value of those areas as of that date, relying on the record facts concerning the natural resources, the development of the areas, and the

sales data contained in the report of their expert witness, Dr. Chisholm.
Dr. Chisholm and plaintiffs begin with the median per acre sales price
of $2.13 obtained by Dr. Chisholm from his study of 508 sales in six

Illinois counties from 1789 to 1848. They reasoned that such a median

value was more than justified by the location of the tracts on rivers,

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 505

the fertility of the soil, the excellence of the natural resources,

although they conceded that it would be several years after 1818
before settlers arrived in great numbers. They concluded that under

all the facts and circumstances $2.10 was a reasonable estimate of

the value of tracts G,H and I as of 1818.

On the basis of the above, the Potawatomi plaintiffs in Dockets 15-D

and 311 valued the undivided 1/3 Potawatomi interest in the 402,870

acres of Tract G and the undivided 1/2 Potawatomi interest in the 351,756
acres of Tract I at $651,352.80. On the same basis the Peoria plaintiff
on behalf of the wee Nation in Docket 314-A valued the Wea's like interests
in tracts G and I in the same amount, and the Wea's undivided 1/3 interest
in the 51,384 acres of Tract H at $35,968.80, for a total Wea interest

in tracts G,H and I of $687,321.60

69. Valuation Q1 Potawatomi Plaintiff in Docket 29—B of Royce Area 93Dr. Helen H. Tanner, plaintiff's expert witness, had recommended a value of
$2.65 per acre for the land in Royce Area 98 for the reasons set forth

in our Finding 58 . Counsel for plaintiff, however, rejected Dr. Tanner's
recomendation and urged that land in Royce Area 98 was worth not less
than $3.00 per acre in 1818; that consideration should be given to the
interim loss of use value or to interest on such use value, and that an

allowance should be made for inflation or the decrease in the value of the

dollar since 1818.

70. Defendant's Valuation of Tracts G, H and I. Defendant's

appraiser, Mr. Harry R. Fenton, submitted separate appraisal-valuations for

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 506

the Wea interests in tracts G, H and I and for the Potawatomi interest

in Royce Area 98, tracts G and I. In both appraisals Mr. Fenton assumed
that the lands would be purchased by a hypothetical single purchaser

who would be a land developer or speculator planning to resell the land in
small tracts to subsistence farmers. He assumed that before any sales were
entered into, the land would have been exposed to the market for an optimum
thme which he defined as 3 to 5 years, to develop the greatest possible range
of prospective buyers although he readily admitted that in fact there had
been no such exposure. He also assumed that there was a general market in
1818 for such large tracts of land and that the buyer would pay cash in
United States gold dollars or specie. Mr. Fenton estimated that

were it not for the hypothetical cash requirements in his assumptions,

the property would be Worth 40% more on a small tract sales basis.

Mr. Fenton reasoned that his hypothetical buyer would have had to hold
his retail prices below the $2.00 per acre minimum.government price for
lands. He believed that his buyer would have been influenced by the
experience of the Holland Land Company in New York, which had taken 26
years to dispose of its lands and by 18l8 had not yet disposed of all
of its holdings.

Mr. Fenton's principal reliance was on sales data from Fulton, Knox and

Henry counties in the Illinois Military Tract, discussed in our Finding 56 .

Defendant adopted the $0.19 per acre value which Mr. Fenton finally put

on the land in tracts G,H and I. On that basis defendant estimated that

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 507

the Wea's undivided 1/3 interest in the 402,870 acres in Tract G was worth
$25,515.10; that the Wea's undivided 1/3 interest in the 51,384 acres in
Tract H was worth $3,254.00; and that the Wea‘s undivided 1/2 interest in
Tract I was worth $33,417.00, for a total Wea interest in Boone: 314~A
of $62,186.10 which defendant rounded off to $63,000.00.
On the same basis discussed above, defendant urged that the Potawatomi
plaintiffs in Dockets l5~D, 29-B and 311, jointly had an undivided 1/3
interest in Tract G worth $25,515.10 and an undivided 1/Z interest in Tracr
I worth $33,417.00, for a total Potawatomi interest in Royce Area 93 of
$58,932.10, rounded off to $59,000.00.
71. The Comission's valuation of the Potawatomi Interest in

Roxce Area 98 and of the Wea Interest in Royce Axgg 98 and Tract H.

For the reasons given in our opinion, considering all of our findings
herein relative to these tracts, and on the basis of the record in the case,

we find that the value of the Potawatomi interests in Royce Area 98 is

as follows:

Tract Potawatomi interest Value of Potawatomi Approximate value
interest get acre
G. one third $154,434.00 $1.15
I . one-ha1f §202,612.00 1.15
Total $357,046.00

we further find that the value of the Wea interests in tracts G, H and

I is as follows:
Approximate value

Tract Wea interest Va12e_gf_wta 1uusregL MW_ get acre
G one third $1:4,a.a no 91,15
H one third $ 20,82d.uU 1.22
I one-half M $zqg,9;;,gg__ 1 35

Total $3:7,a7¢ no

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 503

13, 1803, 7 Stat. 78, the Kaskaskia's perpetual annuity of $500 in goods
which they were receiving under Article IV of the Treaty of Greenville of
August 3, 1795, 7 Stat. 49, was increased to $1,000. The third article
of the 1803 treaty provided that whereas the greater part of the tribe
had been received into the Catholic church, the United States would give
them $300 to assist in the erection of a church and $100 annually for seven
years for the support of a Catholic priest who, in addition to the duties
of his office as a priest, would instruct as many as possible of

the tribe's children. In further consideration of the land cession

under this treaty, the United States promised to pay $580 to procure
necessary articles for the tribe and to relieve the tribe of debt

without specifying the nature of the necessary articles or the subject of
the indebtedness.

Defendant is entitled to a credit as consideration under the 1803 Treaty
Cdfthe $10,000 °aP1t311Z9d value of the $500 increase in the tribe's
perpetual annuity; $700 representing the seven annual payments
of $100 for the support of the tribe's priest; and $300 for the erection

of the church, making a total consideration of $11,000.00. In the absence

of a showing by defendant concerning the nature of the necessary articles
procured with the $580 promised in the treaty, we find it reasonable to
infer that such money was spent for food, rations or provisions and
thgzefore not creditable against the award as a payment on the claim under

Public Law 73-494, 33 Stat. 1499.

42 Ind. C1. COME. 354 509

73. Potagatomi Consideration in Dockets 15-D, 29-B and 311. Under the

Treaty of October 2, 1818, 7 Stat. 185, the Potawatomi were promised
a perpetual annuity of $2,500 in silver, the capitalized value of which
is $50,000.00.

Under the treaty of November 15, 1861, 12 Stat, 1191, approximately two
thirds of the Potawatomi Nation: elected to become United States citizens.
Those individuals subsequently were paid for their interest in the
capitalized value of the annuity and the tribal portion of the $2,500
annuity was reduced to $894.50 on the basis of the tribe's reduced

population. The latter amount was disbursed annually until 1910 when all

permanent annuities then being paid to the Prairie Band of Potawatomi

Indians, totaling $9,037.90 (including the $894.50 annuity under the

1818 treaty), were commuted at 5% as provided in an agreement of March 16, 1909:
ratified by the Act of April 4, 1910, 36 Stat. 289.

Both parties agree that the $2,500 annuity was the sole consideration

given by defendant for the 1818 cession and that the capitalized value
of the annuity is $50,000. It is uncontested that the tribe has been paid

the $50,000 cap1ta11zedvalue of the annuity. Accordingly defendant is

entitled to a credit of $50,000.00 against the Potawatomi award in the

subject dockets.

74. Wea Consideration in Docket 314-A, The sole consideration received

by the Wea under the Treaty of October 2, 1818, 7 Stat. 186, was a $1,850

perpetual annuity payable in silver. Defendant comuted this annity under

Article 6 of the Treaty of May 30, 1854, 10 Stat. 1072, for $34,478.16.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 510

We credited the commuted sum against the award in Peoria Tribe of Indians v.

 . Docket 314 (amended), 9 Ind. c1. Comm. 274, 233, 290-291

(1966).  169 cc. C1. 1009 (1965). Accordingly,

defendant is not entitled to credit for this annuity as considered in

this proceeding.

75. Kickapoo Consideration in Docket 315. In return for land ceded
and obligations released under the Treaty of July 30, 1819, 7 Stat. 200
as amended by the Treaty of July 19, 1820, 7 Stat. 208, involved in Docket
315, defendant promised and paid to the Kickapoo $2,000.00 in silver annually
for 15 years. Article 6 of the July 30, 1819 treaty states that the
United States delivered $3,000 worth of merchandise to the tribe on that
date. Defendant also promised and delivered to the Kickapoo 1,868,500 acres
of land in the Territory of Missouri, hereinafter referred to as the "exchange
land". This tract in Missouri will be valued as of January 13, 1821, the
effective date of the amended Treaty of July 30, 1819.

In return for land ceded and the release of an annuity of one thousand
dollars, the Treaty of August 30, 1819, 78 Stat. 202, provided that defendant
would pay to the Kickapoo $2,000 annually in specie for 10 years, and $3,000
in cash. The "one thousand dollars" annuity which the Kickapoo released
under the August 30, 1819 treaty included a $500 perpetual annuity granted
to them under the 1795 Treaty of Greenville; the $400 and $100 perpetual
annuities granted them under the Treaty of December 9, 1809, 7 Stat. 117; and
the Kickapoo's interest in a salt annuity (not to exceed 150 bushels) granted
jointly to eight tribes under the Treaty of June 7, 1803, 7 Stat. 74. The value
of the released monetary annuities, capitalized at 5% is $20,000. The similarly

capitalized value of the Kickapoo's l/8 interest in the salt annuity is computed

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 511

by multiplying the 150 bushels by 1/8, times the average unit price of
$1.375 per bushel = $25.7a12, . .05 = $515.02, which we round off to $500.
This sum at 5% interest would produce the approximate value of the Kickapoo
share of the annuity. The combined cash and salt annuity has a capitalized
value of $20,500 for which the Kickapoo are entitled to a credit by deducting
this sum from the consideration paid to the Kickapoos under the 1819 treaty,
as amended.

The allowable value of the consideration received by the Kickapoo
under the foregoing treaties, less the capitalized value of the released
cash and salt annuities, is summarized in the following table.

Treaty of July 30, 1819, as amended:

$2,000 annuity for 15 years $30,000.00
Merchandise (3,000) 0
Exchange land (1,868,500) 373,700.00

Treaty of August 30, 1819, as amended:

$2,000 anuity for 10 years 20,000.00
Cash 0 3,000.00
Total $426.700.00

Less the capitalized value of the $1,000 annuity
and other obligations released by the Kickapoos

on July 30, 1819 - 20,500.00
A Net consideration $406,200.00
The $3,000.00 worth of merchandise promised by Article 6 of the July 30,
1819 treaty, may;in the absence of any proof to the contrary, be deemed to
have been food, rations or provisions within the meaning of the Act of October

27, l974,prohibiting the deduction of the value of such items as payments

on the claim.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 512

76. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Location. The Kickapoo exchange land was

a 1,868,500 acre tract about 75 miles long and 60 miles wide located in
the southwestern part of Missouri. The tract was mapped as Royce Area 179

(Royce map No. 38 of Missouri in the Eighteenth Annual Report of

the Bureau of American Ethnology (Part 2), Indian Land Cessions (1896-97))
following the Kickapoo's re-cession of the tract to the United States under
the Treaty of October 24, 1832, 7 Stat. 391. With reference to present

day counties in Missouri, the boundaries of the tract are as follows:
beginning at the confluence of the Pommes de Terre and Osage rivers in Benton
County; thence up the Pommes de Terre River in a southerly direction to the
dividing ridge which separated the watersheds of the Osage and White rivers
in Greene County; thence along said ridge in a southwesterly direction

to a point in the northwestern tip of present Christian County near the headwaters of the Sac River; thence in a westerly direction in a straight line to
the Osage boundary line established by the Treaty of November 10, 1808,

7 Stat. 107; thence north along said line to Nerve Creek in Barton County;
thence northeasterly down said creek to a point thereon due south of the
mouth of White Clay Greek, or Richard Creek (presently known as Clear Creek)
on the Osage River; thence north to the mouth of White Clay Creek on the

Osage River; thence northeasterly down the Osage River to the point of

beginning.

77. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Topography; Soils, Minerals and Timber.

The Kickapoo exchange land was in the western portion of the Ozark Plateau
known as the Springfield Plain. Its topography was predominantly undulating

to steep, with step-like hilly lands near the rivers. It sloped gently from

about 1,000 feet elevation near its eastern line to about 1,000 feet on its

western line with local differences of about 100 to 300 feet.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 513

The tract had some large, treeless prairie-like areas in the southwest
portion. It also contained numerous swales, depressions and minor streams,
many of which were bordered by stands of timber. About two thirds of the
tract was of combined timber and prairie land and about one fifteenth was
prairie. The remainder was timber land. The tract was drained by the
Sac, Osage and Pomne de Terre rivers which, with their tributaries, flowed

through steep sided but somewhat shallow valleys averaging about a mile in

width.

The soils were of three main types. The predominant type was Bazter-Nixa,

a stony limestone soil, greyish to reddish brown with chert rocks two to four
inches in diameter almost universally present through the soil mass. The

other two types were Bates-Boone, and Parsons-Gerald, both of which‘were

also stony. These soils ranged from good to medium fertility and were

capable of growing grain crops in the better watered areas and grass for

grazing in the less Watered places. The soils in the valleys

were generally of alluvium and were fertile except for large sections

which were steep, rocky and gravelly.

At the time of valuation in 1821, the tract had many stands of timber

but they were insufficientln provide a potential for lumbering. The timber

was sufficient to supply some of the needs of settlers. At valuation time

the tract had no known mineral potential

78. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Climate. The annual mean temperature of

this land ranges from 40 degrees Fahrenheit in the northwest to 58 degrees in

the southeast, the average for the state being 54 degrees. Periods of

extreme cold are of short duration and the temperature seldom falls.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 514

lower than 10 degrees below zero. During the summer months the temperature
frequently reaches 90 degrees or more.

The average date of the last killing spring frost varies fro April 12
in the south to April 22 in the north. The first killing frost varies from
October 18 in the south to October 12 in the north. The average length of

the growing season is 180 days.

Precipitation is heaviest in the spring and-early summer and lightest in

late fall and winter; this is true of the entire state. Rainfall averages
approximately 27 1/2 inches during March through September. There are

occasional periods of drought, usually in July.

79. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Highest and Best Use. Consideringithe

topography, natural resources, and climatic conditions in the Kickapoo
tract, the highest and best use in 1821 would have been for subsistence
farming which could have been carried on in the forested acreages along
the river valleys and in other well watered areas. The prairie expanses
and other areas lacking one or more of the good combinations of soils,
water and timber, would have been useful for the grazing of livestock

in connection with a general farming operation.

80. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Surveyor's Notes. The earliest surveys

in the subject tract were made from 1833 to 1835 when a government surveyor
surveyed the north end of the tract which included about 20 sections. His
survey included river lands and uplands. His notes show that some of the land in
both areas had a combination of rich soil, timber and enough water to

accomodate settlers. He also found some sites with springs and other sites

useful as millsites or quarries. He recommended that the government open for

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 515

settlement about 75% of the portion of land he surveyed. He reported that
much of the land was unfit for cultivation because it was too rough, broken,
stony or gravelly. Also in 1835, another government surveyor of an

8 section strip in the western portion of the tract, noted that some of that

land was fit for cultivation and that three sections were of second rate

land.

81. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Population. In 1820 the non-Indian
population of the Territory of Missouri was 66,586. Most of these people
werelocated in the eastern portion along the Mississippi River, with a
concentration in northeastern Missouri near St. Louis and along the
Missouri River around the Boone's Lick country. The non—Indian population in
southwestern Missouri where the exchange tract was located, was less than 2
persons per square mile at that time.

82. Kickapoo Exchange Land - Transportation, Travel and Accessibility.

In 1821 there were no roads in the tract, only Indian trails. None of

the rivers in the tract were used for navigation by non-Indians. Nb nonIndian_trave1 or'trade routes had developed through or near this tract. However,
by 1821 the Osage River had a reasonably forseeable potential for

navigational use.

The nearest travelled route was the Missouri River upon which great comerce
had yet to be developed. Steamboats did not appear on the Missouri

until many years after the 1821 valuation date. The nearest roads were in

eastern Missouri along the Mississippi River.

In 1821 the subject tract was not easily accessible. It was difficult to

enter from the east because of the very rough Ozark highlands between it and

the Mississippi River. It was accessible from the south via a long

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 516

difficult journey up the White River which flows into the Arkansas River just

above the confluence of the latter and the Mississippi River, but that
route had not developed by 1821. It was also accessible from the north by

travel up the Missouri River and its tributary the Osage, but in 1821

this had not been done.
83. _Ei25Q2QQ_§ggh§gg§_L§Qg_;_2gyglQpmgg§. In 1821 the general area around

and adjacent to the subject tract had experienced practically no development

or settlement. The tract was still a part of a vast wilderness extending

from near the Missouri River on the north to and beyond the Arkansas Territory
on the south; and from the rough Ozark highlands on the east to the near level

prairie lands of Kansas and beyond.

The subject tract was then considered rough, raw land hunted by Indians and

non-Indians for its game. It had no operating political structure even though on

the January 13, 1821, valuation date, the Missouri Territory was being
prepared for statehood which it achieved on August 10, 1821. The tract was
not near or easily accessible to market centers, its roughness discouraged
entry and it was not attractive to settlers who bypassed it in favor of more
desirable lands elsewhere.

The rate of settlement in Missouri reached a low point in 1820 when
there were no sales of public land in the entire territory. In addition to
millions of acres of good lands in Missouri available for sale, there were many
nore millions of acres of suitable lands available to settlers in better
located places to the east of this tract. The normal flow of immigration in
1821 was down the Ohio River, into Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and

northeastern Missouri above St. Louis. There was also some settlement taking

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 517

place in the Boone's Lick area some 70 miles northeast of the subject tract.
That area, along with the northeastern Missouri settlements, represented the
farthest westward movement of migrant settlers at that time.

34.  congress
established the first public land office in the Missouri Territory at St.
Louis in 1811. Because the land surveys were not sufficiently advanced,
actual sales did not begin until 1818. In the same year Congress established
two other land offices, one at Franklin in Howard County
(for Boone's Lick) and the other at Jackson in Cape Girardeau County. In
1823 a fourth land district was located at Lexington, Missouri, and in
1825 a fifth land district was established at Palmyra.

The first annual report from the St. Louis land office showed that from
October 1, 1818, through September 30, 1819, some 470,990 acres of Missouri
land, valued at 1.1 million dollars, or $2.33 per acre, were sold with
payments made to the Treasury of $280,000.

In the period 1818 through 1826, a total of 15,887,931 acres of public land
in Missouri were put on the market and some 1,061,667 acres were sold, the vast
majority bringing $1.25 per acre cash. No public land was sold in Missouri
in 1820. ‘The lands involved in the sales were more desirable than the
Kickapoo exchange lands, being of better quality for agriculture and settlement and far more accessible and close to major river arteries.
85. Kickapoo Exchange Land-Expert'Witness Valuations. The Kickapoo plaintiff
presented no expert witness,or value evidence on the Exchange lands except

plaintiffs‘ Joint Exhibit X which is a copy of defendant's expert witness

report offered in evidence in Osage Nation or Tribe of Indians v. United

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 513

States, Docket 105, 21 Ind. Cl. Comn. 67(l969), involving a large tract
of Missouri lands including this tract, and in which the expert placed
a value of 15 cents per acre as of April 28, 1810, on the whole tract.
Defendant's expert witness in that case was Dr. William G. Mrray.

In this case, Docket 315, Dr. Mrray was defendant's expert witness
on the value of the Kickapoo exchange land. He submitted a 92 page appraisal

report valuing the land as of July 30, l8l9,instead of the correct

valuation date of January 13, 1821. Dr. Murray testified that there would
have been little change in his valuation between 1819 and 1820 and we

find the same holds true as of the actual valuation date in early 1821.

Considering the same value criteria outlined above in our findings,

Dr. Mrray concluded that the highest and best uses of the tract was

for farming and stock raising, being of the opinion that the land had

no commercial grazing value in 1820.

Since there were no land sales near to the Kickapoo exchange lands
in 1819, Dr. Murray chose three Missouri tracts which were some distance
to the east. One tract consisted of two townships 30 to 40 miles west of
the Missouri River. A second tract included 7 townships bordering the Mississippi River. The third tract which was not put on the market until 1823
and 1831, was a much larger area bordering the Des Moines and Mississippi
rivers. The data was not used to show the value of the land but rather the
amount of land sold in each year. In the first two townships which were somewhat isolated but not as isolated as the exchange lands, there were a few sales
in 1819 but none from 1820 through 1825. Dr. Murray concluded that if the

exchange lands had been located near the Missouri or Mississippi rivers and had

been placed on the market in 1819, the choice tracts would have been purchased.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 519

Dr. Murray determined the 1819 value of the exchange lands by computing

what a buyer would pay if at 7% interest he hoped to recover over a 30 year

period the 1819 public land cash price of $1.64 per acre. He concluded

that such a buyer would pay 23 cents per acre for the tract in 1819 and that
such amount, at 7% interest, would produce $1.64 per acre in about 30 years..
On this basis Dr. Murray calculated that the tract had a fair market value
of $429,755 in 1819. Since 1819 is not the proper valuation date for the
exchange lands and because by January 13, 1821, the price for public lands
had changed from the $2.00 per acre used by Dr. Murray to $1.25 per acre,
Dr. Murray's calculations would require some adjustments.

86. Kickapoo Exchange Land — Conclusion on Fair Market Value. For the
reasons stated in our opinion and on the basis of the whole record, we
find that on January 13, 1821, the 1,868,500 acre Kickapoo exchange tract
had a fair market value of $373,700, or approximately 20 cents per acre.

87. Kickapoo Offset Against Consideration. From the total consideration
of $426,700 promised by defendant in the treaty of July 30, 1819, as
amended, and the Treaty of August 30, 1819, as amended, the Kickapoo are
entitled to a deduction of $20,500 representing the capitalized value of the
perpetual annuity obligation of defendant which the Kickapoo released under
those treaties. This leaves a net consideration in Docket 315 of $406,200.

88. Conclusion. In the light of the consideration paid by defendant
for each cession of land having the fair market values we have determined
herein, we find the amounts paid in each instance were so grossly inadequate

as to constitute unconscionable consideration. Accordingly, the Commission

42 Ind. 01. Comm. 354 520

concludes that plaintiffs are entitled to the value of the interests they

ceded less the consideration received and properly deductible, as summarized

below:
Allowable
Ceasion Value Consideration Award
Docket 313: Kaskaskia, Royce $ 7,153,750 $11,000 $ 7,142,750
Area 48
Dockets 15-0, 29-3, 311: 357,046 50,000 307.046
Potawatomi cession of Royce
Area 98
Docket 314-A: Wea cession of 377,874 0 377,374
Royce Area 98 and Tract H
Docket 315: Kickapoo cession 11,833,330 406,200 11,427,130

of Royce Area 110

C ' ‘
. .. .:;.-:3.../é’ 4.. _l.:..:'«‘’*'*'

J K. Kuykendall, Ch 3.’. n
D

«I
..‘
/

V‘ . T _ -—-4-4 I
W T . Vance , Commiss ioner
' .'

Lit .'.4(4 0 _ rl .I"Ii'IJ. .5 1'
Richard W; Yarb-'ough, Commi sioner

 
   

Commissioner

      

Brantley Blue, issioner

