BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

me PRAIRIE BAND or Pom-:AToM:[
INDIANS, et 2.1.,

Plaintiffs,
‘V o

INITE STATES or AMERICA,

Defendant.

me CITIZEN BIIEHJ or Pom~rATo1~1I
INDIANS, et al.,

Petitioners,
V.

INITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

IANNAHVILLE INDIAN COMMUNITY,
et al.,

Intervening Petitioners.

Decided:

Appearances:

\.,/\.;\.._,/\.....I -....o~..a~.....-v-....n....u-...z~...a-..w\-..-' ‘--1*-4"--"--—"'--"*--"*--""--""-"”"’

September 19, 1956

Docket No. 15-J

Docket No. 71—A

0. R. McGuire and Robert Stone,

Attorneys for Prairie Band of

Potawatomi; Howard D. Moses and ‘
Louis L. Rochmes, Attorneys for

Citizen Band of Potawatomi.

Walter H. Maloney and James N.
Beery, Attorneys for Intervenors

Sim T. Carmen, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton,

Attornys for Defendant.

- '-f-- ---u----—---........._._.,._ .._..__,_____

h 51).;

OPINION _(_3f‘_ THE COMMISSION
0'Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The case of Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Indians, Doket No. 15-J,
and that of Citizens Band of Potawatomi Indians, Docket No. 71-A, were
consolidated for trial. It is not denied that these two bands of Potawatomi are successors in interest to the Potawatomi Nation. In those
two cases the bands each seek:recovery of additional compensation for
two tracts of land, one composed of 5,000,000 acres, located in western

Iowa, and the other, consisting of 909,565 acres, located on the Osage

River in Kansas.

The Iowa.tract was granted by defendant to the "United Nation of

iChippewa, Ottowa and Potawatomie Indians" by the treaty of September 26,

1833, 7 Stat. h3l, and the Osage River tract was acqnired.by a grant of

the Government to the "Potawatomies of Indiana," contained in the treaty

of February ll, l837, 7 Stat. 532. Both tracts were ceded to defendant

by the treaty of June 5 and 1?, 18b6, 9 Stat. 853, and it is the con»
sideration.the defendant paid for that cession that is the basis for the
The

claims here under consideration. There is no dispute about this.

idispute arises as to'which Potawatomi Indians shall share in the award,
that is, whether it shall be only'for those Potawatomi who are descendants
of the Indians who moved.west of the Mississippi River to lands provided
for them by defendant in the treaties of l833 and 1837, or whether those
descendants of Potawatomi who remained east of that river should share the

award with those who moved west.

h 515

During the hearings on the two claims mentioned above, a petition

of intervention was, with the consent of the Commission, filed purporting
to represent all Potawatomi related.by blood whose ancestors did not
"move west of the Mississippi River to lands provided for Potawatomi by
the treaties of l833 and 1837, but remained in Wisconsin and Michigan
and have since remained there. Their contention is that the treaties

of 1833 and 1837 were made for the benefit of all Potawatomi uheresoever_situate; that there was but one nation or tribe, and all treaties
made with any segment or group of such Indians were in reality treaties
of an entire nation and, therefore, even though the ancestors of the
intervenors did not remove west of the river, they are entitled to share
with petitioners the award in this case.

The petitioners in Dockets 15-J and ?l~A moved to dismiss the intervening petition and thus raised the question whether the intervenors
"have any interest in the claims set forth in said dockets. Since such
claims are substantial1y'alike we shall treat them as one for the purposes of said.motion, and generally refer to the claimants in both

dockets as petitioners.

The intervenors' petition is by an organized group living on a

reservation in‘Wisconsin, another organized group living on a reservation '

in Michigan, and six individual Potawatomi Indians. ‘we shall accept,
for the purposes of this motion, the intervenors‘ assertion that they
represent all Potawatomi Indians who did not move west of the Mississippi
River to the Iowa and Osage rivers tracts provided for Potawatomi Indians

'hy the two treaties referred to above, also such Fotawatomi Indians who

is S16

at one time or another moved west of the Mississippi but later returned
to places east of that river and remained east.
The evidence is plain that the United Nation of Chippewa, Ottawa

and Potawatomi and most of its members, and the Kankakee band of southern
Illinois moved.to Iowa on lands provided by the l833 treaty. Later,
the'Wabash and St. Joseph bands, and most of their members, moved to the
Osage River tract acquired.by the 1837 treaty. Finding 25a

The position of the intervenors is best set out by quoting from

their brief:

* *'* (a) that there was one, and.only one tribe, the Potaeatom
‘mi Nation or United Nation of Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatomi,
inclusive of all Potawatomies; (b)=that the ancestors of petim
tioners and intervenors were members of that Nation; (c) that
intimate and blood relationship existed between them and now
betneen petitioners and intervenors; (d) that the Nation
owned all the land; (e) that there were and are no autonomous
groups in the Nation; (t) that the lands ceded by the Treaty
of June 5-17, l8h6 belonged to the United Nation; (g) that
every Potanatomi Indian, removed or not removed, organized
or not organized, who is or can be identified as a descendant
of those of the tribe as it existed.when it owned the lands
east of the Mississippi river and acquired title to the lands
in Iowa and Kansas, are entitled to participate with all other
identifiable Potawatomi Indians % % %.

The petitioners, on the other hand, while admitting that there was an
ethnic group known as the Potawatomi Nation, insist that the nation was

actually composed of two general groups: ‘Those in northern'Wisconsin and
northern.Michigan, referred to as Forest Potawatomi, and a part which had

separated.from those in the north and migrated south and eventually settled

around the southern part of Lake Michigan in the states of Michigan,

Indiana and Illinois. And that prior to 1833, the southern Potanatomi

34 517

became divided into four main bands or groups which, in its dealings
‘with the United States acted independently of each other and of the
northern group, and also of the Illinois4Wisconsin group.

The main contention of the intervenors, as set forth in the quoted
part of their brief and in their proposed Finding II, is, as has been
stated, that there was only one nation ortribe which included all Pota'watomi, and that it was never divided into independent political groups.
They seek to explain the many treaties executed by Potawatomi Indian
groups up to and including the treaty of June 5-17, l8h6, 9 Stat. 853,
by asserting that certain groups performed some local or group activities
and that in dealing with them the government agents created a name for
them by describing their geographical location, but however described,
the lands involved belonged to all Potawatomi and not to any autonomous
group of such Indians. Hence, they contend, the Indians who did not
follow the main groups to Iowa after 1833 or to the Osage River in Kansas
after 1837, but remained east of the Mississippi River in'Wisconsin and
Michigan, are entitled to the same rights in the lands under the treaties
of 1333, l83? and l8h6, as those who moved west of the Mississippi to
the locations provided by the treaties of 1833 and 1837.

In the treaty of Greenville, Ohio, of August 3, 1795, 7 Stat. b9,
are identified two bands of Potawatomi. This treaty was executed by
fifteen tribes, including Potawatomi (Pottawatimas). In the caption of

the treaty reference is made to the_tribe of Indians called the “Puta'watimes," but it was executed.by "Pottawatimas of the river St. Joseph"

h 518

and “Pottawatimas of Huron,“ two groups widely separated geographically.
It is no doubt true, as the intervenors contend, that they were given the
names of the rivers up0n'which they resided. This was a common practice
of treaty-makers, but it is also true that such a designation was one the
Indians would likely understand and served to identify separate parts of
an ethnic group. ‘we believe there were two separate Potawatomi groups who
acted independently of each other and other Potawatomi in executing the
Greenville treaty.

The treaty of July h, 1805, 7 Stat. 87, and the treaty_of November 1?,
1807, 7 Stat. 105, were made with several Indian groups, including
Potawatomi. In the captions of those treaties the Potawatomi are referred
to as a nation, but such general designation is restricted in each by
provisions of the respective treaties. In the body of the 1805 treaty
(Art. V), provision is made for certain payments to “such of the Pottaw
watima nationias reside on the river Huron of Lake Erie, and in the neighbor»
hood thereof." In the 1807 treaty, the sum of $1666.66 was made payable
to the “Pottawatomie nation" and an annuity of $hOO "to such of the Pottau
watomies, as now reside on the river Huron of Lake Erie, the river Raisin,
and in the vicinity of said rivers.“ Thus, it is apparent, that the dealu
ings were not by the Potawatomi Nation, that is, all people of the Pota'watomi blood, as the intervenors -- because of the designation, Potawatomi
Nation, appearing in the captions of the treaties —- contend, but only with
that small group which occupied a relatively small area on and in the
‘vicinity of the Huron.River. General designations of parties, as contained

in the caption.of a treaty, must of necessity give way to specific references

to them in the body of a treaty, and when the documents are so worded as
to plainly show the real parties bound by and.entitled to share in the
benefits of such agreements, such references must prevail over a broader

or inaccurate designation appearing in the caption. ‘we believe that it

was understood by the parties to the 1805 and l807 treaties that only

the Huron band was intended as the Potawatomi parties thereto. Moreover,

there is nothing in either treaty or the evidence indicating the purpose
or authority to negotiate with the Government for Potawatomi other than
the Huron band separately. Furthermore, it will be noted that in the

1807 treaty there were reserved, as numbered in Royce Michigan 3, Segen—

siwin's village (135), Tonquish's village (136) and the Macon village
(137) tracts for the Huron. In all a mere thirteen square miles were
reserved for this group, which fact is in itself proof that in joining
in the treaty and in retaining the reserves it was acting independently
of other Potawatomi. Further evidence of this political independence of

'10

the Huron is found in the treaty of September i,,

1827, 7 Stat. 305, by
‘which'the Government consolidated some of the “dispersed bands of the
Potawatomi Tribe in the Territory of Michigan.“ In this treaty the three,
Huron.reserves mentioned above were ceded to defendant and it is presumed
that some Huron.went to the Notawaseppe area (Royce Mich. 3, Tr. 189),
whieh.by said.treaty was enlarged and reserved for all of the dispersed

bands of Potawatomie in the Territory of Michigan.

The intervenors stress the importance of the treaty of September 19,

1327, 7 Stat. 305, as evidencing action by the entire Potawatomi people,

h S

as opposed to band.action, because the caption recites that it is a treaty
with the "Potawatomie Tribe of Indians“ and that its purpose was to
"consolidate some of the dispersed bands of the Potawatomie Tribe in the
Territory of Michigan % %." To carry out this stated purpose there was
ceded certain specified tracts “heretofore reserved for the use of said
Tribe." 8

Reference to the treaty of 1827 shows beyond.question that the
parties thereto were dealing with reserves theretofore set aside to
specified.bands of Potawatomi, namely, the three small reserves mentioned

above, to the Huron, and several other small tracts which had been set

aside to other Potawatomi bands by the treaty of August 29, 1821, 7 State

218. At the time of the 1827 treaty, there were several thousand Potam
‘watomi, other than the bands ceding the reserves in 1827, residing-in
southern Michigan, northern Indiana and in Illinois and southern Wisconsin,
yet the various bands acted as politically independent entities in ceda
ing their respective reserves in 1827, reserves which were set aside to
the respective groups from larger areas previously ceded. It would have
been somewhat of a surprise to these reservees, we imagine, had the

treaty Commissioners informed.them that their reserves belonged to other
Potawatomi as well as themselves. So it must be accepted as a fact that,
while the Huron and the other Potawatomi groups acted under a treaty
rwhich, in its caption, purports to have been.made by the “Potawatomie
Tribe," it was in.reality a treaty with the individual groups who acquired

the individual reserves. The Huron, as has been seen, beginning in 1795

and until the 1827 treaty, made four treaties dealing with the lands in

each of which.they acted as an independent political unit. There is no
evidence that they, as a political unit, made or joined in any land
cessions after 1827, but their political independence was demonstrated

thereafter. The Huron asserted an exclusive interest in the treaty of

July h, 1805, which was recognized by defendant and that band.relinquished
any interest it might have had in the permanent annuity of the 1795 treaty.

(Find. 32). It commuted the $h00 permanent annuity of the 1807 treaty and
received the commutated sum of $8000 by the Act of June 29, 1888, 25 Stat.

225. (Find. 33).

And by the Act of March h, 1889, 25 Stat. 988, there
was appropriated and paid.the Huron $9h00 found to be due them under the
1805 and 1807 treaties. In this act they are referred to as the "Pottewatomies of Huron, Michigan." (Find. 3h). The Huron apparently were then

on lands purchased for them by the people of Michigan in l8h6. lnt. Ex.

I-106. After the treaty of 18b6, the annuities payable to the bands united
by that treaty were paid to the Potawatomi Nation, except those payable to

the Huron (Find. 28) under treaties made with that band exclusively.

The Huron did not join in the 1833 or 183? treaties nor does the

evidence show that they moved to the Iowa or Osage river tracts, but appear

to have remained in Michigan. The political actions of the Huron, as outlined above, show that they never acted for or on behalf of Potawatomi in

general, but as a completely autonomous entity.
‘°110“iU8 these treaties wdth.the Huron -« who were probably the most

°33‘“?1U Of the Potawatomi groups -- were treaties with other Potawatomi

“T°“V3 1”V°1Vi“R lands generally west of the Huron, in Illinois, Iichigan,

and Indiana.

h 522

On October 20, 1832, 7 Stat. 378, the "Potawatomi Tribe of Indians

of the Prairie and Kankakee“ ceded lands south of Lake Michigan in Illinois

on.the Kankakee river (Royce, Ill. 1, Tr. 177).

On October 26, 1832, 7 Stat. 398, the "Chiefs, Headmen and Warriors
of the Pottawatomie Indians" ceded land in northwest Indiana lying imr

nediately east of the Kankakee tract. This group is identified by the
Act of March 2, 1833. h Stat. 636, 638, as the "Pottawatomies of the
‘Wabash" in which appropriations provided for in Article III, were made
to cover the first annuity of $20,000 and goods to the value of $100,000.

A.treaty dated October 27, 1832, 7 Stat. 399, was concluded with the
’Potawatomies of the State of Indiana and.Michigan Territory" ceding lands
in north central Indiana. Topenebee signed this treaty and.is described
therein as "principal chief."

Hence, by the treaties of 1795, 1805, 1807, and the three treaties
of 1832, referred to atove, four Potawatomi groups -- the Huron, Kankakee,
St. Joseph.and Wabash -- dealt with the Government as independent and
distinct groups and.ceded separate tracts. During this period, at least
from before 1816 to 1833, a large part of the Potawatomi lived along the
west shore of Lake Michigan and in areas west thereof, as shown by Royce
bracts 77, 78, 1L7, lh9, and 187, Illinois 2 and Wisconsin 1, Maps 18 and
6h, respectively. Geographically, Potawatomi group holdings extended
from western Lake Erie to the Hississippi_River from west and southwest
of Lake Michigan, those west and southwest of Lake Michigan having been

separately dealt with by the Government as that band of Potawatomi known,

from the first cession in 1816 to the final cession in 1833, as the United

h 523

Tribes or Nations of Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatcmie Indians. 'With the
exception of the Prairie and Kankakee cession of October 20, 1832, 7 Stat.
315, the Government had dealt with, and such United Nation had ceded in
separate tracts all Potauatomi lands remaining in Illinois and Wisconsin
at the time of the 1833 cessions. No other Potauatomie group, whether
in.Michigan or Indiana, were parties to those treaties, nor was the United
Nation a party to any treaty made by the Huron, St. Joseph or Indiana
Potawatomi. These main treaties by the various groups, some ten in
number, are listed.following Finding 11.
In addition to the above, there were thirteen treaties, which are

cited under Finding 23, by which individual bands of Potawatomi ceded

to the United States small tracts reserved for their individual use from
cessions of large areas previously made. In each of these treaties, the
consideration.was made payable to the "chief and his band," except in the
1836 treaty, 7 Stat. 515, the consideration is made payable to the "chiefs,
warriors and headmen of the Potauattimie nation," but the treaty was,
according to its caption and text, with the "chiefs, warriors and headmen
of the Potawattamies of the Wabash.“ In none of these thirteen treaties

does it even remotely appear that Potawatomi, other than the individual

bands, had.any interest in the ceded tracts.

The above transactions with Potawatomi Indians show beyond doubt
that the Potawatomi people, at the time of the treaty of 1833 and the
treaty of 1837, was composed of numerous autonomous groups who in their

land dealings with defendant acted independently of each other and.aS

autonomous entities.

11 S214.

---oIDENTITY OF INTERVENORS

What has been said abve deals mainly with the rights of nonaemigrating

Potawatomi as'members of an alleged over-all nationo It now becomes
necessary to identify the intervenors in order to determine whether their
ancestors retained any rights as members of the bands which acquired the
lore and Kansas lands under the treaties of 1833 and 1837, since they
seek to trace their rights through such ancestorso

In their petition the intervenors allege that “they are descendants
and successors in interest of the Potawatomi Indians who, and the Potae
natomi Indian Nation.that owned and lived upon the lands hereinafter

described and who, subsequent to Treaty of September 26, 18333 (? State

h3l) were not moved west of the Mississippi river or, who, pursuant to

the Treaty of September 27, l833 (7 Stat. hh2) remained east of the Missisu

sippi river, or who returned from.west of the Mississippi to live east
ofasaidxrivero" This general allegation is repeated in substance in their
proposed finding Io
But in their proposed finding XVI, the intervenors give us a more

detailed description of their asserted tribal connections. Therein they
state that they are composed of three groups of Potasatomi Indians:

(1) Those descendants of Potawatomi who resided on.lands in Wisconsin
‘which were ceded by the treaty of September 26-27, 1833 and who thereafter remained in Wisconsin or returned.there after going to Iowa
pursuant to that treaty, and include ancestors of members of the Hannah»
ville Indian Community of Wilson, Michigan, and the Forest County Potae

'watomi of Crandon, Wisconsin; (2) Those descendants of Potawatomi

Indians who lived upon Potawatomi lands in the State of indiana and the

Territory of Michigan prior to and in 1833, and (apparently) are descendants of members of the group identified in the supplemental treaty of
September 27, 1833, 7 Stat. hh2, as the "United Nation of Chippewa,
Ottawa and Potawatomie," but who did not move west of the Mississippi
River but remained in Michigan. Included in this group is the Pokagon
band; (3) Those descendants of Potawatomi Indians who lived on and in
the vicinity of the Huron River of Lake Erie on three reservations which
were ceded by the treaty of September 19, 182?, 7 Stat. 305. These
Indians became known as the Potawatomi of the Huron and, presumably,
moved to or near the Nottawasepe Reservation in Michigan, which by the

1827 treaty had been enlarged to acccnodate “dispersed bands of the

Potawatomie Tribe in the territory of Michigan.“

Huron Band

 

‘we have discussed the Potawatomi of the Huron at some length above.
They were a relatively small group, for in l8hS there were only 30 or ho

in Michigan and some in Canada (Def. Ex. 29}. In l8SO, there were only

51 mmbers of that band. The Huron made no treaties after l827 and were
opposed.to moving and in 1850 were living upon lands of their own in
Michigan. There is no evidence that they as a band moved.west of the
Mississippi to either tract provided for Potawatomi. They always acted
as an independent group and.there is no evidence that they took part in

the treaties of 1833 and 183?, or that they acquired any rights in either
So, the Huron

tract. The petitioners and defendant are agreed on this.

band may be excluded as claimant.

h 526

Pokagon Bang

The Pokagon (Pocagon) band‘s identity is recognized by all parties
to the motion as being a part of the St. Joseph band and at the time of
the supplementary treaty of September 27, 1833, 7 Stat. hh2, to which they
were a party, lived on a reservation near Niles, Michigan. After the
execution of this treaty, Pokagon”s band.refused to emigrate west to the
Iona tract and asked permission to remove to northern Michigan. This
permission was granted by the supplement to the treaty of September 27,
l833, and they moved north -u some 250 of them am but later returned to
a tract acquired by them near their former reservation in the vicinity of
Miles, Michigan. (Ex. I-66). By its action, as disclosed by the plain
terms of the supplement to the September 27, 1833 treaty, the Pokagon
severed its connection with the United Nation and voluntarily abandoned
their rights in the Iowa land, retaining, however, their proportionate
share of the annuities in all Potauatomi treaties prior to September 26,
1333. Their share of such annuities was eventually paid them. Findings
h0mh8 and evidence cited.

ln a suit brought in the Court of Claims by the Pokagon band for
their proportion of annuities under the supplement to the September 2?,
27 C. Cls. L03, n12.

l833 treaty, an award was made for this band. In

its opinion said.court said.concerning the effect of the supplement to

the treaty of September 2?, 1833:

% % % Under the terms of this supplement a portion severed
its connection with the united nation, and thereby lost its
identity with the Pottaratomies as a tribe, in order that it
might avail itself of the privilege of remaining in the Term
ritory of Michigan. In ceasing to be a.part of the united

h 52?

nation, it did not retain any part of the political or
corporate power of the tribe, that was undivided and still
inherent in the body which emigrated beyond the Mississippi
pursuant to the terms and requirements of the treaty. The
portion.remaining may have acquired a right to share in the
annuities, but the corporate power of the tribe remained
intact and incident to the larger body which emigrated.

It follows from the above, that the Pokagon band never acquired any
interest in the lands ceded.by the Potawatomi Nation in 18b6, and the
descendants of the members of that band who may be included as intervenors herein are not entitled to share in any award that may be made

in the above-entitled cause.

‘Wisconsin Indians

 

In considering that part of the intervenors referred to in the
group (1) classification above as Wisconsin lndiansg we do not include
the Pokagon band or the Huron, as those groups are separately considered
above.

The intervcnors subdivide the Wisconsin Indians into two divisions
(proposed findings XVI and.XVII): (a) Those descendants of Potawatomi
who migrated to the Iowa tract and later retnrned.to‘Wisconsin; and
(b) those whose ancestors remained in Wisconsin or Michigan and never
migrated west of the Mississippi.

As to the descendants of those Potanatomi referred to in the inter»
venors' proposed findings I, XVI4XVIII, who, having moved west of the
Mississippi River or to Canada, returned east of that river to live,
we are unable to identiiy them. There is evidence in the record to the

T
1

effect that some Potawaonmitdmnemigrated.to "era or Kansas pursuant

28

te the treaties of 1833 and 1837 returned.to live east of the Mississippi River. This is indicated by some of the exhibits, but there is no
satisfactory evidence showing when or from where they came or that they
are included as part of the intervening petitioners. If there exists
such an identifiable group the burden would be upon them to show who
they are and how they are represented in these proceedings. As the
evidence shows, the two organized communities and five of the six

individual intervenors represent non-emigrating Potawatomi. The sixth

individual intervenor did not testify, nor is it shown that he represents
the returning Indians. ‘we do not overlook the testimony of the indie
vidual intervenor, Michael B. Williams, who testified: “I represent the
citizens composing the body of the Pokagon group and other Potanatomi
who are similarly situated to our own selves.” Even if the witness
intended by this statement to include returning Potawatomi from the west,
which we doubt, it is too vague to base a conclusion that he represents
returning Indians. Accordingly, on the evidence, or lack of evidence,

we must hold that the intervenors have not shown.that they or any of them
have identified any group or class of Potawatomi whose ancestors migrated
west and afterward returned east of the Mississippi, or that such a class
is represented in this proceeding. Incidentally, notwithstanding the
reference to Canadian Potawatomi in proposed Finding I, the intervenors
state in their brief (p. 5) that the Canadian Indians are not parties

to this cause.

Coming now to the second division of Wisconsin Indians, we believe

the evidence is plain that the intervenors comprise descendants of nonemigrating Potawatomi, that is, those Potawatomi who remained in Wisconsin
or Michigan and did not move to Iowa, as provided by the 1833 treaty or to

Kansas, as provided by the 1837 treaty.

By the treaty of September 26, 1833, 7 Stat. L31, the United Nation
of Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatomie Indians ceded their remaining lands
in Illinois and Hisconsin.(Royce 187) and were ceded 5,000,000 acres of
land in western Iowa. Article 2 required the Indians to vacate the
Illinois part of the cession immediately upon ratification, which was
February 21, 1835, and the Wisconsin part within three years after ratification of the treaty, or by February 21, 1838. The United Nation moved

to Iowa, except some remnants who refused to move and avoided the Govern:ment‘s efforts to remove them. In the early reports, these Indians were

referred.to as stray bands, some at least had committed depredations
upon the whites in Wisconsin.

In the Act of June 25, l86h, 13 Stat. lél, 172, the Secretary of

the Interior was authorized to take charge of such stray bands and to
withhold the proportion of the annuities the stray bands would be entitled
to if they were settled on.the reservations of their tribe. (Find. 51).

Nothing was accomplished.under this act because, as stated by the Secretary
(IéEx. 85 and Def. Ex. hl), no census of the Wisconsin.band had been taken
annually.

By the Act of June 21, 1906, 35 Stat. 380, the Secretary was directed

to cause an enrollment of the Potawatomi Indians of'Wisconsin (the stray

'bands) to be made. This was done by one W. N.'Hooster who, by his

reports of December 18, 190? and January 18, 1908 (Def. Ex. hl, pp. 12

and 22) enrolled 2007'Wisconsin Potawatomi, of which hS7 were in the
United States and 1550 in Canada.

The importance of this roll lies in the fact that only non-emigrant
Wisconsin Potawatomi were enrolled. He also excluded Pokagon‘s band.
(Find. 56). The evidence is quite convincing that the intervenors must
be considered as the non—emigrant'Wisconsin Potawatomi Indians.

Having decided that there was no over-all Potawatomi Nation but that
there were several autonomous Potawatomi groups, we reach the question
whether the'Wisconsin Potanatomi because of their former relationship
to the United Nation lost their rights as descendants of members thereof
hecause their ancestors failed to remove west of the Mississippi pur»
suant to the l833 and l83? treaties.

It is not questioned but that the alleged rights of the intervenors
in the l8h6 cession by the Potawatemi Nation stem from the l833 or 1837
treaties if their ancestors were members of the groups acquiring the two
western tracts. Since the intervenors assert that they were, we will
proceed on that assumption.

The treaty of September 26, 1833, 7 Stat. h31, granted the land in
western.Iona to the United Eation.of‘Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatomi
Indians “to be held as other Indian lands are held'which have lately been

assigned to emigrating Indians * %." And the Potawatomi of Michigan,

M 531

south of the Grand River, by the supplementary treaty of September 27, 1833,

? Stat. hh2, became a party to the September 26, l833 treaty, and thereby

became interested.with the United Nation in the Iowa grant. The treaty

of February ll, 1837, granted lands to the Potawatomies of Indiana -I the Osage River tract. In all of these treaties the grants were to

political entities. Of course, the members thereof shared a common
benefit but, as has been.repeatedly held by the Court of Claims and the
Supreme Court, they, the members, acquired no vested interest in the
tribal lands and in none of the treaties here involved was there conveyed title to the individual members. Sizemore v. Brady, 235 U. S. hhl,
Eastern Cherokee vu U. S. 117 U. S. 288, Cherokee v. Hitchcock, 187 U. S.
29h, Halbert v. U. 5., 283 U. S. 753. And, as these cases show, voluntary severance of tribal membership terminates the rights of individual
Indians to share in the tribal assets where, as here, no provision is
made for them in a treaty.

The intervenors seek to overcome these plain doctrines by contending that in neither of the treaties of 1833 or 183? were their ancestors
required to move west in.order to share withihose who did have the rights
of tribal membership.

By Article 2 of the 1833 treaty, it is stated that it is the wish
of the United States that the United Nation of Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatomi.Indians move to the Iowa tract as soon as convenient. To expedite
the removal, the Government agreed to pay the expenses of the removal
and provide subsistence during and for a year after the removal.

The last sentence of said Article 2 required the Indians to vacate
the Illinois part of the cession immediately upon ratification of the

treaty (Feb. 21, 1835), but were "permitted to retain possession of

the country north.of the boundary line of said state (Illinois) for a

L: 532

term.of three years" thereafter.

paid as follows:

most of their members with their chiefs and headmen did so.

And by Article h it is provided that

the annuity money payable under former and the 1833 treaties shall be

A just proportion to the portion of the nation moving

‘sest during the ensuing three years and after that period all annuities

‘were to be paid west of the Mississippi, that is, in Iowa. The clear

purpose of these provisions was that the entire nation.move1sest, and

Some re»

mained east in‘Wisconsin or Michigan, while others moved to Canada to

avoid compulsory removal to Iowas It is impossible to read the above

provisions of the l833 treaty and September 27, 1833 supplement thereto
in.connection with the journal of the treaty proceedings of September;
1833 (Pet. Ex. 1t) without reaching the conclusion that it was intended
by those treaties that all members of the United Nation, which included
the Illinois and Wisconsin Potawatomi, Chippewa and Ottawa, and the
Imichigan Potawatomi south of the Grand River, 7 Stat. hh2, were to move
‘Best of the Mississippi. This intent is further borne out by the fact
that only those who were allowed to remain in the east did so by special
permission of the parties to the treaty of September 27, 1833 -— the
Pokagon bands (Supp. to treaty of September 27, 18339 7 Stats hh2)a
The treaty of February 11, 183?, 7 Stat. €32, is more specific as to
group removal, for in Article 1 thereof the chiefs executing the treaty
for themselves and their hands expressly "agree to remove to a country
thatemay be provided for them % % southwest of the Missouri river % %o”

The country referred to was of course the Osage River tract, later

specifically located and occupieds

h 533

In none of these treaties is provision made for non-emigrating
Indians, and the evidence shows that those Indians who did not remove
wiih.their respective groups did so voluntarily, in fact, many, if not

all, resisted compulsory removal from their former habitats. By this

action they effectively severed their connection with the United Nation

and thereby lost their identity as individual members of their respective

'bands. The Potawatomi case, 27 C. Cls. hO3, from which we have previously

quoted, is authority for this statement. ‘While in that case the withdrawal of the Pokagon.band was with permission of the United Nation, the

‘basis for the decision was the effect of its severace. It would seem

‘the decision would.have been the same had the Pokagon band simply renmined in Michigan, as their voluntary severance would have deprived
them of the rights as members of the United Nation in the lands of that

nation. Had they not been given a proportionate part of the annuities

they perhaps would have lost those also. But however that may be, the

case, Eastern Band of Cherokee v. United States, 117 U. S. 309, seems

to apply to the noneemigrating Indians. In that case, concerning

Cherokee who refused to move from North Carolina with the nation.when
it moved.west of the Mississippi, the Supreme Court, at p. 887, said:

If Indians . . . wish to enjoy the benefits of the common
property of the Cherokee Nation, in.whatever form it may
exist, they must, as held by the court of claims, comply
with the constitution and laws of the Cherokee Nation and
be readmitted to citizenship as there provided. They cannot
live out of its Territory, evade the obligations and burdens of citizenship, and at the same time enjoy the benefits of the funds and common.property of the Nation. Those
funds and that property were dedicated by the Constitution
of the Cherokees, and were intended by the Treaties with
the United States for the benefit of the united Nation, and
not in any respect to those who had separated from it and
become aliens to their Nation.

1; 53h

.- - . - v ..
... -_.; .... ,1

The intervenors and the Government contend that the case, McGhee Va

United States, 122 C. Cls. 380, is determinative in the principle
announced of the rights of intervenors here. In that case the Creek
lands involved were lands located in southeastern United States, which
had.been ceded by the Creek Nation in l8lh. Some years after that
treaty the Creek Nation moved west and acquired lands in Oklahoma, but
as a tribe it sued.for the value of the eastern landso In the suit
before us the Nation claimed it was the exclusive owner of the claim
in question and denied the rights of the intervenors therein who had
remained east pursuant to the treaty of March 2h, l832, 7 Stato 366a
The Court of Claims held that those non—emigrating Creeks, being
descendants of members of the nation as it existed in ldlh, had an
interest in the eastern lands along with the Greeks who moved west and
since their rights were denied by the petitioners in that case they
were entitled to assert them as intervenors.

The difference between the McGhee case and this case is obviouso
in this case the claim involves lands acquired by certain groups of
Potawatomi in consideration of their relinquishment of title to certain
lands they held east of the Mississippi Rivera The McGhee case is
unlike this case in.that there the claim.involved the lands the Greeks
in southeastern.United States had relinquished, and not the lands the
Creek Nation subsequently acquired in Oklahomao This difference isl
indicated.by this language taken.from the opinion in the McGhee case;

3.22 Ga Clso 3803 387:

. . . The land which is the subject matter of this suit
was not land in Oklahoma, nor was it land.concerning which
the United States dealt exclusively with the Oklahoma
Creeks. It was land located east of the Mississippi which
was obtained by the United States in l8lh under a treaty
with the Creek Nation, all of whose members then lived

east of the Mississippi, . . .

The Government also contends that by the Acts of June 25, 186b,
13 Stat. 172, June 21, 1906, 3h Stat. 380, and the appropriations
aggregating $hh7,339 made pursuant to the report of the Secretary of
the Interior (Def. Ex. 21; Int. Ex. I-85), the Congress recognised the
rights of the intervenors to share with petitioners in the recovery
herein.

‘We have referred.to the l86h Act (For text see Find. 51) above.
Instead of a recognition of intervenors' (Wisconsin Indians) rights to
share in the award.herein, it would.appear that an attempt was made
‘Hy that act to deprive the Potawatomi Nation of funds vested in that
nation by treaties, -— questionable action to say the least, and
apparently so considered by the Secretary of the Interior in his report

of April 1, 1908 (Def. In any event, as stated above,

bl, p. 7).

Ex.
no Potawatomi funds were withheld under it and it was in effect superseded by the Act of June 21, 1906, 3L Stat. 380.

The Act of June 21, 1906, does not, as we read it, purport to give
the Wisconsin Potanatomi any rights in Potawatomi annuities, trust funds
tor other moneys, as members of the nation, but only required "an investigation to be made of the claims of the Potawatomie Indians of'Wisconsin
He was

* * and to report thereon % s" by the Secretary of the Interior.

not directed to make any determination of rights of Wisconsin Potasatomi

B 536

whose ancestors did not emigrate with the groups to which they had hem

longed, and he did ndt do so. He did, as directed, cause an enrollment
of the nonnemigrant Potawatomi and determined that there were 2007 none
emigrant Potanatomi, of which H57 resided in Wisconsin and Michigan, and
1550 resided in the Dominion of Canada. He also determined that the pro»
portionate share of all nonuemigrant Indians was $l,96h,S6S.87 if they were
entitled to share in the annuities of the Potawatomi Nation as created by
the 18h6 treaty. i

Over five years after the Secretary's report of April 1, 1908 (Def.
Ex. hl), the Congress, on June 30, 1913, 38 Stat. 102, passed an act which
determined that the sum of $hh7,339 was the proportionate share of the
‘Hisconsin.band.residing in Wisconsin and.Michigan, in annuities and moneys
of the Potanatomi Tribe in which they had not shared. In this act and by

the acts of May 28, 1.916, 39 Stat. 156, March 2', 193.7, 38 Stat. 991,

May 25, 1918, ho Stat. 589, June 30,.l9l9, Ll Stat. 29, and May 29, 1928,

1 MS Stat. 901, appropriations aggregating $hh7,339 were made for the pure

chase of 1and,'bnildings, farm.implements, supplies, etc. and to pay for
legal services, for the Wisconsin band. In none of these acts was the
appropriation made a.charge against past, existing, or future Potanatomi funds, and in each, except the last, the appropriation was based
upon the report of the Secretary of the Interior of April 1, 1908

(Def. ER. bl) in which, as we have before stated, the Secretary made no
determination of rights of the'wisconsin Indians as menters of the Potau~

‘Hatomi Nation although the total of the appropriations was based upon

is: 537

the amounts he found would be payable had the‘Wisconsin4Michigan Potawatomi retained their membership in the groups or bands who moved west.
In essence, the Congressional action was a final disposition of the.

troublesome problem resulting from the presence of those non-emigrating
Indians in the east rather than a recognition of their rights as former
members of the migrating bands. That Congress had the power to make

such gratuitous appropriations cannot be disputed, but in doing so, it
acted, we believe, solely in the interests of the United States and to

provide a home for those Potawatomi who voluntarily severed their connctions with the migrative bands.

So now, after the lapse of years, to permit the intervenors to share
in the award in this case would, in our opinion, work:a grave injustice
on the petitioners who have shown themselves to be the sole beneficiaries

of the award.to be made on their claim. Nor do the equities of the case

require the inclusion of the intervenors as beneficiaries of the award
herein. The treaties of l833 and l837 were made with the several Potawatomi goups and in each there was ceded the comm.on property of such
groups and the interest of each member thereof, so the intervenors by
basing their claims upon, or growing out of such treaties, of necessity
admit the effect thereof on their rights as members of the bands making
the cessions but, as was held in the Eastern Cherokee case, supra, and
the Court of Claims in the same case, 20 C. Cls. hh9, when such members
refuse to join their bands and remain.permanently separated from them

they thereby dissolve their connections and their rights to share in

14 S38.

the band property or the proceeds from the sale thereof . It is perhaps
true that ancestors of intervenors were members of the bands making the
cessions in 1833 and 1837, but that fact, if it is a fact, does not help
the intervenors in this case because, as we have stated? such ancestors
acquired no interest in the western land. If the intervenors have claims
they would appear to arise from the cessions of lands by bands in which
their ancestors were members in 1833 or 1837 -- lands east of the 1‘~Iissis-=»
sippi River, and not the western lands ceded by the Potawatomi Nation
in 1.81:6. However, we are not to be understood as deciding here that the
intervenors have any such rights as that question M11 perhaps arise in
othvr cases pending before the Commission, involving some or all  the
eastern lands ceded in 1833 and 1837.

We, accordingly: conclude that the petitioners" motion should be
sustained and the intervenors' petition dismissedo It ‘i~.‘-‘ill be so
crderedo

Associate Co:n.m.issioner

   

We concur in the foregoing:

Edg__a_..:r' E. Witt
Cih:E’.e:€:‘ Comniissiorxer

 

W111» M, 
Associate Commissioner

 

