BEFOE I-E IIQDIAEE CIJJ.I'ES COI¢J'I£'SSIOI~§

CLYDE F. THOMPSON, et al., (Indians

of California) N Docket No. 31

ERNEST RISLING, et el., (Indians

. ‘§.’.-‘$.13-’Z3{}i'3.’E€I2-I BRND C-F SNAKE IIEDI.5'-.NS ,

D Y2‘-EA TRIBE OF I}§DL‘i.NS

Deossve T: c3 OF INDIANS, et al.,

of California) Docket No. 37

no BANDS oF:NIssIoN IKDEANS Docket No. 80

THE NDNNHDNN PAIUTE NATION, et a1.‘ Docket No. 87

THE SC’-..3TI*~LERl~I PAIUTE NATION, et al. , Docket No. 88
KT...»’-.3-§.=\TH §.I’5D Z-ZODCC TRIBES .-‘QED
Docket No. 100

"1'O2‘-I1?-‘=.H  OF 'I.E'DI.-‘U338 , et al. ,

Docket No. 215

'1‘!-‘E ‘.~J.l*.-SEOE TRIBE 0? THE STATES OF

HE?ADA £KD CALIFORNIA Docket No. 288

Docket E0. 295

 ‘.1; 'T'.”"?_'.‘-'.C".‘.'f..;‘-.32’ '.§.";”s.....a'V:'E C‘-F THE FORT YUMA
 ' ".3 ‘ '7""('\‘§.f
_ .

. , Cs‘-.LEF{‘?£~fIA

4- Us I-u.-I.::a'%I‘ ‘Lu J- 7;‘:

Docket No. 319

Z".-'~.’.3'.‘z'.. «.'='.-"‘-.'.-TE, et Dd. , EECEI ON TIEEIR
C.-2'3‘-3 B3-_I“..=‘-.341‘? .i33-«ED 03:5 BFH.5.LF OF THE

.-‘,1 pd-non... ‘‘_.'..-u.

z-.-...‘_ ;'.-;:.=.:~;.-': ?.='-EUTE i=3.-’-.TI-OI‘! CF I1‘3DIA}‘IS, Docket No. 330

3 ":' '''‘''I''''.»',''T‘:’'''’
— 1 '

-. ...'...’...........34..r,  953-C’   

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
3
COLOR$DO RIVER INDIAN TRIBES, et al.. ) Docket No. 283
I
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
FEST ZE¥E? ISDIANS ) Docket Eco Ne?

)
CH3IZ3UE?I TR; 3, et al., )
)

Plaintiffs, )
V.

THE UNITED STATES OF NNENICA,

‘\-.../‘-..I"\u../

Defendant.

Docket No. 176 .

Docket N09 351

Decided: January 20, 1958
  opnnorzs or CO1-II~1ISSIOI~IERS
SEPABj~.TE OPILEIC-1.»: OF CEEIEF CO2-3-EESSIONER '=.~IITT
As to the question of whether or not the Indians of California,
petitioners in Dockets Ros. BI and 37, have the exclusive right to

present claims to the Indian Claims Commission relating to the lands

of California does not present any issue of fact (all facts involved
being undisputed), I decide said question, and that alone, by this

decision.
There is nothing in the language of the Indian Claims Commission

AC1: which Supports the contention that the Indians of California have

the sole and excl naive 1"} cfht. and ‘Mower ‘if:-3 sue and T9001’??? 01'’: C-l?.i'T!.$';’ f-21?."

the lands in California, To the contrary, the expressed provisions of
Section 10 of said act are otherwise, This section reads as follows:

‘5-ny claim within the provisions of this act may be presented
to the Commission by any member of an Indian tribe, band, or
other identifiable group of Indians as the representative of all
its members; but wherever anv tribal organization exists, recognized by the Secretary’ of the Interior as having authority to
represent such tribe, band, or group, such organization shall be
accorded the exclusive nriviles-re of representing such Indians,
unless fraud, collusion, or laches on the part of such organization

be shown to the satisfaction of the Commission. " (Underscoring
supplied)

 

It is plain from this provision that there is only one situation
where the act grants an exclusive right and power to sue, namely,-*, where
a tribe, band, or group has a governing body recognized by the Secretary
of the Interior as having authority to represent such tribe, band, or
group and where such governing body is not guilty of fraud, collusion, or

laches in the bringing of the suit. In other situations, the act applies

the doctrine of representative suits and authorizes any member of any
tribe, and, or identifiable group to sue for the benefit of all its

members. The Indians of California do not have a tribal organization

or governing body, nor is it contended that they have. However, the

respective petitioning tribes in Dockets Nos. 87, 88, 100, 330, 283, 288,

295. 319, 351 and 334-? each alleges it is a tribal organization and is

recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having authority to represent such tribe. It is not contended that such tribal organization or
any of them are guilty of any of the delinquencies that would deny them
exclusive rights to assert their respective claims.

The contention of the Indians of California for the exclusive right
and power to sue and recover on claims for the lands in California is
claimed to be derived from the Act of May l8, I928. If the contention
of the Indians of California for such exclusive right is sustained, this
would nullify the above quoted (and underscored) provision of Section 10

and also would nullify the provision of Section 15 of the Indian Clafuns

Commission .-‘act which authorizes tribes to present their claims through

attorneys of their own selection; and also would nullify the provision of

Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission not which providesthat said

Commission shall hear and determine claims "on behalf of any Indian tribe,

band, or other identifiable group of American Indians, residing 1-zithm the

territorial limits of the United States or 3‘-.las}<a."
There can be no doubt as to the ‘meaning of Sections 2, l0, and 15
as hereinabove referred to. These provisions constitute a positive a.nd,

unambiguous authorization of Indian tribes claiming ownership of lands

688

2 and 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

which were taken by the United States to sue and recover from.the
United States for such taking, if liability is established. The construction which the petitioners in Dockets Ros. 31 and 3? seek would

be a nullification of the rights of tribal claimants as provided in

said Indian Claims Commission.Act and a nullification of the duty of the
Indian.Claims Commission to hear and determine such tribal claims.

In Thompson V. The United States (122 C. Cls._348), the Court of
Claims held that for the purpose of presenting claims to the Commission,
the Indians of California {petitioners in Dockets Nos. 31 and.37) were

an identifiable group of American Indians within the meaning of Sections

I find nothing in said

decision of the Court of Claims, however, holding that said petitioners

in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37 have the exclusive power and.right to present
to the Commission and the exclusive right to recover on claims relating

to the lands of California. Neither of the two said issues were presented

to the Court of Claims in said case. They were not considered by the

Court of Claims, and it is m view they were not decided'by the Court of

Claims.
The Act of l928, relied on by petitioners, defines the Indians of

California as being “all Indians who were residing in the State of
California on June l, 1352, and their descendants," and petitioners allege
they are this group; and this group doubtless includes many, ii not all,
the persons belonging to tribal plaintiffs in the tribal suits, as well as
the Indians whose tribal organizations had ceased to exist. However, said

act_states that such definition was "for the purposesof this Act"; that is

for the purpose of the law suit therein authorized.

Cr)
\;_)

In discussing the history of the l928 fact, the Court of Claims

in the Thompson case, above referred to, states, among other things,

that:

"After the cession ofCalifornia to the United States by the
Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo of July 1+, l8L:»8, thousands of white
people entered the State of California, and as a result of this
great influx of white people the various bands, groups and com.
munities of Indians which had up to that time existed in more

or less distinct Indian fashion, were disrupted; many were killed
and those remaining were driven from their places of abode and

scattered throughout the State. As a result of this treatment
of the Indians in California and the policies of the United States
thereafter pursued with respect to them, the existence and life

of the Indians of California, as bands or groups which had previously existed were disrupted and destroyed and such tribes, bands
or separate groups constituting villages, have not since that time
existed, and for this period of 100 years these Indians have been

known only as the ‘Indians of California.”

Elsewhere the Court said:
The Indians of California who had many years ago lost their
identity as distinct tribes, band or villages, had been pressing their claims before Congress for many years, and we think it
is clear that in enacting the Indian Claims Commission Act, Congress

intended to confer upon the Indian Claims Commission jurisdiction
to hear and determine such claims. It seems evident that it was the view of the Court of Claims that
Congress created the group “the Indians of California" to represent the
Indians whose tribal connections had been lost because of E3I‘.'«’T."’f..‘,_“,'i.Tz'_'3_'-._:-“3_ :1 oi‘
tribal identity or tribal organization by disruption, dest.ruct:?:.on, ciieath
forced abandonment of their homes, etc.

By permitting the prosecution by the tribal organization  a::;;‘; ;j:..;;'ri
to have survived of their claimed losses of land, while at the same 
permitting the petitioners in Dockets 31 and 3'7 to maintain. their actions,

I think we are carrrin out the wishes of Con ress as indicatr: '
J

Act of 1928, as construed by the Court of Claims, and are not doing
violence to the provisions referred to in the act creating the Indian
Claims Commission and providing its jurisdiction.
In passing, I will say that the willingness of said petitioners

in Dockets 31 and 37 to waive all rights as to approximately 1,600,000
acres in the State of California, involved in Docket No. l0O, does not
seem reconcilable with the claim of exclusive right of prosecution for
all lands in California. This waiver would seem to be an admission by
petitioners in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37, that the Act of May 18, l928 does

not constitute an absolute bar to the suit for or recovery by a tribal

claimant on a claim relating to lands in California. If the law as con -6".-.--. ‘RV? 1--u--.4'4 4-4 nvwnwsn -: -on a-o--‘s A r1a-s.r\Tp4-.4- -v-\1«vvu"v\a\-U-no-u 4~I'.\‘VT an  A "l"'\F'\'¥"':l  .--mint-vii:-n
5 '-9-¢\I-III-"#‘-I-‘I -i-\u'- W rlur -Id-p v-ngqg--mpg ‘.3 .J—|.¢ mi \g'.9.,J‘Iv£uh.¢ % &&'|-lui-an-II-u'IIu.r-5 5! ‘Oak V 3 I-J!-I-Z‘!-III» xv I-D «want 6-—\.i'n-at-I-D up

the exclusive right to prosecute claims for lands in California, this
would be a jurisdictional matter and could not be thus waived.

In regard to the contention made by petitioners that to permit the
several tribal claimants to maintain their claims wodd work unfairness
and injustice by reason of the fact that members of such tribes-have paI'ti==cipated in the judgment previously recovered by reason of the 1928 Act, and
offsets by reason of ezcpenditures made in behalf of said respective tribes
have been allowed against other Indians, it is my view that those matters
can be controlled by the distribution of any awards, either by direction
of the Indian Clam Commission or by Congress. Petitioners in %c2~:et Nos.

31 and 37 themselves seem to admit that this can be done (see petitioners‘

2.2 and footnote}.

692.

Therefore, I am of the opinion that the tribal claimants in Docket
NOS. 87, 88, 100, 330, 283, 288, 295, 319, 351 and 31%? are each entitled
to present and have determined their respective claims relating to lands
in California; and that the petitioners in Dockets 31 and 37 can prosecute
claims for all lands in California not recovered in the 'i;1‘:1.‘-02,41 :~su."L‘i'.s .

I am of the opinion that the facts involved are tmdisputed, and the
statements in this decision are sufficient and additional findings of fact

unnecessary, but 1 would consider any contention by any party hereto to

the contrary’, and any findings recuested.

JI-IININ

I see no reason for changing orders in Dockets 80, 176, 2l5, and 3;).
The petitioners in these cases should be permitted, in my judgment, to ’t._I'_x_[

to recover as independent tribes, if they should fail as meznbers of-Indians

of California. Alternative bases of relief are well recognized rights -an

and assertable as desired, and especially applicable to California Indians

because of their confused condition.

Chief Comxissioner

' 37 , anti

7'3‘. t“."\‘,'\

SE?!-hm in.IN

.1--r ',~ 1-: rn-"-.r'_u -:«_*'-'3'-"\_‘1""*‘3-__
C'£’.:.I‘:.I(.?.’.q O1’ \..fKJ1.°...L'¢3::..r's...-'... "~/.:.-J...-:.-'.b

1: ' -— o "H "' * fu-5‘-:-o

:-—..z.-..-E1 CS-:.’Iul:aolc 4..a..~

-\

-I-:--O-r

 7r- _
I".'~...'.'...:.':.. :.‘\J.L1‘...‘3

I have read with much interest the op.«..:::?.on of Chief Com

Witt and concur in his conclusions that the cl:.i.~:;a-.ts in Dockets Nos. 87,

4-. ,-"1

88, 100, 283, 288, 295, 319, 330, 31.17 and ;:::.z.,. may, as they have done,

~vrv\-‘z-3
.58 \-ll’

assert olai:::s for lanr3.s within the State of (312.1 4.0 and may recover for

such as they may prove they had Indian title to when the defendant acéi 

quired then; that as to such lands the In of Californ.ia (petitioner

\r---in DOCn::.' e claim therefor.

ts hos. 31 and 37) have no right to rzaiz As to
the clams set forth in the dockets referred to above, it may be stated

that with the e:«:c tion of the Quechan Tribe Becket No. 319 and the
3 923 5 3

' Pitt River, Docket No. 31:7, all hose claimants assert claiins for lands

which extend into California frczn contiguous areas in the adjoining state

of Nevada or Arizona. The =ZT,=uecha.n and Pitt }‘;.i.ver claims are for lands

within the borders of California and the India.ns of California have
waived all claim to Fiodoc (Docket 3.00} lands in California.

Aside from the claim of the Indians of California in Dockets 31 and

4..
L.‘

he claims in the ten dockets mentioned above, there are four

Q
Xi

Indian gr:-ups we have filed claims for lands located entirely within

.
'-Iv1"V".1 f:
-u-- J-A--ouudbf

Calif.'o They are the Mission Indians, Docket No. 80, Yokiah Tribe,

P‘?

Docket E’.-Co. 1:5, ‘Sana Tribe, Docket I-Io. 23.5, and Shasta Tribe, Docket No.

'3
/0

33 In their petitions, each of these four groups base their claim on
Indian title to specific areas of land in that state.

In his opinion, he Chief Commissioner refers to the four groups
who have made stipulations (hereafter set forth) with the Indians of

California by this language:

\.L)

I see no reason for changing orders made in Dockets 80,

I76, 23.5 and 333. ‘The petitioners in these cases should be
permitted, in my judgment, to try to recover as independent
tribes, if they should fail as members of Indians of California. Alternative bases of relief are well recognized

rights -- and assertable as desired, and especially applicable to California Indians because of their confused condition.

The record in this case shows that in 1955 the Indians of California
and each of said four groups made separate stipulations as to the handling
of their respective claims. The stipulations are substantially the same
and I set forth the following pertinent parts of the stipulation entered
into by the Indians of California and the Yokiah Tribe, Docket No. 3.76,.
as typical of the others:

1. Docket No. 176, with the consent of the Indian Claims
Canmission, may be held in abeyance pending the final determination of consolidated Docket Nos. 31 and 37 insofar as

Docket No. 176 asserts any claim for compensation based on
original Indian 'l'.'_i_+.'W2 to land j_p_ C.91§_forn§_a_

2. If the plaintiffs in consolidated Dockets Nos. 31 and 37,
or either of them, should recover compensation for the lands in
California, formerly owned by original Indian title by the Indians
in California, including the area claimed by petitioners in .
Docket No. 176, as is more particularly set forth in the petitions
in consolidated Dockets Nos. 31 and 37, this case, Docket No. 176,
may be dismissed, insofar as Docket No. 176 seeks compensation
for lands in California formerly owned by original Indian title.

3. If it should be finally adjudicated that the plaintiffs in
consolidated Dockets Nos. 31 and 37 , or either of then, should
not recover compensation for the lands in California, formerly
owned by original Indian title, including the lands claimed by
petitioners in consolidated Dockets Nos. 31 and 3?, this case,
Docket No. 176, shall be brought on for trial without prejudice
to the plaintiffs in Docket No. 176 and with the same rights as
if Dockets Nos. BI and 37 had never been tried.

This stipulation was followed by an order pennitting it to be filed
and directed the handling of such claims in accordance with the terms of

the stipulation.

The orders in Dockets Nos. 215 and 333 varied‘ from those in Dockets
Nos. 80 and 176 only in that they expressly approved the stipulations
while there is no such express provisions in the orders in Dockets Ros.
80 and 176.

A reading of the petitions of the Indians of California (Dockets Nos.
31 and 37) shows that these Indians claim compensation for all lands in
the State of California, except confirmed grants, and by their briefs
maintain that they have the exclusive right to assert a claim for all the
California lands, except Modoc lands. As to the granted lands, however,

we need not, and do not, for the purposes of this discussion, determine

' whether they are or are not included as part of the area claimed in the

petitions. It is in any event obvious that at the time the stipulations

and. the orders 1'-efer-red to above were made the Indians of Calii'o..-.ia were

contending, as they now are, that they have the exclusive right to claim

compensation for all lands in California. The four groups by becoming

parties to the stipulation agreed to this theory of the Indians of Cali’ fornia, for, it would seem, that unless the Indians of California had such

right there would be no basis for the stipulations since the stipulations

do not purport to assign the claims of any of the four claimants or authorize

the Indians of California to assert claims for them or on their behalf.

contrary is apparent, for by express provisions of the stipulations and

The

orders the claims are merely "held in abeyance without prejudice to the plaintiffs [5laimant§7 ti -3% pending the final determination of consolidated Dockets

Nos. 31 and 37."

dismissal of such petitions should the Indians of California recover for

It is true, of course, that the stipulations provide for a

I same be set down for trial in the reasonably near future.

lands, which include the lands of said four groups, but they also provide
for the contingency that should the “Indians of California fail to obtain
such a recovery each stipulator could assert its claim independently of
the Indians of California. Obviously, the stipulations were based upon
the possibility that the Indians of California would be adjudged to have
the exclusive right to recover for all lands in the state, including those
of the stipulators.

Now that all the members of the Commission are agreed that claims
for large segments of California lands may be asserted and maintained by
the ten tribal claimants independently of the Indians of California, I
find -no logical or legal basis for holding that the Indians of California
may include as part of their claim the lands of the Mission Indians, the
Ioki:-ih, ‘fans mid Shasta Tribes, which are claimed in their separate cases.
Certainly, the only possible basis for treating them differently is the
fact that they entered into the stipulations above referred to which, as
I have stated above, do not in my opinion, change their status as litigants
before this Commission, nor that of the Indians of California insofar as
"permitting them to include in their claims lands of these four groups.

For the reasons mentioned above, I believe the claims of the ;i;f‘=ow.;:x*
groups -- Mission Indians, Yokiah, Yana and Shasta -- he proceeded  "-”f=3‘“"-t'
same as was done with the other ten claims, except the Modoc, and that tine
In this connection, it appears that there is already in the record evidence concerning

the areas used and possessed by each of these four groups and since such

696

evidence is made available for use by all parties to the consolidated
hearing there should be no great delay in concluding such cases. It may
"be that the parties desire to rely upon the evidence already in the record,

in which event further hearings on the four cases should not be required.

Louis J . O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. H. Holt
Associate Commissioner

