42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 354

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE POTTAWATOMIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, THE PRAIRIE )
BAND OF THE POTTAWATOMIE TRIBE OF INDIANS, ) Docket No. 15-D
)
Plaintiffs, )
. )
HANNAHVILLE INDIAN COMMUNITY, FOREST COUNTY )
POTAWATOMI COMMUNITY, ) Docket No. 29-B
)
Plaintiffs, )
)
CITIZEN BAND OF POTAWATOMI INDIANS OF )
OKLAHOMA, and POTAWATOMI NATION, ) Docket No. 311
)
Plaintiffs, )
)
THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA, )
on behalf of the KASKASKIA, WEA, and ) Docket Nos. 313
PEORIA NATIONS, ) and 3l4—A
)
Plaintiffs, )
1 )
THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF KANSAS, THE KICKAPOO )
TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA, ) Docket No. 315
)
Plaintiffs, )
)
POTAWATOMI INDIANS OF INDIANA AND MICHIGAN, ) Docket Nos. 15-D
INCORPORATED, ) and 29-3
)
Intervenor, )
)
v. )
)
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )

Decided: August 25, 1978

Appearances:

Robert Stone Johnson, Attorney for
Plaintiffs in Docket No. l5—D.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 355

Robert C. Bell, Jr.,

Attorney for Plaintiffs

in Docket No. 29-3, and for the
Intervenor, in Docket Nos. 15-D and
29—B.

Louis L. Rochmes, Attorney for
Plaintiffs in Docket No. 311.

Jack Joseph, Attorney for Plaintiffs
in Docket Nos. 313 and 314-A.

Alan Hull, Attorney for Plaintiffs
in Docket No. 315.

Richard L. Beal, and Alexander J.
Pires, with whom was Assistant Attorney
General, Wallace H. Johnson, Attorneys
for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

Pierce, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission,

Scope of this Decision

The claims in this proceeding are for monetary damages to remedy

allegedly unconscionable consideration received by the plaintiff tribes
for cessions of land in Illinois and Indiana.

The Commission has before it the tasks of determining; (1) the
acreages and value of lands ceded in the subject dockets; (2) the value
of the consideration paid by the defendant, including the amount and value
Of exchange land granted to the Kickapoo; (3) whether the consideration for

each cession was in fact unconscionable within the meaning of Clause 3,

Section 2, of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. 1049, 1050); and

(4) the amounts, if any, owed by the defendant to the plaintiffs. we have

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 356

also to rule on an offer of proof of value by the Peoria plaintiff in
Docket No. 313, relative to lands (Royce Area 96a) in which we ruled
in our title decision that the Peoria had no compensable interest.

The Comission's title decision in this proceeding was issued on April
4, 1973. 30 Ind. Cl. Comm. 42. It involved a number of overlapping land cessions in fifteen consolidated dockets,only six of which are still directly involved in this proceeding. The nine dockets no longer involved include the
claims of the Peoria on behalf of the Piankeshaw in Docket 99, which were dismissed as having been decided previously; and the Miami claims in Docket l24—H
and Docket 254, which were dismissed since the Miami were found to have no

interest in the subject areas. Also excluded are the Potawatomi claims to

Tracts D,E and F in Dockets 15-P, 29-N and 306 (then on appeal on the Potawa1/
tomi entity issue) , and the Potawatomi claims to Tract H in Dockets 15-Q, 29-0,
2/
and 309 (then on appeal in another proceeding ).

The subject dockets were tried on value and consideration on January
6-10, inclusive, January 14, and March 13, 1974.

A/Appeal No. 6-73, under lead Docket 29-N, aff'd, Potawatomi Nation of Indians
v. United States, 205 Ct. Cl. 765 (1974). These three dockets were tried on
value and consideration on June 24, 1976 and were the subject of a separate
decision entered June 8, 1978, 41 Ind. C1. Comm. 399, determining the amount
due plaintiffs and reserving for further proceedings the amount, if any,

which might be deductible for gratuitous offsets. On July 14, 1978, following
a comunication from defendant that it would reserve its claim for gratuitous
offsets against the award for other docketed cases involving the several
plaintiffs, and the plaintiffs‘ motion for entry of a final award, the Commission entered such final award. 42 Ind. C1. Comm. 205.

   

2/ Appeal No. 8-74, under lead Docket 128, aff'd, Potawatomi Nation of Indians
v. United States, 206 Ct. C1. 867 (1974). These three dockets were tried on

consideration and value on June 21,22, and 23, and on July 20, 1976, and will

be the subject of a separate decision.

   

#2 End. C1. Comm. 354 357

Treaties, Cessions, Valuation Dates, and Acreggeg

Our Finding 38 contains a table which summarizes the Royce Areas, tracts,

owning tribes, total acreage, interest of tribes in tract, and the Va1Ua~

tion dates. Q] The ceded areas to be evaluated at this time are Royce

Area 48 in Illinois, and Royce Areas 98 and 110 both of which are partially
in Illinois, and partially in Indiana. Because of overlaps between these

and other cessions, the areas were subdivided into various tracts as an

aid in determining title interests. Tracts A, A‘, B, C, D, E, G, H, and

I involved in this evaluation are described in our title decision at

30 Ind. Cl. Com., pages 50 through 53. They are mapped in the same

decision as appendices I and II at 30 Ind. Cl. Comm., pages 79, 80; and

as Map Appendix A, herein.

Finding 38 in effect corrects our Finding 21 at 30 Ind. Cl. Comm. 110,

in respect to the effective date of the Kickapoo cession. The Kickapoo
cession was effected by the Treaty of July 30, 1819, 7 Stat. 200 and the Treaty of

August 30, 1819, 7 Star. 202. The latter treaty was ratified on May 10,

1820, which in Finding 21, was given as the effective date of the cession.

However, the Treaty of July 30, l8l9,was amended by the Treaty of July 19,

1820, 7 Stat. 208, which modified the description of the exchange land
ceded to the Kickapoo by the United States. The amended treaty was

ratified on January 13, 1821, which is the correct effective date of the

Kickapoo treaties, and the valuation date of the cession of the Kickapoo

interests herein and of the Kickapoo exchange lands.

 

2/ By Royce Area we refer to cession areas as mapped and numbered by Charles
0- Royce in the 18th Annual Report, Bureau of American Ethnology, Part II,
Indian Land Cessions (1896-97).

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 358

In determining the valuation of the Kickapoo cessions and the
Kickapoo exchange land, we have been particularly alert for any significant
valuation factors during the eight month interval between May 10, 1820 and
the correct valuation date of January 13, 1821.

The acreages were supplied by the United States Bureau of Land
Management and accepted by the plaintiffs. In our title
decision we held that certain plaintiffs had undivided 1/2 or 1/3 interests
in tracts which were separately ceded by two or three tribes. During the
trial on value and in their briefs, parties overlooked the undivided nature of the interests in such tracts and discussed the plaintiffs‘

interests on the basis of 1/2 or 1/3 of the acreage of such tracts. In
fact each cession must be valued as a whole and the plaintiffs’ monetary
interests in each tract must be determined on the basis of their fractional

interests in the value thereof.

Offer of Proof

In our title decision we denied and dismissed the claim of the

Peoria plaintiff in Docket 313, to Royce Area 96a on behalf of the Peoria

and Kaskaskia. 30 Ind. Cl. Comm. 42 at 62 through 64, and 126, paragraph
4/
4.

 

§/ As evidenced by Map Appendix I, at 30 Ind. Cl. Comm. 79, and Map
Appendix A, infra, Royce Area 96a overlaps Tracts B and D of

Royce Area 110 in Illinois. Tract D is also overlapped by Royce Area 177.

 

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 359

On July 11, 1974, the Peoria plaintiff in Docket 313 filed a motion
with respect to the valuation date of the Kaskaskia cession of Royce Area
48 under the Treaty of August 13, 1803 (7 Stat. 78). In the final
paragraph of its motion the plaintiff announced its intention to make
an "offer of proof" with respect to value of the Kaskaskia cession under
the aforesaid treaty, with value being computed not as of the 1803 cession
treaty but as of the date of the confirmation treaty of September 25, 1818
(7 Stat. 184). The Peoria plaintiff apparently has abandoned its intent
to make such an offer of proof.

However, in view of this Commission's determination that the Peoria
had no interest in either Royce Area 48 or 96a, under the 1818 treaty, the
Peoria, in the same document, announced its similar intent to make an
"offer of proof" of value "with respect to the additional lands ceded by

them. . . for the purpose of preserving their' Q0Siti0n for possible appeal."
In denying the motion we interpreted the reference to the "additional lands"
to be to Royce Area 96a, ceded by the Peoria under the 1818 treaty. We
presumed that the offers of proof would be made, if at all, during the
valuation hearing. Peoria Tribe of Indians v. United States, Docket 313,

34 Ind. Cl. Comm. 428 at 429, 430 (1974).

During the ensuing hearing on value, counsel for the Peoria plaintiff

in Docket 313 introduced plaintiff's exhibit B in relation to its offer
of proof. The exhibit, titled "The Market Value of Royce Area 96a in
Illinois in the Year 1819," was admitted for identification only and not

as evidence.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 360

At page 85 of plaintiffs’ proposed findings of fact and brief on value,
the Peoria plaintiff contends that this Commission is required "to make a

finding on the subject" of its offer of proof for purposes of appeal.
In this the plaintiff is mistaken. The purpose of an offer of proof is to
make the substance of the excluded evidence known to the trial court so that
it may rule intelligently, and to preserve the record for appeal. Rule
l03(a)(2) of Federal Rules of Evidence, and Seminole Nation v. United States,
Docket 247, 40 Ind. Cl. Comm. 231 (1977). The cases relied upon by the
plaintiff are inapposite in that they deal with situations where findings
of fact were not based on the whole record. Since plaintiff's
exhibit B has not been admitted as evidence, no substantive findings may
be based upon it.

Section 23 (e)(l) of the Commission's Rules of Procedure provides:

when at any hearing documentary evidence is offered and objection

is made thereto the Commission, Commissioner, or Examiner con—

ducting the hearing shall rule upon same and, if the ruling is

adverse to the party offering said evidence, the document may
be marked for identification and added to the record.

In this instance the defendant implicitly objected to the admission
of plaintiff's Exhibit B and voiced further objection thereto
in its brief. The Commissioner conducting the hearing
ruled adversely to the offering party, to the effect that the exhibit

would not be admitted into evidence, but would be allowed into the record

for identification. Nothing remains to be done at this point

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 361

by the Commission. For the Comission to make findings of value on
Royce Area 96a as of 1818 or 1819 as requested by the Peoria plaintiff
would not be appropriate in the light of the foregoing ruling and

of our title decision denying and dismissing the Peoria claim to the
area.
Historical Background

Our finding 39 sets forth in some detail the historical background of
Illinois and western Indiana from about 1671. Until the close of the
French and Indian War in 1763, all of the tracts involved in this proceeding
were French territory. Explorers such as Joliet, Father Marquette,
LaSalle and Hennepin, traveled extensively through the area and issued
glowing reports on the many advantages which they considered these lands
to possess. French fur trappers,traders, military posts and several
thriving trading centers built by the French and populated by French
nationals dominated the territory. A chain of military and trading
posts were established from the upper Great Lakes region extending southward along the Illinois River and into the Mississippi Valley. Other
posts were established in western Indiana along the Kankakee and Wabash
river valleys. For the most part the presence of the French did not
disrupt the pattern of life of the Indian inhabitants.

When the French and Indian War ended with a British victory in 1763
the British tried to create a strong and friendly alliance with their
late Indian enemies in the old Northwest Territory. Pursuant to the Proclamation of 1763, settlement by members of the colonies in lands west of

the Apppalachain Mountains was forbidden. Despite this prohibition and the

42 Ind. C1. Conn. 354 362

British attempts to enforce it, large numbers of Virginians crossed the
mountains and settled in Kentucky and southwestern Pennsylvania, and a
few reached Illinois. Some of the older French settlements on the
Mississippi River and in the Ohio Valley in southern Illinois survived the
British takeover and retained their French flavor although they lost

some of their importance as trading centers. Reports of the British

who took over the trading and military centers from the French were

as glowing as were those of the French concerning the great potential

of the area for settlement and trade, for hunting the plentiful wild

game, for agriculture and for the construction of mills, one of which
was already operating in the late 1760s. The numerous rivers, most of them
clearly navigable, were also mentioned in the reports.

Following the colonial victory in the Revolutionary War in 1783, the
lands west of the Appalachian Mountains became the property of the new
Federal Government. Although the Indians inhabiting these regions had
enjoyed friendly and prosperous relations with the French and later the
British, this was not the case with the Americans whom the Indians
correctly supposed were eager to obtain possession of the Indians‘ lands
in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois. The British had remained in their former
military posts along the border between the United States and Canada and
from those posts they supplied the Indians in the Northwest Territory with
arms, ammunition and trade goods and made it possible for them to defeat
every military expedition sent into the area until General Anthony Wayne
won a victory at the Battle of Fallen Timbers in 1794. At about the same

time John Jay succeeded in negotiating a treaty with the British in which

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 353

the British agreed to abandon the military posts in question and to

have their soldiers out of such posts by June 1, 1796. News of this
impending event was communicated to the Indians by General Wayne

in the course of his negotiations with them leading up to the Treaty of
Greenville of August 3, 1795. Realizing that without British help they
would no longer be able to control all of the Northwest Territory, the
Indians agreed to cede to the United States approximately two-thirds of

the present state of Ohio, a small part of southeastern Indiana, plus a number
of enclaves located in their retained territory._ The United States
recognized the title of the Indian treaty parties to their lands north and
west of the so-called Greenville Line running from east to west across

Ohio and south west into Indiana, and the Indians agreed that they would

sell their remaining lands to no one but the United States. The small
enclaves acquired by the United States in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois,

were for the purpose of establishing a chain of military posts.

Even before the Treaty of Greenville a large number of American settlers

and traders had moved into Ohio and Indiana and in 1789 Congress provided

for a government for the Northwest Territory. 1 Stat. 50. Prior to

1795 most of the Americans settled in former French towns in Indiana and
Illinois.‘ After 1795 settlers in greater numbers moved into the newly
acquired land in Ohio and Indiana. Callot, publishing in French and English
concerning his travels in Illinois in 1796 described Illinois as perhaps the
only spot respecting which travellers had given no exaggerated accounts.

He wrote of the beauty, fertility and good climate of the area; the majestic

rivers which flowed through and around it and of the many smaller navigable

rivers and creeks. He mentionai that access to Kaskaskia and Cahokia, both

on the Mississippi River in Tract A of Royce Area 48, was not

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 364

only by water but by two roads, one open the year around and the other

usable in summer. He described the luxuriant vegetation and the

rich soils in the area.

With the end of the War of 1812, the British gave up all claims to
trade south of the Canadian border and withdrew whatever support they
had been giving to the Indians. There was then no further impediment to
the westward expansion of the American frontier to the Mississippi
River and beyond,and the Federal Governent continued its policy of
land purchases from the Indians east of the Mississippi River. By 1821
most of Indiana, Illinois, Michigan and Ohio had been acquired from the
Indians by the Federal Government and there was a large movement
of settlers westward into those regions.

Topography, Soils, Vegetation, Climate, Drainage
The topography and soils of Illinois were largely determined by two

glaciers which moved southward during the Pleistocene Age. They left two

different soil areas whichinfluenced the patterns of settlement and
economic development of Illinois. Details may be found in our finding

40. In general, the result was an undulating countryside with extremely

fertile soil in some sections and good soil in most. Minerals abounded in
the state including white pipe clay, potters clay, brick clay, fire clay,
p1asterers' sand, sandstone, limestone, marble, galena, iron, copper, zinc,
coal and natural gas. The clay was very useful to early settlers and
the mineral springs and salines were also of great value.

All tracts in suit contained some prairie land and some timbered land.
The prairie portions were covered with tall grasses which made plowing difficult but which provided good pasturage for cattle. The dense grass con42 Ind. C1. Conn. 354 365

tributed to the richness of the soils. Parts of the subject land were
heavily timbered, often in commercially exploitable quantities and qualities.
Timber was always useful to settlers for building purposes and for fencing.
Most parts of Illinois contained many fine fruit trees and fruit bearing
bushes. Details of the types of trees and the ratio of timber land to
prairie land will be dealt with in parts of this decision dealing with the
value of the separate tracts of land.

The Illinois climate was generally of the humid continental type
with hot summers, cold winters and short transitional seasons. Average
annual precipitation ranged from 32" in the north to 47" in the south.

The average number of frost-free days ranged from 160 in the north to over
200 in the south.

Drainage in the various tracts was generally good and only a
few areas required tile orditch«drainage which settlers in the times
of the cessions in suit were quite familiar with. The many rivers,
streams and creeks provided good drainage except where the land was
very low and in those areas the marshes, swamps and wetlands were
valued because of the wild game and the fur bearing animals and the
wild fowl which thrived in such places. Many of the first non-Indians

in the areas in suit were hunters and trappers to who skins and furs were an

important source of income.

Transportation and Access

In our finding 41 we have described the transportation through and
access to the subject lands which we found to be unusually good

because of the network of waterways to the eastern and western states and

from the Great Lakes to New Orleans. River and stream routes long used by

the Indians and by the French were followed by the Americans. Those

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 366

water routes were an essential element of the fur trade and of colonization

and settlement by the French, Spanish, British and finally by the Americans.
The major streams and rivers were the Illinois River and its

tributaries, the Kankakee and Des Plaines rivers; the Mississippi, the

Ohio and the Wabash rivers. Also important were the Iroquois tributary of
the Kankakee, the Vermillion, Mackinaw, Sangamon, Macoupin, all tributaries
of the Illinois River; the Kaskaskia, Shoal, Big and Little Muddy and Cache,

all tributaries of the Mississippi; the Saline tributary of the Ohio River;

and the Embarrass, Vermillion and Tippecanoe,tributaries of the Wabash River.
An important route to the Illinois portions of the subject lands was
ly way of the Great Lakes to Chicago, up the Chicago River and then by
portage to the Des Plaines River and down the Des Plaines to the Illinois
River at Tract D. Upstream from this point, the Kankakee River and its
tributary, the Iroquois River, gave access to Tracts D and E. Access from
Lake Michigan was possible by ascending the St. Joseph River and by portage
to the Kankakee River. The Illinois River formed the northern border of
Tract D and the northern and western borders of Tract B. Tracts A, A‘ and B
all met at the confluence of the Illinois with the Mississippi. The Mississippi constituted the western border of,and gave access to the rich Amrican

Bottom Lands of Tract A.

The most important water route to the subject lands until the opening
of the Erie Canal in 1825, was down the Ohio River from Pittsburgh, along the
borders of West Virginia, Ohio, Indiana and Kentucky. By ascending the
Wabash tributary of the Ohio, direct access was gained to the entire

southern part of Tracts G and I. The Vermillion tributary of the Wabash

42 Ind. C1. Conn. 354 357

River formed the border between and gave access to Tracts C and G. The
Tippecanoe tributary of the Wabash formed the eastern boundary of and gave
access to Tract I. The eastern border of Tract C paralleled the course of
the Wabash River and was relatively close by. The lower reaches of the Ohio
River formed the entire southeastern boundary of Tract A. To the south, the
Mississippi River provided the area with access to New Orleans
where ocean transport was available to the east coast and abroad.
The descent down the Ohio, past Royce Area 48 to New Orleans was first
made by a non-Indian in 1742. Fort Pitt was already in existence as the
nucleus of the future traffic west and south from Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The entire length of the Mississippi below the subject lands was
navigable by large shallow draft vessels at all times. The other rivers
were navigable by canoe and by flatboat. The bark canoe in use in
the subject areas ranged in size from a one-man vessel to vessels 30 feet in
length and capable of carrying 3,000 pounds of cargo and a 12-man crew. The

canoe was light in weight, easily repaired and portaged. The raft, pirogue,

barge, bateau and keelboat followed the canoe. Propulsion was

by current, oars, sweeps, poles, sail and tow ropes. The keelboat was in

use on the Mississippi by 1751 when a fleet ascended from the mouth of

the Ohio River about 75 miles to Fort Chartres in Tract A. The journey from

Pittsburgh to New Orleans took about three weeks. The return trip took

from three to four months by keelboats and barges. Immigrants to the subject

tracts from points upstream could sell their vessels to persons going

further downstream or the vessels could be dismantled to supply the need

for sawed timber.

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 353

The first steamboat on any western river left Pittsburgh in November,
1811, on a voyage down the Ohio past Tract A and thence down the

Mississippi to New Orleans. In 1812 the first steamboat went up the

Mississippi from New Orleans. More and better steamboats followed.
In 1820 steamboats were on the Wabash and traversed the entire length of
Royce Area 98, Tracts G and I and beyond to Delphi, Indiana.

Overland travel was necessary to reach some parts of the interior of
the subject tracts. Shortly after 1700 the French had made a trail
from Kaskaskia in Tract A through Danville in Tract G to Detroit.
when George Rogers Clark passed through Tract A in 1778,

a French trail existed from Kaskaskia to Prairie du Rocher.

Two trails led from Kaskaskia to Cahokia and a well defined trail

from Kaskaskia to Vincennes in Royce Area 63. As early as 1792,the

Territorial legislature enacted authority to lay out roads. The first road in St.
Clair County, Tract A, was recorded in 1806. By 1811 there were 17 road
districts in that county.

In addition to the above mentioned roads, there were Indian trails,
game trails and a few blazed trails referred to as "traces" in the subject
tracts. Annual migrations of vast herds of buffalo fro the western
plains to the salt licks of Kentucky and the Allegheny feeding grounds left
well defined trails that were used by Indians and non-Indians. The old St.
Louis Trace, believed tobe the first overland route used by Americans on their
way to Illinois, was such a buffalo trail. Known also as the Vincennes
Trail, it extended from the falls of the Ohio to the Wabash River near

Vincennes and westward across Tract A to St. Louis, Missouri. To the east

42 Ind. c1. Com. 354 359

it extended from the present site of Louisville, Kentucky to the Wilderness

Road and the Great Valley Road to Richmond, Virginia.
Indian trails radiated in various directions from several focal

points in all of the tracts and provided usable "roads" for travel

and transportation. Early settlers also made their own trails, removing
trees and stumps, fording or bridging small streams and constructing

log roads across swamp lands. Compared with much other land being opened

for settlement in the years covered by this suit, the subject lands in Illinois and

Indiana were not raw and rough or inaccessible.
Settlement and Population
Population of the United States in general and of the areas in suit
is dealt with in our finding 49 and also in specific findings relative
to the several tracts to be valued. The population of the United
States increased 34.8% between 1790 and 1800, and
36.4% between 1800 and 1810. Throughout the period of 1790
to 1820 the total population of the country was in a period of rapid expansion
and the population of the immediate region of the subject tracts
was rising more rapidly than in the country as a whole. Between 1800 and
1810, Indiana had gained population at ten times the national rate and the gain

was even faster between 1810 and 1820. Between 1810 and 1820 Illinois gained

in population at a rate of more than 10 times the United States as a whole.

Farmigg

In finding 50 we have discussed farming in the area in suit.
Prior to American settlement, Indians were farming along stretches of the
Illinois River in Tract B and the Wea Indians had extensive cultivated

fields in the bottom lands of the Wabash and Tippecanoe Rivers along the

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 37°

borders of Tract I in Indiana. By 1700 the Illinois Indians were farming
in the American Bottom portions of Tract A. The Piankeshaw farmed in the

vicinity of Danville in Tract G. The French had farmed a great deal of

land in the American Bottom.

Most of the American settlers who came into the subject tracts
arrived with a team of horses or oxen and a wagon, some household goods,
tools, and a little money. Those who arrived on foot with few possessions
managed to gain a foothold by working for other settlers.

At first the settlers lived in lean-tos which they replaced with
log cabins. They acquired as much land as they could afford and
commenced with subsistence farming. Later they produced excess crops
which they sold at a profit.

The early settlers preferred to locate their farms in or along the
edges of the forested lands .preferab1y along the wooded banks of the
many streams that criss-crossed the Illinois lands. Timber furnished

materials for buildings, containers, furniture, tools, boats, fencing and

fuel. It also provided shelter from the heat, wind and cold of the prairies.

While the early settlers recognized the value of the prairies as pasturage

for their cattle, the density and toughness of the sod was a deterrent to

settlement and farming such land because those settlers came with primitive

wooden plows and harrows which could not make much headway on tough prairie

soil. Even those settlers who appreciated the richness of the prairie

soil for the raising of grain crops,the difficulties they faced in

bringing such land under cultivation discouraged them.until better tools were

acquired.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 371

A great variety of crops could be and were grown in the subject
areas, including corn, wheat, barley, oats, rye, buckwheat, grasses, clover,
Irish and sweet potatoes, tobacco, castor beans, flax, cotton, apples,
peaches, plwms, grapes, a variety of berries, melons and garden vegetables.
Farm production in the earliest days of settlement was mostly for home

C0n5umPti0n 33d labor barter. ‘Where river transportation was available

to market centers as it was on the borders of the subject lands, excess

farm produce was sold at a profit and shipped to established settlements.

Banking and Finance

In our finding 51 we have dealt with banking and finance in the
United States from 1791 through 1821, the last valuation date in suit.
The First Bank of the United States was chartered by Congress in
1791 and lasted until 1811. Thereafter, until the Second Bank of the
United States was established in 1816, citizens and the government had to
rely on state chartered or unchartered banking institutions for their
banking needs and, largely, for currency. The earliest bank in Illinois,
the Bank of Illinois at Shawneetown just outside the southeastern edge of
Tract A, grew from a mercantile business commenced in 1804. By 1813
its owner began to accept deposits, to lend money and to issue bills of
credit. A charter was applied for in 1816 and the bank was highly regarded.
Other banks followed and survived the financial panic of 1819. In 1821

the Bank of Illinois at Vandalia was chartered.

Public Land Laws of the United States

 

The details of the public land laws applicable to Indiana and Illinois

at valuation dates are in our finding 52. The Harrison Act of 1800

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 372

applicable to public lands in Ohio and Indiana, provided for public sale at
auction of surveyed public lands in 320 acre half sections for not less than

$2.00 an acre. Lands remaining unsold might then be sold at private sale
for $2.00 per acre. Installment payments with certain limitations and
penalties for non-payment are detailed in our finding. The discount
allowed for advance payment could reduce the purchase price from $2.00
to $1.84 per acre. After the admission of Ohio in March of 1803, the Act
of March 26, l804,extended the public land laws to the rest of the Old
Northwest Territory including the lands in suit. The $2.00 minimum price
per acre was retained but the land could be offered at both public and private sales in 160 acre quarter sections. Land offices were established at
Detroit, Vincennes and Kaskaskia. Other land offices were opened in 1807
at Jeffersonville, Indiana, and Shawneetown, Illinois, the latter in
1812. In 1816 a land office with jurisdiction over Illinois lands was
opened at Edwardsville and in 1820 land offices were opened at Vandalia and
Palestine, Illinois. Legislation in 1817 permitted the sale of 80 acre
tracts in six out of every 36 sections and in 1820 further legislation
required that all public lands be offered in 80 acre tracts with the minimum
price reduced to $1.25 per acre. Credit sales were abolished and full
payment on the date of purchase was required.
Because public land could not be sold prior to survex.and substantial
periods of time were required to make surveys of the Indian land cessions,
the Government's total inventory of public lands tended to exceed the supply

actually available for purchase by the public.

Details concerning the rights of squatters, speculators and

42 Ind. c1. Conn. 354 I 373

the effect of the preemption laws are given in our finding 53.
Prior to 1830 the law did not accord rights to squatters on public lands to
purchase the tracts on which they had made improvements. Rather, remaining

on public lands without permission of the register and receiver of

the local land office was a misdemeanor. The law was not often enforced.
There were, moreover, a number of statutes applicable to special areas

or to special classes of persons which granted preferential rights

to purchase, called preemption rights. For example, an 1813 statute
granted a preemption right to Illinois residents to purchase at private

sale for the minimum per acre price ($2.00) not more than one quarter section of

unreserved public land in a tract which they had actually inhabited and
improved prior to the enactment of the law.

Despite the laws, settlers swarmed over public lands, and also on
unceded Indian lands in Indiana, Illinois and elsewhere. Sometimes they
moved west when their tracts were put up for public auction. At other

times they attempted, and sumetimes succeeded, to bid in the land. Success
in buying land at auction often resulted from arrangements among the
various settlers in an area and this could and did result in very valuable
land being purchased at bargain prices. Competitive bidding at Federal

land sales in the area north of the Ohio River became rare after 1816.

Despite the vigorous opposition of settlers, speculators in land

managed to stay in business and buy up considerable quantities of land.

They also had their associations which indulged in a variety of schemes to

Procure public land at bargain prices.

In pre-industrial America, land speculation was big business. Great

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 374

landowners moved west with,and sometimes ahead of the frontiersmen, following closely the surveyors. Speculators who bought large tracts of
choice land and held them for resale at prices the settlers could not
afford were a serious deterrent to the settlement of public lands.

In Finding 54 we have summarized the public land sales at land
offices northwest of the Ohio River from 1800 through the first half of
1820. Also in that finding we have shown sales under the cash
system from 1820 to 1825 when the minimum price for public lands was

reduced to $1.25 per acre cash .

We shall now describe the physical characteristics of each of the
tracts in suit on the basis of evidence in the record. Next we will
report the expert witnesses‘ opinions on the value of each tract, and
finally the Commission's findings of value and its reasons for accepting
or rejecting value theories advanced by the parties.

Tract A of Royce Area 48. Tract A was ceded by the Kaskaskia Nation
under the Treaty of December 12, 1803, and will be valued as of that date.
It consists of 6,279,118 acres of land in southwestern Illinois bounded
on the west by the Mississippi River and on the south by the Ohio River.
The tract encompasses all or parts of the following present day counties
ranging from the southern part northward: Alexander, Pulaski, Union, Massac,
Johnson, Pope, Hardin, Jackson, Williamson, Saline, Gallatin, Randolph,
Perry, Franklin, Hamilton, White, Monroe, St. Clair, Washington, Jefferson,
Madison, Clinton, Marion, Bond, Fayette and Effingham. Of the total

acreage in the tract 352,000 acres were the famous American Bottom lands

42 Ind. c1. Conn. 354 375

described in some detail in our finding 42. The balance of Tract A was

3/4 timbered lands and 1/4 prairie lands.

The American Bottom is a strip of rich alluvial soil along the
eastern bank of the Mississippi River, 100 miles long and from 3 to 15 miles
wide with an average width of from 5 to 6 miles. It streches from the
mouth of the Illinois River on the north to the mouth of the Kaskaskia
River on the south through present day counties of
Madison, St. Clair, Monroe and Randolph. The soil reaches some 25 feet
in depth and was described by 19th century writers as of unsurpassed
fertility, the finest body of land in what was then called the "west"
and by far the most beautiful tract of land in the "western" country.

It was believed to be capable of supporting more people than any other
tract of equal size in America.

The area was heavily used from time immemorial by American
Indians. It supplied them with game, fish, wild fowl, fruit, nuts, corn,
berries, timber, water and excellent grass for their stock. The opulence
of the area attracted white settlers from the time it was first discovered

by them. It was the original seat of the French settlement of
Kaskaskia in 1700, Prairie du Rocher in 1722, Fort Charles, Cahokia in 1699,

and Prairie du Pont in 1760. Apparently the French used the area without

disturbing the Indian inhabitants. American settlement of the area

began in 1779. In 1783 Piggot's Fort was established. In 1786 New Design
was founded, and in 1800 Bellefontain, Whiteside's Station and Goshen

“Ere founded. For a number of years more than three-fourths of the population

°f Illinois lived in the Amrican Bottom area.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 375

While the portions of Tract A which contained American Bottom lands

were the finest in the tract and were settled in some areas long before

the 1803 valuation date, the remainder of Tract A contained much

excellent land. The lands bordering the Mississippi River

contained fine arable lands, rich bottom lands, large stands of timber and
few of the prairie-type areas which early settlers found difficult to
cultivate. There were many streams, lakes and marshes where fish and wild
fowl were plentiful. The lands bordering the Ohio River on the south

were of the same type. The interior portions of Tract A contained some
broken and hilly areas but drainage was good because of the many small
streams traversing the land and emptying into the large rivers. Heavy stands
of timber covered much of this interior land and there were no large

areas of prairie without timber. All of the area was well watered

and in some portions there were mineral springs and salines. Transportation
to and from the interior areas was not as easy as in the case of the lands
bordering on the navigable waters of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers, but
access was by no means difficult and settlement of the interior areas, although
slower than the river areas, was steady.

Tract A‘ of Royce Area 48. Tract A’ is located in central Illinois

and is overlapped by Royce areas 48 and 110. It contains 3,824,842 acres

of land ceded by the Kaskaskia in 1803 and in which we have found they have
an undivided one-half interest, the other one-half interest having been ceded
by the Kickapoo in 1821. A detailed description of this area is in our
finding 43.

One-fourth of the land in Tract A’ was well timbered and the balance

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 377

was prairie land and was located in the so—called Grand Prairie of central
Illinois. The soil was rich black loam well suited to the growing of a large
variety of crops. The topography was not as hilly as that of Tract A and
the area was not as accessible by means of large rivers as the Tract A lands.
The timbered areas were primarily in the vicinity of smaller rivers
and streams which criss-crossed the tract and it was to these sections
that the settlers first came. The northwestern pprtion of the tract
was close to the towns of Peoria and Pekin from which supplies could be brought
into the tract without much difficulty. The climate in the northern part of
the tract was excellent with short winters and long pleasant summers.

Settlement in Tract A‘ commenced later than in Tract A and population
growth was slower. The Goshen settlement was established in 1800.
Settlement of Bond County which was inland and east of the Mississippi
River began in 1811. At the conclusion of the War of 1812 settlers began
arriving in greater numbers.

Wild game was plentiful in the tract. Drainage was no problem and
the tract contained all sorts of clay useful to settlers in building.

Tract B in Royce areas 96a and 110. Tract B is in north-central
Illinois and is overlapped by Royce areas 96a and ll0. The counties
later formed are listed in our finding 44. The tract contains 5,117,115
acres, approximately 60% of which were prairie and the balance timbered lands.
The valuation date of this tract is January 13, 1821, and all of it was

Owned by the Kickapoo.

The southwestern and western portions of Tract B are bordered by the

Illinois River which flows into the Mississippi River in Jersey County which

is in Tract B. The lands drained by the Illinois were exceptionally fertile.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 373

The bottom lands, particularly those above high water mark, were considered
by Indians and non-Indians as superb lands for crop raising. The

bluffs along the river were covered with fruit trees and grapevines and

also contained quantities of clay used by the settlers in building. These
areas were predominantly timbered which made them attractive to settlers who
commenced coming into the area prior to the extinguishment of

Indian title, i.e., as early as 1815. There was little flooding and the climate was temperate and pleasant. Mineral springs were present and were
valued for their medicinal properties. The occasional barrens or

hickory flats were used for growing wheat and the rich grasses were useful

for cattle grazing.
Those portions of Tract B not on the Illinois,were well drained by

smaller rivers such as the Sangamon, Vermillion and the Mazon and also by
Salt Creek. There were fine stands of timber along all of the many

watercourses in the tract and the prairie lands in this tract were either

rolling or level and were exceedingly fertile.

Settlement commenced in Jersey County in 1815 prior to the 1821 valuation date. The first grist mill was built in the county in 1821 and the
first blacksmith shop in 1824. The first settlement in Green County was in
1815 and immigrants began to pour into the county immediately after the
Kickapoo cession treaty was signed in 1819 and before its 1821 effective
date. Settlement commenced in Sangamon in 1816, the great fertility of
the area having been well advertised. Morgan County settlement commenced
in 1816 and there were a few non-Indian settlements in Cass, Mbrgan, Scott,

and Woodford counties prior to 1821. After 1821 settlement was rapid.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 379

Tract C of Royce Area 110. Tract C containing 2,193,176 acres

in central Illinois near the eastern border of the state was ceded

by the Kickapoo on January 13, 1821. Two thirds of the tract is prairie

land and one third is timbered. The present day counties in this tract

are listed in our finding 45.

Most of Tract C was well drained by numerous creeks and by the

Embarrass River which flowed through much of the tract and was navigable

by flatboat. The river contained an abundance of fish, and timber grew

along its banks which were not subject to flooding. Most of the swamps in the
tract dried out sufficiently in summer to permit cultivation. The prairie
areas were very fertile with thick black soil excellent for growing corn,
wheat and grasses. Most of the timber was hardwood and the timbered areas
were settled first. The Wabash River was not far to the east of Tract C

and provided drainage and transportation to and from the tract. The Kaskaskia
River which was near the tract on the west was navigable and provided drainage.
Other rivers which benefited the tract were the Vermillion,

the Kickapoo, the Sangamon and the Little Wabash.

The earliest non-Indian settlers in Tract C were the French. American

settlement commenced in 1816 and increased slowly after the Kickapoo cession

‘in 1821. Because the Kickapoos did not leave the area immediately

following the cession, settlement did not pick up until 1828. Settlers

found portions of the land in this tract so productive that they did not

need to practice rotation of crops.

Tracts D and E of Royce Area 110. Tracts D and E formed the northeastern portion of the 1821 Kickapoo cession and the Kickapoos had an

42 Ind. ‘c1. Comm. 354 380

undivided one-half interest in each tract. Finding 46 lists the present

day counties which are partially or wholly within the tracts.

Tract D is bordered by the Illinois River on the north and by the Kankakma
River, a tributary of the Illinois, on the northeast. The tract
benefited by drainage from those rivers and also by the Mazon River, the
Vermillion and by numerous streams. Although the bulk of the tract
consisted of prairie lands, there was good timber along the many streams
and rivers which bordered and criss-crossed the tract and the bottom
lands along those river and stream courses were exceedingly fertile.
Coal outcroppings were visible and were used by blacksmiths once
the Indians left the area in 1828 and settlers commenced arriving in
numbers. Well defined Indian trails which paralleled the
Illinois River and led to Chicago some 40 miles away, plus the rivers themselves provided access and easy transportation. Since 1812 there had
been talk of building a canal to link Lake Michigan with the Illinois
River and the canal was actually completed in 1848.

Tract D had 890,014 acres of which 98% were classified as prairie
lands and 2% timber.

Tract E contained 844,794 acres which included several present
day counties listed in our finding 46. Eighty percent of the tract was
prairie land and 20 percent was timbered. The tract was drained by the
Iroquois, the Vermillion and Kankakee rivers and by numerous creeks.
Most of the tract is located in Iroquois County which also extends into

tracts D and C, and was the former bed of Lake Kankakee. Most of the land

in the tract was exceedingly fertile. Transportation and access were good

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 381

by water and by Hubbard's Pack trail from Danville, Illinois, to Chicago
and the Butterfield Trail.

The Kickapoos remained in both tracts after the 1821 cession and
non-Indian settlement did not commence to any marked degree until 1828.

Tracts G and I of Royce areas 110 and 98. Tract G, containing
402,870 acres in the western part of Royce Area 98, is overlapped by
part of the Kickapoo cession of Royce Area 110. The tract is partly
in Illinois and partly in Indiana and the Kickapoo, Potawatomi and Wes
tribes each have an undividedcne—third interest. The Potawatomi and Wes
interests are valued as of October 2, l8l8,and the Kickapoo interest
as of January 13, 1821. Tract I contains 351,756 acres wholly in western
Indiana. The Wea and Potawatomi each have an undivided one-half interest
to be valued as of October 2, 1818. The counties which are wholly or
partly included in these tracts are listed in our finding 47.

The Illinois portion of Tract G is drained by three forks of the
Vermillion River and its tributaries and also by the Little Vermillion River.
Timber in belts of from one to three miles in width grow along these
watercourses . The prairie lands in the tract were of black, dense,

muck—1ike soil of variable depth. Good supplies of well water were obtainable at from 15 to 50 feet, including artesian flows in the northwest portion
of Vermillion County. The tract had an important Indian saline which was

in great demand by the settlers. The tract contained a part of the Grand
Prairie which, in the early days of settlement, was not favored by the nonIndian pioneers. The climate was hot and dry in the summers and very cold

in the winters.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 332

The Indiana part of Tract G contained about 220 square miles and
was bordered on the west by the Illinois-Indiana line and on the east by
the Wabash River. This area contained rich bottom lands and some fine
terraces in the river valleys. The terrace, or "second bottomV rose some
40 feet above the first bottom and was from one to four miles wide. It
furnished a broad stretch of rich, well drained farming country. The soil
of the second bottom was black, sandy loam.which produced abundant crops.
Rising from.the second bottom were abrupt bluffs reaching heights of from
120 to 130 feet above the river and forming the border of the Grand Prairie
in the central part of Tract G. The bluffs and bottoms were timbered with
oak, hickory, maple and walnut. Although the first non-Indian settlers came
to Tract G as early as 1816, the Kickapoos and the Potawatomies remained in
the area for several years thereafter. The settlers preferred the timbered
portions and considered the Grand Prairie area poor for settlement.
Tract I is in the vicinity of the Wabash and Tippecanoe rivers. It

is well drainedtnrthose rivers and also by Pine, Indian and Burnett creeks.
The Wabash at this point contains salmon, bass, red horse and pike.

Buffalo fish were found in the Tippecanoe River. Geese, duck and other wild
game birds were in good supply in this area. The Wabash River was navigable

by light draft boats.

The prairie portions of Tract I were very fertile and either level or
gently undulating. There was good timber land and many fruit-bearing trees
and bushes. Except for some inferior land in the oak barrens, the soil
of the timbered lands was of excellent quality. Settlement in Tract I

commenced in 1820 and increased after the Indians had left.

42 Ind. Cl. Conn. 354 383

Tract H - Royce Area 110. Tract H lies in western Indiana in Benton
County and constitutes the overlapping portion of Royce areas 110 and 180.
The Kickapoo and Wea tribes each have an undivided one-third interest in this
51,384 acre tract. The Wea interest has a valuation date of October 2, 1818,

and the Kickapoo interest, January 13, 1821. 393 °“T Finding 43Most of the tract consists of gently rolling prairie land dotted
by groves of oak, hickory and maple. Much of the surface soil is of various
silt loams ranging from clay to rich black loam. The country is drained by
five major creeks and the headwaters of the North Fork of the Vermillion
River. Certain parts of the county have small lakes and wet ground which
require ditch and tile drainage. Early settlers arrived in the 1820s and
kept to the timbered portions or near to them. This area was particularly well

adapted to the growing of corn and other grains. Despite the presence of

the Indians in this tract, settlers continued to take up land therein.

Parties’ Appraisals and Valuations
The plaintiffs in Dockets 15-D, 311, 313, 314-A and 315 jointly

employed as their valuation expert, Dr. Roger K. Chisholm, Associate Professor
of Economics at Memphis State University. Plaintiffs counsel rely on Dr.
Chisho1m's detailed report and on the sales data gathered by Dr. Chisholm

and have also introduced in evidence and analyzed certain evidence of

early sales in Indiana which defendant's expert collected but which

defendant did not introduce in evidence. In addition, plaintiffs rely on
Certain findings of fact made by this Commission in Miami Tribe v. United

§£§§g§, Docket 67, 4 Ind. Cl. Comm. 346 (1956), aff'd in '

and remanded for further proceedings on the matter of value, 146 Ct. Cl.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 384

429 (1959). The land being valued was in Royce Area 99 in Indiana
immediately south of Royce Area 98 involved in this proceeding.

In appraising all of the subject lands, Dr. Chisholm prepared a
comprehensive background report covering a broad spectrum of historic
events influencing the settlement of the Northwest, and a number of
economic variables which operated on the land market generally, and on the
land market in the northwest part of the United States in particular.
Much of the material which we have included in our findings on the
several tracts involved in this proceeding was contained in exhibits
which were the basis for Dr. Chisholm's report.

In our finding 57-A we have described the sales data used by Dr.
Chisholm in his report. Basically, he selected 508 recorded land sales
in six Illinois counties in Tract A, Royce 48, and wrote a report on
the land prices reflected by those sales and their significance in
arriving at values for the various tracts in 1803, 1818 and 1821.

The sales occurred over a 31 year period from 1789 through 1821 plus

a sale in 1822 and one in 1848. The largest number of sales took place

in 1818 when 56 of the tracts were sold. The per acre consideration

ranged from 2 cents per acre to $5,400 per acre. The highest prices

in the sales considered by Dr. Chisholm, were for townlots. Dr. Chishoh
obtained a weighted average price per acre of $2.38 by dividing the mean
total consideration of $575,872 by the mean acres sold(242,885). The median
value for the 508 transactions selected is $2.13 per acre.

A tabulation of the six 1803 sales used by Dr. Chisholm shows that

they had a weighted average price of $1.15 per acre. A recapitulation of

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 385

29 sales from 1798 through 1807 produces a weighted average price per
acre of $1.17. Similar treatment of 80 sales selected in 1818 results in
a weighted average price per acre of $4.05. A like computation involving
25 sales in 1820 and a single sale each in 1821 and 1822, produces a
weighted average price per acre of $3.66. The evidence used by Dr.

Chisholm does not indicate whether or not any of the land involved in the

sales included improvements. Much of the rich American Bottom lands

in Tract A.was settled prior to the extinguishment of Indian title

in 1803. In view of the fact that the Kaskaskia's recognized title to

Royce Area 48 was not extinguished until December 12, 1803, any settlers
who made their homes on that land were trespassers vi§_a_3i§_the Kaskaskia
and the value of any improvements on such land would not be deductible from
the value of plaintiff's land on valuation date. Tlingit and Haida Indians
v. United States, 182 Ct. Cl. 130, 146, 147; 389 F. 2d, 778, 789 (1968);
United States v. Northern Paiute Nation, 183 Ct. Cl. 321 (1969) gjjig

Dkt. 87, 7 Ind. c1. Comm. 322, 615 (1959), 16 Ind. c1. Comm. 215 (1965).

The holding in Fort Sill Apache Tribe v. United States, Docket 182-A, 40 Ind.

C1. Comm. l43(l977), on reversal and remand by the Court of Claims, 209

Ct. Cl. 433 (l976),that improvements made by trespassers on plaintiff's
lands must be deducted from an award for the miners’ trespass damages
imputed to the United States, is distinguishable from the facts in the

instant case on several grounds. In the Apache case the land was held by

Indian title rather than recognized title as in the Kaskaskia situation.

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 335

The United States was at war with the Apache and had no duty to protect
them. To the extent that defendant was held liable to the

Apache for imputed trespass damage to their lands by the miners, the
court held that equity required that any enhancement to the land by
virtue.of improvements made by the trespassers, should be deducted from
the final award. None of these circumstances are in the Kaskaskia case
which is not based on a taking of land nor on imputed trespass, but
rather involves a cession of land improved prior to cession by third
parties whom defendant had failed to eject.

In selecting his sales data for use in his valuation, Dr. Chisholm
eliminated transactions involving governmental bodies, sheriff's
and estate sales, sales between parties having the same names, and
sales with no,or only nominal consideration.

Plaintiffs analyzed data on sales in Indiana prior to 1833 compiled
forgbut not used by defendant,and described in our finding of fact 57-B.
Data were gathered in counties bordering Royce Area 98 on the south
and in present day Warren and Tippecanoe counties north of the Wabash
River extending into Royce Area 98. Data concerning sales prior to 1818
were in the Clark's Grant area on the southern border of Indiana and
consisted of a number of sales between 1790 and 1802. With the consent of
defendant's counsel, plaintiff's counsel introduced in evidence data on
47 such pre-1803 sales in the Clark's Grant area. In selecting the 47
sales, Mr. Keller who had done the research for defendant, eliminated town

lot sales, sales with small acreage, sales with long boundary descriptions

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 337

which he found difficult to read or from which it was difficult to

compute a per acre price, and most sales at $4 or more per acre, on the
assumption that such sales must have included improvements. Mr. Keller
testified that he had selected sales which were easy to work with and which
fell in the price range of from $1 to $3 per acre because he judged

such price range at that time and place to be "normal". Plaintiff's
counsel eliminated seven sales from Keller's compilation because they
involved parties having the same names, and then recapped the balance.

In spite of the obvious bias of Keller's selection procedure which was
guaranteed to result in the lowest possible price per acre, the weighted
average per acre price thus obtained for the Clark's Grant sales in

1800, 1801 and 1802 were $1.88, $1.91 and $1.76 respectively and the overall
weighted average price per acre for all forty sales used by plaintiff's

c:ounse1 was $1.68.

Plaintiff's counsel also relied on our decision in Miami Tribe v. United

States, Docket 67, 4 Ind. C1. Comm. 346 (1956) aff'd in part and remanded for

further proceedings on the matter of value, 146 Ct. Cl. 429 (1959), and

on the findings and opinion following the remand, 9 Ind. C1. Comm. l(l960),
in which the Commission found that the 7,036,000 acres in Royce Area 99
in central Indiana imediately south and east of Royce Area 98,

had an 1818 value of $1.15 per acre. (Our finding of fact herein, 57-C.)

Based on the physical characteristics of Royce Area 48, access to

the area, population data, export sales, banking, natural resources,
soils, settlement, economic development and sales of comparable lands,

the Kaskaskia plaintiff and its expert witness, Dr. Chisholm concluded

4-2 Ind. C1. Comm.  388

on December 23, 1803, Royce Area 48 land had an average per acre value
of $1.90. Plaintiff computed the Kaskaskia interest in the area on the
basis of 1001 ownership of Tract A which contains 6,279,118 acres, and on
an undivided one—ha1f interest in Tract A‘ which contains 3,824,842

acres, making a total Kaskaskia interest in 1803 of 8,191,539 acres.
Applying the $1.90 per acre to the total Kaskaskia acreage, plaintiff
reaches a December 23, l803,va1uation of $15,563,924.l0. See Finding 62.

Defendant made an extensive analysis of Dr. Chisholm's valuation

methods in general and his sales data in particular. In an effort to

show what defendant felt the sales data indicated as the proper value

of the American Bottom portion of Tract A.in Royce Area 48 in 1803,
defendant selected 68 of Dr. Chisholm's 508 sales. The selection covered
the period from 1790 to 1809. Three of the sales selected were not

in the American Bottom but were of land located some 150 miles north thereof
at Peoria, Illinois, in Royce Area 110. A fourth sale was located west

of the Illinois River at Peoria and was outside any of the lands in suit,
Included in defendant's selection were sales as far back as 1790

at Prices Of $.02 per acre with few post-1803 sales at higher per acre
prices. Defendant considered the land had value only for subsistence
farming and eliminated all sales of less than 40 acres . Defendant also
ignored all other uses to which this land was actually put, including
business and residence sites in towns, townsites and millsites. Defendant
also failed to take into consideration that settlers often purchased less
than 40 acres to add to their existing holdings originally purchased for

Subsistence f3rmin8- Defendant's analysis of the Chisholm data is expressmi

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 389

in "average" prices per acre without indicating which type of average
was used, i.e., mean, median, mode, weighted average, etc. Defendant
justified the elimination of many sales carrying high prices per acre

on the grounds that the lands in question were located in or near the numerous
pre-cession towns in the area; that they reflected purchases of townsites
for subdivision and resale; that they were for lands located on the
Mississippi or Kaskaskia Rivers; that they included a ferry landing, rich
timber lands, "perhaps a coal mine", and rich Mississippi River bottomlands; that they reflected French or military donation lands, and that
some sales were at prices which must have included improvements prior to
valuation date. Defendant makes a blanket assertion that most of

Dr. Chisholm‘s sales data was not comparable in time, access to
comparably navigable streams, to soil and climate, population, and state
of improvements to the land being valued. In view of the fact that

most of Dr. Chisholm's sales data used for valuing Royce Area 48 in 1803
Wereland sales of land in Royce Area 48, it seems that it wguld have been
difficult to have used sales data that was more closely comparable.

In reaching its valuation of Royce Area 48, defendant did not adopt

the valuation of its appraisal expert witness, Mr. Harry R. Fenton.

(See our finding of fact 59 for a description of Mr. Fenton's testimony.)
Mr. Fenton assumed that a hypothetical buyer of Royce Area 48 in 1803
would have been a land speculator paying cash in U.S. gold dollars or the
equivalent in specie, and would be buying to resell in smaller tracts. He
assumed that it would take such a buyer from 10 to 30 years to resell

the land and make his profit and that he would therefore take a substantial

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 390

discount for delay and would also deduct from his purchase price the costs
of surveying, recording, quieting title, policing and defending the property.
He concluded that the buyer would pay only a fraction of the small tract per
acre price and would resell at from 3 to 5 times his cost. Mr. Fenton

did not use the sales data gathered by Mr. Thomas L. Keller, a real

estate appraiser retained by Mr. Fenton to gather sales data for use in

‘the case, which data was, with defendant's permission,introduced in

evidence and used by plaintiffsscounsel. Instead Mr. Fenton relied on

sales in the Illinois Military Tract and sales in Missouri and in Ohio.

Mr. Fenton was of the opinion that land sales on the American

frontier, regardless of where that frontier might be, at what particular
time the sales took place, the quality of land involved

or other conditions usually deemed significant in connection with

comparability, were all "comparable" for the purposes of his valuation

since he believed the "frontier" to be a moving phenomenon which kept many

of its characteristics intact. Accordingly, Mr. Fenton relied on sales of
very large tracts of land in western New York State in the late 1700's

by the State of Massachusetts to land speculators, individuals and

companies. Indian title had not yet been extinguished to much of this

land and the title acquired by the purchasers was,therefore, somewhat
clouded. Other sales relied on were large purchases of Indian lands,

in New York State and in Pennsylvania made by New York State in the late 170W5
and by Connecticut in 1795. In addition Mr. Fenton and defendant relied on
purchases of large tracts of land in western Pennsylvania by the Holland

Land Company (1792-1793) from an undisclosed seller, and resales of lands

included in the large early purchases of New York State Indian lands.

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 391

Using the average per acre price of the large land sales by

states and land speculators described above and in our findings of fact
59-A and 63, Mr. Fenton concluded that the land in the

Gorhan-Phelps tract, the Robert Morris purchase, the Macomb purchase

and the Boston 10 Towns tract, all in New York in the 1700's, was

worth on the average 9 cents per acre. He then computed the average per
acre price of the Ohio Land Company lands, the Western Reserve tract and the
Symmes tract, all in Ohio, at 18 cents per acre. He considered Tract A

in Royce Area 48 to be similar to the Ohio lands but not quite as good

and on that basis he valued Tract A at 15 cents per acre. He considered
the lands in Tract A‘ to be worth about two-thirds of the price of the land
of Tract A , or 10 cents per acre.

Defendant followed a different approach in its valuation of Royce Area

48 to arrive at a slightly higher valuation. Defendant started with

the proposition that Royce Area 48 was 2/3 timbered and 1/3 prairie with

the less favored prairie land concentrated in the northern portion of the
area. Defendant assumed that a hypothetical purchaser in 1803 would

buy the land for resale and that it would take 30 years to sell the southern
68% of the area in small tracts with an average holding period of 20 years.
Defendant assumed that it would take 35 years to sell the northern portion
with an average holding period of 25 years. From this defendant concluded
that an overall average holding period would be 22 years. Defendant assumed
that its purchaser would have realized 10% per annum on his money by

means of some unspecified investment and thus justified discounting comparable
small tract sales figures to determine the then present worth of such lands

on a per acre price basis if payment were deferred for 22 years at 10%

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 392

interest annually. Present worth tables show that each dollar so deferred
has a present worth of only $.l22,845,9736.
Defendant next took into account three sets of sales figures. Of the
508 Illinois sales introduced in evidence by plaintiff from the
data compiled by Dr. Chisholm, defendant selected 68 sales of 40 acres or mom
during the period 1790-1809. Of these defendant selected 16 sales
for the years 1801-1803 showing an arithmetic average price of $.83 which
the defendant reduced to $.102 by application of the above mentioned
present worth factor.
Defendant separately considered 31 sales of 400 acres each included in
Dr. Chisholm's sales data for the years 1793 through 1809. Defendant
appears to assume that these sales were of military donation lands
although it seems more likely that they were improvement grants
under the Act of 1791. In either case, it is well known that grants of
either type generally sold well below the actual market value of
the land especially in the initial sales. Defendant's weighted average per
acre price of those 31 sales was $.88 which defendant discounted to $.ll8

by applying the present worth factor.

Next, defendant considered 39 of the 47 sales of small tracts in the

Clark's Grant area of Indiana, data gathered for;but not introduced in

evidence by,defendant and finally introduced in evidence by plaintiff.
Defendant found a weighted average per acre price for the 39 sales
of $1.68 which defendant discounted to $.20 by application of the present

worth factor.

42 Ind. C1. com. 354 393

Defendant considered the early sales of large tracts of frontier land
by the State of Massachusetts in what is now New York State, by
the State of Connecticut and by the United States of lands in Ohio,
and other large private sales.Defendant calculated average prices per acre
of $.09 for the New York lands, $.18 for the Ohio lands, as did
Mr. Fenton, defendant's expert witness.

Defendant concluded that the fair market value of the 10,103,960 acres
in Royce Area 48 was 14 cents per acre in 1803 which, when applied to
the Kaskaskia's 100 percent interest in Tract A and undivided onehalf interest in Tract A‘, would amount to approximately $1,150,000.

For the reasons discussed hereinafter and on the basis of our
findings of fact we cannot concur with defendant's or Mr. Fenton's
valuation of the Kaskaskia interest in Royce Area 48, tracts A and A‘.
We particularly reject Mr. Fenton's conclusion that sales in the Military
Tract in Illinois represented a good example of a free, normal and active
market for lands in the West and that sales prices for land in that
tract are comparable for the purpose of valuing Area 48. As we 3314 in

our recent decision in Potawatomie Nation of Indians, the Prairie Band, et al.

V. United States, Dockets 15-P, 29-N, 306, 41 Ind. Cl. Comm. 399 (1978),
we consider the Military Tract a mere paper market operated for the sole

benefit and enrichment of eastern land speculators. Being bought and sold

were soldier's warrants to lands that neither the speculator nor the

soldier knew anything about or ever intended to develop for settlement

Purposes. While the market in such lands was an active one, the prices

42 Ind. Cl. Conn. 354 394

were unrealistically low for land of generally good quality.

If it had not been for the confusion over the location of several types of land
the tax status of the land, speculation at tax sales, the validity of
titles, and innumerable other problems inherent in the military tract
market, sales of this land might well have been comparable since the

land was near to Royce Area 48, the climate and physical features of the
tract were similar to the land being valued and much of the land was

very desirable. See our finding of fact 56.

Defendant's reliance on the early sales of large tracts of frontier

land in New York State and in Ohio, is, we think, entirely misplaced.

The results obtained from an analysis of that sales data are as unreliable
as those obtained from analyzing the Military Tract sales evidence, and
for generally the same reasons. In most instances Indian title had

not been extinguished to the lands being sold, the purpose of the sales
was not settlement but pure speculation and the lands were far

removed from the Illinois lands being valued in this proceeding and

many of the transactions relied on took place in the 1700's.

On the whole the Commission is of the opinion that the private sales

submitted by Dr. Chisholm are the best evidence in the record of the

probable fair market value of the subject lands.

Before explafning our valuation of each of the several tracts in suit,
particularly from the standpoint of the sales evidence of lands consisting of
40 acres or more, we wish to point out that the record contains evidence of
a special value attributable to much of the land in suit by reason of townsites, town lots and comercial sites which were present and for which there

. - i ble
is sales data. Land in or near towns and adjacent to roads, “RV 33

rivers and other primary transportation means, were greatly enhanced in value

42 Ind. C1. Count. 354 395

in comparison to unimproved rural areas. Speculation was frequently involved
in the sale of townsites, town lots and sites for mills, ferries and other
commercial enterprises and such speculation inflated the prices of these sites
and of adjacent lands. Between 1810 and 1812 townlots in Harrisonville,
Illinois, sold at prices ranging from $1,428.57 to $5,400 per acre. In
Tuscarora County, Ohio, town lots were selling at from $30 to $1,000

for lots measuring 60 by 90 feet, and an unimproved millsite near Zanesville,
Ohio sold for $50 an acre. There was active speculation in town lots in
Indiana just after the end of the War of 1812, particularly along the Wabash
River a few miles downstream from Royce Area 98; at Bloomington, Indiana; at
places on the road from Vincennes to Louisville, on the Ohio River

and elsewhere in the state. In 1818 a townsite in St. Clair County (Tract A
of Royce Area 48) sold for $13.03 per acre, or $1,700 for the 130.42 acres

in the site. The buyer laid out the land as the town of Illinois

and began selling town lots that same year. Three lots were sold in

1818 for $289.47, $578.95 and $1,153.85. At Palestine, the first capital

of Lawrence County in southern Indiana east of Vincennes, 157 town lots
averaging 1/3 acre in size, sold in 1818 for over $14,000, averaging $90

per lot. Banks at Edwardsville in Madison County (Royce Area 48) and
Shawneetown (Royce Area 48) participated actively in the speculative boom

in town lots which swept Illinois in 1819. In the summer of 1821, town lots
at Greenville, Illinois (Bond County, Tract A),so1d for $44.60 a lot.

In 1821 copetition was keen for land at the site of Indianapolis

which had been selected as the new capital of Indiana. Four sections of land

Consisting of 2,560 acres, were laid out in the wilderness some 40 to 60 miles

from th
e nearest settlement. Three hundred lots were sold at the first sale

in 0°t°bera 1821 for a t
2 t 1 f
o a 0 $35,596.25, or $118.65 per lot. Many

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 396

lots sold for $500 each.

The agricultural settlement of New Harmony, Indiana, 100 miles south
of Royce Area 98, was established in 1813 on 24,734 acres purchased from the
Government for $2.50 per acre. This land was resold in 1824 for $182,000
or approximately $7.50 per acre.

One William Digby, the first proprietor of Lafayette, Indiana
at the south central edge of Tract I, purchased 80 acres in 1825 at the
Government price of $1.25 per acre, divided 50 acres into 148 lots and sold
them three days later for $4.80 per acre. He retained ferry privilege, and
sold the remaining 20 lots for $3 per acre. Digby's purchaser resold fiveeights of the odd numbered lots consisting of about 15 acres for an average
of $8.66 per acre.

The town of Danville in Tract G was laid out in 1827. In April of that
year 42 town lots sold for $22 each. At Warrenton, Indiana, in Tract 1, seven
miles up the Wabash River from Williamsport in Tract G, town lots sold for from
$10 to $20 in 1828. In 1829 combinations of bidders for the townsite
of Pekin, Illinois, in Tract B just south of Peoria, managed to reduce
the initial bid of $100 per acre to $1.25 per acre.

Often speculation in townsites prevented the orderly settlement of land
in Indiana and in Illinois. Speculators would buy land from the Government
at the minimum price and then keep the land off the market, particularly when
the land was two or three miles from a good transportation site, holding it
until it could be sold for high prices. As a result of this practice, the land
around Joliet, Illinois, just north of Tract D, brought from $40 to $50 per

acre sometime prior to 1838 and the townlots sold for from $500 to $600 each.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 397

The prevalence of speculative buying of town lots, mill sites and
other commercially exploitable land in Illinois is evidence of the optimism
felt about the future of these lands during the periods in suit.

Some portions of the area we are to value contained cultivated precession Indian corn fields and well established Indian villages. There were also
a number of non»Indian villages, many established in the 1800's by the French
and some by Americans. There were a number of thriving businesses such as mills,
breweries, trading posts for trade with the Indians, established farms and
plantations. The well established ncn-Indian settlaents and businesses were
chiefly in the American Bottom portion of Tract A. A number of pre-cession
non-Indian farms and businesses were also in Tract A‘ and Tract C of Royce
Area 110, but they were fewer in number than in Tract A and Tract B. A valuable
Indian saline was in Tract C and was developed by whites prior to the
cession date of this tract. Such properties had immediate resale, lease or
rental value for the indicated uses.

Timber lands had a highest and best use generally for farms and
were highly prized for that use because they furnished materials for building,
fencing, tools, fuel and containers of all sorts. They also provided shelter,
fruits, nuts, honey, game and furbearing animals, forage and water. In Tract
D and in some parts of the other tracts, the timber had an immediate commerCial value. In Tract C timber was used to build flatboats for the river
traffic.

The prairies which were in the immediate vicinity of timbered lands had a

Iighest and best use at valuation dates for subsistence farming and as

Pasturage for farm animals. Later they would become valuable for raising

Brain crops. Prairies which were not near timbered lands, were most

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 393

valuable for hunting and for their potential use for farms, grazing, and
in some places for the development of the coal and other minerals which
were present in those areas.

All of the areas in suit had an obvious potential at valuation dates
for speculation in the sale of townsites, town lots and commercial sites
for mills, ferries, etc.

Many of the early settlers saw the areas in suit as ideal for subsistence farming in parcels of 40 acres or more. Subsistence farming
included the use of part of the land for the grazing of cattle and other
livestock and for the growing of crops to supply the settler's immediate
needs. Eventually the owner would raise a surplus crop to be sold at a
profit to neighbors or for export down the Mississippi or other rivers.

The highest and best uses for all of the subject lands varied from
tract to tract but included subsistence farming, farming to raise cash
crops for profit, townsite and town lot speculation, business enterprises
based on mill and ferry sites, comercially exploitable timber to a small
degree, and hunting and trapping for home use and for profit.

Turning first to Tract A in Royce Area 48, we believe that a

purchaser in 1803 would have been aware of the rich agricultural lands
comprising the American Bottom which, for many years prior to 1803, had
been considered the richest agricultural land in the nation and was in

great demand by settlers. It contained approximately 352,000 acres and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 399

was almost totally in Tract A. Although less than five percent of the
total area of Royce Area 48, and less than six percent of Tract A
consisted of American Bottom, the extinguishent of Indian title to that
valuable land had a significant and substantial effect on the value of
the entire cession area in 1803. The value of lands adjacent to the
American Bottom was enhanced by such a location.

Excluding the American Bottom, the remainder of Tract A consisted of
approximately three-fourths timbered lands and one—fourth prairie land.
Portions of each type would have presented some difficulties
in cultivation at the time of valuation but most of the tract was
very desirable agricultural land. In 1803 the most sought after
lands for settlement were the timbered lands and this tract was
predominantly of that type. Settlers reluctance to settle on the
prairies was soon to change.

Access to Tract A was excellent. It was bordered by the Mississippi and
the Ohio rivers and was traversed by the Kaskaskia, the Cache and the
Big Muddy rivers as well as by several other smaller water courses.
Portions of Tract A along the Mississippi and Ohio rivers had been
settled for many years prior to 1803, predominantly by the French.

The area contained established towns, good potential townsites, an
operating mill and other fine millsites.

Due to the early valuation date, the parties were able to find few
comparable sales involving lands in the immediate vicinity of or within

Royce Area 48. This is understandable since on the valuation date

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 400

nearly the entire state of Illinois was encumbered by Indian title and
only three areas had been ceded to the United States: Royce Area 26,
consisting of the post of Vincennes on the Wabash River, and adjacent lands in
southeastern Illinois and southwestern Indiana, to which Indian title

had been extinguished prior to 1795 and which was ceded to the United
States under the provisions of the Treaty of Greenville, August 3, 1795,

7 Stat. 49; Royce Area 27, a tiny area of land near the mouth of the

Ohio River known as Fort Massac, similarly ceded to the United States

in the Greenville Treaty; a four square mile tract, Area 47, ceded by the
Treaty of June 7, 1803, 7 Stat. 14, consisting of the Great Salt Spring on
Saline Creek near the Ohio and Wabash rivers. Likewise, the entire state
of Indiana immediately east of Illinois and the subject tract, was still
Indian country in 1803 except for the above mentioned Royce Area 26

and four areas ceded to the United States in the Treaty of Greenville,
i.e., Royce areas 11, 16, 17 which were very small, and 25, the latter

in southeastern Indiana on the Ohio River and known as Clark's Grant.

Until Indian title is extinguished and the land is surveyed and officially
opened to settlement, there could be few if any valid sales.

However, the record does contain evidence of 29 sales between

1800 and 1805 of land which was either within or in the immediate vicinity
of Tract A. These sales are in the data compiled by Dr. Chisholm, plaintiff's
expert valuation witness. In selecting his sales data, he eliminated sales
where the grantor and grantee had the same surname or the transactions
involved governmental bodies, sheriff's Sales or estate Sales, Or Where the
consideration was abnormally low. If we eliminate three sales which

involved tracts containing less than the 40 acres we believe would have

42 Ind. C1. Conn. 354 401

been required for subsistence farming, the remaining 16,205 acres in the

26 Illinois sales sold for $12,005, or an average per acre price of $0.74.

Also of significance in determining the 1803 market value of Tract A
were the sales of land in Indiana, Royce Area 25, known as Clark's Grant.
Indian title to this tract was extinguished in 1795 and like Tract A it lies
along the Ohio River. The 1800 to 1803 sales prices of land in Clark's
Grant (above $1.60 per acre) are some evidence of the probable market value
of the lands in Tract A. Although Clark's Grant was closer to the migrating
settlers, the rich agricultural lands in Clark's Grant and the tract as a
whole was equal to if not more desirable than the land in Clark's Grant. Both
tracts were accessible by navigable rivers and good trails, but the large
interior portions of Tract A were somewhat less accessible and the whole
tract was much larger than Clark's Grant.

From our analysis of the factors at work in these two land markets, it
is our View that a reasonable per acre base figure lies somewhere in between.
The very superior lands of the American Bottom.were not commanding premium
prices near the valuation date. By far the greater part of Tract A was not
so accessible as equal lands elsewhere. Comparing all the qualities of
Tract A with the market data we find to be comparable, we think the Tract A
lands had a market value of $1.15 per acre. However, due to the large size
of the tract, we feel that a significant size discount is in order (but not the
size discount recommended by defendant) since the tract's many desirable
features tended to offset the disadvantage of its size. Under the circumstances, we feel that a discount of 20% is appropriate.

On the basis of the record and the above considerations, we conclude

that the value of Tract A in 1803 was $5,776,800 or approximately $.92

Per acre on the average. The Kaskaskia’s interest in the tract is 100 percent.

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 402

Tract A’ contains 3,824,842 acres. It constitutes the overlapping
areas of the northern half of Royce Area 48 and the central and southcentral portion of Royce Area 110. The Kaskaskia and Kickapoo tribes

each have an undivided one-half interest in A‘. The valuation date of the

Kaskaskia interest is December 12, 1803. The Kickapoo interest

is valued as of January 13, 1821.

In valuing the 1803 Kaskaskia interest in Tract A‘ we relied on the
same data used in our valuation of Tract A lying directly to the south.
However, several factors made Tract A more valuable in 1803 than
Tract A‘.

The American Bottom, that rich agricultural section along the
Mississippi which so enhanced the value of Tract A was almost exclusively

outside of Tract A‘. However the close proximity of portions of Tract

A‘ to the American Bottom did have some positive effect on the value
of the tract.

whereas Tract A was predominantly timbered lands, Tract A‘ proportionaunf
had far more prairie lands. As noted earlier, the migrating settlers in
1803 preferred timbered lands over prairie lands and would have believed

that Tract A‘ was, for that reason, less valuable than Tract A.

Tract A had excellent access since it was bordered on two sides by
the Ohio and Mississippi rivers and was traversed by many interior
streams, most of which were for 1803 purposes, navigable. Only the

southwestern portion of Tract A‘ was near a major waterway, i.e., the

Mississippi. Overland travel was generally required to reach the Mississim$

since the waterways traversing Tract A‘ were fewer in number than those

in Tract A.

42 Ind. c1. Conn. 354 403

Settlement in Tract A’ began later than in Tract A. While settlement
in Tract A had begun by the early 1700's, settlement in Tract A’ did not
begin until the early 1800's. The extreme fertility, attractiveness
and nearness to the Mississippi and Ohio rivers accounted for this difference,
since both tracts were technically closed to settlement prior to the
extinguishment of Indian title in 1803. Even after both tracts were officially
opened for legal settlement, Tract A‘ experienced a much slower influx of

settlers due partly to the remoteness of large portions of Tract A‘ from the

Ohio River which was a favorite path followed by many early settlers.
In 1803 we have found that Tract A had an average per acre value of

$1.15 before any discounts. Based on the record, our findings of fact and

the factors discussed above, it is our belief that in l803,Tract A’ had an
average per acre value of about $.90 before the application of discounts.
Although Tract A‘ is about half the size of Tract A, we believe the same 20%
discount for size is applicable since Tract A’ did not enjoy the many offsetting enhancements in value which favored Tract A. Accordingly, we conclude
that in 1803 Tract A‘ had a value of $2,753,900,or an average per acre value of

about $.72. The Kaskaskias' one-half interest would amount to $1,376,950.
Royce Area 110. The valuation date of the Kickapoo interest in Royce Area

110 is January 13, 1821. Because this area partially overlaps Royce areas

48, 96a, 98,177 and 180, the portions of Area 110 involved in this

proceeding have been designated as tracts A‘, B, C, D, E, G and H. We

have already discussed the parties‘ valuations of the Kaskaskia interest

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 404

in Tract A’ as of 1803.

Plaintiffs rely on the $2.13 median price per acre of the sales
gathered by Dr. Chisholm from six Illinois Counties (see our Finding 57—A
and also Finding 65) in Tract A of Royce Area 48 , as the basis of their valuation. Plaintiffs point to the generally easy access of Royce Area
110, its fertile prairie soil, its known natural resources and all of the
other factors discussed in_Dr. Chisho1m's report, and conclude that the

land was worth on the average $2.00 per acre in 1821. We have discussed

the evidence of those other factors in findings, 43, 44, 45, 46, 47,48 and
earlier in this opinion.

The Kickapoo had an undivided l/2 interest in the 3,824,842 acres in
Tract A‘; a 100% interest in the 5,117,115 acres in Tract B and in the
2,193,176 acres in Tract C; an undivided 1/2 interest in the 890,014 acres in
Tract D and in the 844,794 acres in Tract E; and an undivided l/3 interest
in the 402,870 acres in Tract G and in the 51,384 acres in Tract H.
Plaintiffs applied the $2.00 per acre value to these interests and obtained
a total value of $20,483,068 for the Kickapoo interest in Royce Area 110.

In our finding 66 we discussed defendant's valuation of the Kickapoo
interest in Royce Area 110. Defendant's valuation approach was similar to
the one used in valuing Royce Area 48 in 1803, i.e., a single hypothetical
purchaser who could pay cash for land he expected to develop and resell.
Defendant's expert witness, Mr. Fenton, reasoned that the hypothetical
purchaser would estimate the diminished present worth of the money he

would receive on resale in from 10 to 30 years of purchase, would deduct

therefrom the costs of surveying, recording, quieting title, policing the pro42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 405

perty plus resale expenses and would conclude that he could pay only 1/3
to 1/5 of the Small tract price per acre if he were to make a profit.
The small tract price per acre used by Mr. Fenton was derived from data
he collected on sales in the Illinois Military Tract for the years 1817-1820
showing that in Fulton County there were no sales in 1817; that in 1818-1820
the average prices per acre were $0.68,$0.74 and $0.92, respectively; that
in Henry County the average prices per acre in 1817-1820 were $0.47, $0.58,
$0.39 and $0.79, respectively. In Henry County, the average
prices per acre in 1817-1820 were $0.47, $0.58, $0.39 and $0.79, respectively.
In Knox County the average prices in 1817-1820 were $0.70, $0.76, $0.40,
and $0.74, respectively. From these sales in the Military Tract which
we have found to be not comparable with any of the land in suit, Mr.
Fenton concluded that the value of a small farm-sized tract located in the
area of Royce Area 110 in 1821 was $.70 per acre. Mr. Fenton then concluded
that the purchaser would discount this price by 80% to cover anticipated
expenses, risks and the need for a profit on resale and would therefore offer
1/5 of that price or $0.14 per acre .

We have not valued Royce Area 110 as a whole as did the parties but
have considered each tract separately.

Tract A‘ We described the physical characteristics of Tract A‘ in
our finding of fact 43, earlier in this opinion,and in connection with
our valuation of the Kaskaskia's 1803 interest in the tract. We noted
that it was outside the American Bottom region but that it was sufficiently

close to it to enjoy some enhancement in value; that access to the tract was

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 405

not as good as that of Tract A but that the southwestern portion of the tract
was close to the Mississippi River and that there were a number of good
watercourses traversing the tract which was made up of more prairie lands than
the better liked timbered lands.

We examined the sales obtained by Dr. Chisholm and relied on by him
in reaching his value of Tract A‘ on 1821. We excluded all sales where
the transactions involved fewer than 40 acres and also all sales prior to
1818 and after 1821. We selected as comparable, 164 sales in Illinois
involving 37,993 acres which were sold for $149,449, or a per acre average
price of $3.93. Because we considered these sales to be sufficient in
number and quality for valuation purposes, we did not consider any of the
sales from Indiana which plaintiffs introduced in evidence from data
collected but not used by defendant's expert witnesses.

In addition to the differences noted above between Tract A and Tract
A‘ in 1803, we found further differences between the two tracts
due to the later valuation date of the Kickapoo interest. By 1821 the sales
data counties of St. Clair, Randolph, Monroe and Madison in Tract A were heavily
populated compared to the Tract A'lands. Since by 1821 many of the sales in
Tract A may have been of improved lands, that factor probably was reflected
in the prices. Tract A‘ was almost totally unimproved in 1821. After the
conclusion of the War of 1812, migration into the Northwest areas increased
as did the demand for its land.

Based upon the record in this case and upon the above factors, we are

of the opinion that the lands in Tract A‘ had an 1821 average per acre value

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 407

of $1.40 before any discounts. Due to the size of Tract A (approximately
3,800,000 acres) and the other factors previously discussed in connection
with our valuation of this same land as of 1803, we believe a 20%
discount is appropriate resulting in an average per acre value of $1.12, or
a total tract value of $4,282,823.00.
The Kickapools undivided one-half interest in Tract A‘ as of
1821 was worth $2,141,912. Finding 67
Tract B. Tract B consisting of 5,117,115 acres occupies the western
portion of Royce Area 110 (see our finding 44). The valuation date of
this tract is January 13, 1821.
We used the sales data compiled by Dr. Chisholm in arriving at our
valuation and selected 160 sales occurring between 1818 and 1821.
The 37,993 acres involved in those sales brought an overall price of
$149,449, or $3.93 per acre. We did not take into consideration the
Indiana sales introduced in evidence by plaintiffs.
There were certain significant differences between the lands
covered by the sales data and the tract to be valued. Lands reflected in
the sales data came from counties in which the rich American Bottom comprised
a substantial portion. The southern end of Tract B was in the iediate
vicinity of the American Bottom and was thus enhanced in value. However, most
of Tract B was far from this valuable area. There were rich agricultural
lands in Tract B lying along the Illinois River bottom and the Sangamon
River bottom. Frequent flooding of these rivers made the bottoms less
valuable than the American Bottom lands.

The sales data counties had immediate access to the Mississippi River

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 408

whereas only the southwestern portion of Tract B lands were near the
Mississippi. The western border of the tract was the Illinois River
which flows into the Mississippi River and the tract was traversed by other
watercourses which flowed into the Illinois River. Access to the tract
and means of transportation through it were not difficult but not as

good as in the case of Tract A.

The counties comprising the sales data were adjacent to or were included in areas that had been settled by the French. As early as 1803, the
valuation date for Tract A, those settlements were well established.

Tract B, on the other hand, did not experience much settlement until

the 1800's. The sales data lands possessed excellent conditions for
agriculture and were greatly desired by settlers. Tract B was approximately
60% prairie and 40% timber. By 1821, the unpopular prairie lands were
beginning to find a market, particularly if there was timber nearby.

Large prairie areas, however, were still avoided where possible.

Due to the well established settlements in the sales data area, there
was a likelihood that some of the sales between l8l8 and 1821 contained
improvements.

Portions of Tract B extended into north-central Illinois and was considemi
more remote tn; settlers from the east and south than were the sales data
counties. If we were valuing Tract B lands in 1803, they would have been
uch less valuable than the lands in the sales data counties in Tract A in
1803. However,as of 1821 the movement of settlers into this area had
increased and lands to the north of Tract A.were being sought out.

Under all the facts and circumstances, it is our opinion that the

42 Ind. C1. Comm.  

per acre value of Tract B in 1821 would have been approximately $1.50.
Tract B contains over five million acres and this size coupled with
other factors discussed in connection with our valuation of Tracts A and
A’, indicates that a 20% discount is in order.

On the basis of the whole record and the above considerations, we
conclude that the value of Tract B in 1821 was $6,140,538, or an average per
acre value of $1.20. The Kickapoo plaintiffs have a 100% interest in this
tract. Finding 67

Tract C. Tract C contains 2,193,176 acres and occupies the southeast
corner of Royce Area 110. The valuation date is January 13, 1821 and the
Kickapoos have a 100 percent interest in this tract. See our finding 45
for the physical characteristics and settlement patterns in this tract.

As with Tract B, 1818-1821 sales were obtained from the data
compiled by Dr. Chisholm for use in our valuation of the tract.

We treated these sales in the same manner discussed in the previously
valued tracts. The $3.93 per acre average price for the acceptable

sales was adjusted on the basis of the factors discussed below, which factors
distinguish Tract C from the counties in the sales data area.

Tract C possessed rich lands along the Embarrass River but they did
not compare with the quality and location of the American Bottom lands in

the sales data counties. The Embarrass River flowed into the Wabash

River which in turn flowed into the Ohio River. Thus, the distance from

Tract C to the more widely used routes of travel was greater than in the case
of the sales data counties.
Access to Tract C was inferior to that of the counties comprising

the sales data area. The eastern boundary of Tract C was within a short

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 410

distance of the Upper Wabash River but often required overland travel in

order to reach the river. The northern boundary of the Tract was bordered

by the Vermillion River and the tract was traversed by the Embarrass and Little
Wabash rivers. None of these rivers compared, of course, with the

Mississippi.

Settlements within the sales data counties were established in the
mid-1700's. Settlement in Tract C did not comence until the 1800's but the
southeast portion of Tract C was only a short distance from.Vincennes,

Indiana, which had been settled by the French in the 1700's. Lands in
Indiana directly east and southeast of Tract C had been ceded by Indian
tribes many years prior to the 1821 valuation date and were well settled by
that date. Accordingly, Tract C could not be considered as having a
"remote location" at the time of valuation. The sales data counties in
Illinois had also been settled for many years by 1821 and were still
attracting settlers.

In 1821 lands in Tract C were almost wholly unimproved whereas
the lands in the sales data counties undoubtedly contained improvements.

Tract C was approximately two-thirds prairie and one-third timber.

In 1821 settlers were still reluctant to settle on prairies if timbered
lands were available. The lands in the sales data counties contained
much timbered lands.

The above circumstances indicate that the market value of Tract C in 1321

was lower than the per acre price of the sales data lands. Tract B lands were a5‘
more desirable than Tract C lands due to the presence of rich lands along

the Illinois and Sangamon rivers and their tributaries.

42 Ind. Cl. Conn. 354 411

It is our opinion that under all the circumstances, the per acre
value of lands in Tract C in 1821 would have been $1.35. The tract

contained over two million acres and this,in addition to other factors

discussed in this opinion,persuades us to agply a 207. discount,

On the basis of the record and the above considerations, we conclude

that the value of Tract C in 1821 was $2,368,630 or an average per acre

price of $1.08. Finding 67.

Tract D, Tract D contains 390,014 acres in the northeastern corner of

 

Royce Area 110. The valuation date is January 13, 1821, and the Kickapoo

Indians have an undivided one—half interest in this tract. Finding 46.

In reaching our valuation of Tract D we used the 1818 to 1821 sales
obtained by Dr. Chisholm and discussed in connection with our valuation of
Tract C. Due to the various factors listed below which distinguished
Dr. Chisholm's Tract A sales data from Tract D, we adjusted his $3.93 average
per acre 1821 value to conform to what we believe were the conditions
existing in Tract D in 1821.

As noted above,the 1818 to 1821 Chisholm sales data came primarily
from the counties of Madison, St. Clair and Randolph, all of which were
on the Mississippi River and therefore very accessible to travelers and
settlers. Tract D bordered on portions of the upper
Illinois River, the Kankakee River and the Vermillion River. None of these
rivers were as easily navigable as the Mississippi nor as important as
a means of travel or trade. Access to Tract D was not physically difficult
but was hampered due to the fact that lands adjacent thereto were still

inhabited by Indians. This was not true of the sales data counties.

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 412

Royce Area 180 immediately to the east of Tract D in Indiana was in Indian
ownership until 1832.

Tract D possessed much fertile lands along the several rivers
which traversed the tract but the quality of land did not reach that of
the American Bottom lands in the sales data counties. In many places
in the tract drainage was required along the river bottoms before the
admittedly rich land could be cultivated.

The first settlers did not move into Tract D until the mid 1820's.
By 1821 the sales data counties were relatively well populated having had

thriving settlements in the area since the mid-1700's. The demand for land

in the sales data counties was high due to richness of the lands and the fact
that access and transportation were excellent. Tract D contained almost

all prairie lands with only a small portion of timber land. In 1821 many
settlers still preferred timbered areas and avoided settling on prairies
unless the land was within reasonable distance of timbered lands. The

large proportion of prairie lands comprising Tract D would have made this

tract less attractive to settlers.

Tract D lands were unimproved whereas the sales data county lands
were probably improved to some extent.

Tract D was within a short distance of Lake Michigan but in 1821
that lake was not widely used by settlers and land values would not have
been greatly enhanceddue to such a location. Although slightly more remote
from established settlements than Tract C, Tract D had better access because 05
its proximity to the Illinois River.

It is our opinion that the per acre value for lands in Tract D in 1821p

would have been $1.35 Tract D contains 900,000 acres, approximately, and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 413

this relatively smaller size plus other factors previously discussed in relation
to size discounts, persuades us to apply a 15% discount resulting in a value

for Tract D on January 13, l82l,of $1,023,516, or an average per acre price

of $1.15. The Kickapoo Indians‘ one-half interest amounts to $511,758. Finding 67.

,E£gg§_§. Tract E contains 844,794 acres and is also in the northeastern corner of Royce Area 11. The valuation date is January 13, l82l,and
the Kickapoo Indians have an undivided one—ha1f interest in the tract.

(See our finding 46).

As with the other tracts in which the Kickapoo had an interest which
they ceded in 1821, we based our valuation on the physical characteristics
of the tract, settlement patterns, and evidence of 1818-1821 sales data
compiled by Dr. Chisholm in the Tract A counties of Illinois. The factors
which we found distinguished the land in tract D from the sales data counties
of Madison,Monroe, St. Clair and Randolph in the American Bottom portion of
Tract A, hold true for Tract E. Although Tract E contained some very fertile
lands along the Iroquois River and in the old Kankakee Lake bed, the amount,
quality and location of its fertile lands did not match that of the sales
data counties.

Tract E bordered on portions of the Vermillion and Kankakee rivers
and was traversed by the Iroquois. While these waterways provided access
and transportation to the area as well as fertile timbered areas along
their banks, none of them were as important or as easily navigated as was
the Mississippi River. Access to Tract E and demand for its lands in 1821
was diminished due to the presence of Indians in lands just to the east in
Illinois and in Indiana.

The sales data counties were well settled by 1821 whereas Tract E was

outside the main path of migration. About 80% of Tract E consisted of

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 414

unimproved prairie lands and 20% timbered lands. It was only a short distance
from Lake Michigan but it was not until after the Erie Canal opened in 1825
that settlers began to reach the Northwest by way of Lake Michigan, at least
in any numbers. Since settlers used other routes in 1821 and the town of
Chicago had not yet become an important center, the tract's proximity to
Chicago and to the Lake would not have significantly affected its value.

Tract E was very comparable to Tract D. What Tract E lacked by not
having direct access to the Illinois River, it made up for by possessing a
larger proportion of timbered lands.

It is our view that the average per acre value of the lands in Tract
E in 1821 would have been $1.35, the same as Tract D lands, and that a 15%
discount is appropriate.

On the basis of the record and the above considerations we conclude
that the value of Tract E on January 13, 1821, was $969,401.00 or an
average per acre price of $1.15. The Kickapoo's undivided one-half
interest amounts to $484,700. Finding 67.

Tract G. We have discussed the Kickapoo plaintiffs’ and the defendant's
valuations of Tract G,but before we explain our valuation of the tract we
should discuss the valuation submitted by the Potawatomi plaintiffs in
Docket 29-B. (See our finding 58) Dr. Helen Hornbeck Tanner, an ethnohistorian,
consultant and expert witness in this and a number of other cases involving
Indian claims, used an historical approach in valuing the lands in Royce Area
98 (Tracts G and I) and to value Tract H.in the overlapping portions of
Royce areas 110 and 180. She collected her materials from county histories writ

ten, as she pointed out, many years after the valuation date, but containing much valuable and verifiable data bearing on the 1818 value of the

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 415

land in suit. She also used material from Government census records and the
records of the federal land offices. Her sales data came from the latter
sources. The lands being valued by Dr. Tanner had been ceded on October 2,
1818. She noted that it was about 10 years after the cession of the

subject lands that sales in any appreciable numbers took place in the tracts.
After examining the sales figures for Indiana in the American State Papers,

she observed that tracts of comparable size to Royce Area 98 were disposed

of within three or four years in Indiana in the early 1820's and during any
eighteen month interval in the early 1820's. She noted the prices at which the
Indiana comissioners offered Indiana Wabash and Erie canal lands

for sale, i.e., from $3.50 for 1st rate land to $1.50 for third rate land.

The middle figure set by the commissioners was $2.50 per acre. Dr. Tanner
believed that because all parts of Royce Area 98 were within a day's

journey of the Wabash River and because the relatively small tracts in suit were
of generally high quality land having a diversity of local resources, a bonus
factor estimated at 15 cents per acre should be added to the.base figure

of $2.50 per acre for an 1818 average valuation of the tracts in Royce Area

98 of $2.65 per acre. She did not think that this price should be discounted
in any amount for size or for the period during which it might have to be held
before sale but rather urged that the accessibility, quality and natural

resources of the area required that the base value per acre be enhanced.

In our finding 59-B we discussed defendant's expert's valuation
Of Royce Area 98. As in the valuation of Royce Area 110, hereinabove

discussed, defendant relied on sales in Henry, Knox and Fulton counties

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 416

in or near the Illinois Military Tract. Since we have already discussed

that evidence and concluded that those sales were not comparable for
valuation purposes in connection with any of the tracts to be valued in
these dockets, we will not go into the matter again.

Tract G contained 402,870 acres located in the western part of
Royce Area 98 and is overlapped by the Kickapoo cession of Royce Area 110.
The tract embraces parts of Indiana and Illinois and the Kickapoo,
Potawatomi and Wea tribes each has an undivided one-third interest in the
tract. The valuation date of the Potawatomi and Wea interests is October 2,
1818, and of the Kickapoo interest is January 13, l82l.

For the Potawatomi and Wea interests we carefully considered the
materials submitted by Dr. Tanner and by Dr. Chisholm and found it all
quite helpful. We selected as comparable approximately 270 sales of 59,556
acres which took place during the years 1815 through 1819, eliminating
all sales where the grantor and grantee had the same surname or where the trans.mtions involved governmental bodies, sheriff's sales and estate sales. We
also eliminated any sales for less than 40 acres since we felt 40 acres
was the minimum amount that would have been purchased for the predominant
use at that time of subsistence farming. The total selling price was
$194,679 or an average per acre price of $3.27 35 Of 0Ct0beT 2: 1818For the valuation of the Kickapoo interest, as with the other tracts
in which they had an interest, we used the 1818 to 1821 sales which were
compiled by Dr. Chisholm. We selected 164 sales which we deemed acceptable
involving 37,993 acres which were sold for a total price of $149,449 or
an average per acre price of $3.93 as of January 13, 1821.

The per acre price of the two sales data periods require adiustment becau“3

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 417

of certain factors noted below. These factors reveal pertinent data

which distinguish Tract G from the lands involved in the sales data.

The sales data lands were located in the extremely fertile and
early settled American Bottom portion of Royce Area 48 which was bordered

on the west by the Mississippi River and on the south by the Ohio River.

Tract G contained a great deal of fertile lands along the Vermillion

and Wabash rivers but the lands were not as fine as those in the sales
data counties. Although the Vermillion and Wabash rivers were navigable
and certainly enhanced the value of Tract G, they did not reach the
importance of the Mississippi and Ohio rivers.

Tract G did not experience steady settlement until the 1820s.

The sales data counties were fairly well populated long prior to 1818

and some settlements had been in eistence since the mid-1700's. These
established settlements attracted settlers towards the sales data region
which was in the path of westward migration. Tract G was outside that path
in 1818 and 1821 and the lack of existing settlements within its vicinity
further reduced the demand for the lands in the tract.

Nearly all of the land in the sales data counties possessed a topography

and terrain highly attractive to settlers being mostly timbered lands.

On the other hand, slightly over one-half of Tract G consisted of prairies

and at both valuation dates for this tract settlers continued to be

reluctant to homestead on prairies unless there were adjacent timberlands.

Most settlers, having come from timbered areas, were either unskilled or uneducated in the process of breaking and cultivating the prairies.

Since the sales data counties were well populated at the time of

42 Ind. _c1. Comm. 354 4 418

these valuations, it is likely that the lands sold and reflected in the sales
data contained some improvements which would have increased the value of such
lands and resulted in a higher selling price to buyers. Tract G was almost
entirely unimproved and therefore the sales price for its lands would not
have been as high as prices in the sales data counties.

Tract G was bordered on the west by Tracts E and C and we find the
value of Tract G to be comparable with the value of these adjacent tracts.
However, tracts C3and E were valued as of 1821 and only the Kickapoo interest
in Tract G is valued as of that time. The Potawatomi and Wea interests must
be~ valued as of 1818. Therefore, it is our view that the per acre price for
the lands in Tract G in 1818 was $1.28,and in 1821 was $1.35.

Tract G contains slightly more than 400,000 acres. This and other
factors previously discussed as part of the size discount persuades US to
apply a 10 percent discount. We conclude that the value of Tract G
on October 2, 1818,was $A63,30l or an average per acre value of $1.15.

The Potawatomi's and Wea's one—third interest in the tract amounts to
$154,434 each. The value of the tract on January 13, 1821, was

$491,501 or an average per acre value of $1.22. The Kickapoo's oneathird
interest amounts to $163,834.00. Finding 57

Tract H. Tract H contains 51,384 acres in the western part of
Indiana and constitutes the overlapping portion of Royce areas 110 and 180.
The Kickapoo and Wea tribes each has an undivided one-third interest in the
tract. The Wee interest is valued as of October 2, 1818 and the

Kickapoo interest as of January 13, 1821.

42 Ind. (:1. com. 354 419

The Potawatomi Indians also possessed an undivided one-third interest
in Tract H but the valuation of their interest was assigned to dockets 15-N,
0, Q and R and will not be touched upon in this decision.

In our valuation of this tract we examined sales from 1815 through
1819 for the wee interest, and sales from 1818 through 1821 for the Kickapoo
interest. These sales were selected from the data prepared by Dr.
Chisholm previously discussed in connection with our other valuations.

From Dr. Chisholmls sales data for the years 1815 through 1819 we
selected 270 sales involving 59,556 acres of land with a total selling price

of $194,679, or an average per acre price of $3.27. The 1818 through 1821

period produced 164 acceptable sales involving 37,993 acres selling for
$149,449, or $3.93 per acre.
The per acre prices of the two sales data periods require adjusting

because of various factors which reveal pertinent differences between

Tract H and the sales data counties.

Tract H did not possess as fertile soil as that in the sales data
counties, described and referred to several times above. Tract H did not
possesses the easily navigable water routes enjoyed by the sales data

counties although the north fork of the Vermillion River rose in the western

portion of the tract and the Wabash River was only 20 miles away.

The Tract H land was fertile and desirable but it did not experience

Steady settlement until several years after 1821. As of the valuation dates, the
Sales data counties were relatively heavily populated with several thriving
settlements having been in existence for many years. St. Louis, just across

the Mississippi River from the sales data area, had been settled by the 1760's.

The sales data area was in the direct path of westward migration whereas

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 420

Tract H was outside of such path, partly due to the continued presence
of Indians in Tract H and other adjacent lands.

Slightly over one-half of Tract H was composed of prairies whereas
the sales data counties were predominantly timbered lands which were
much preferred by settlers. Tract H was almost totally unimproved at
valuation dates whereas the sales data counties must have contained
significant improvements in some areas.

Tract H was bordered on the west by Tract E which we find to be
comparable land. Tract E was valued as of 1821. The
Kickapoo interest in Tract H is also to be valued as of 1821 whereas the

Wea valuation date is 1818. In View of the circumstances and evidence of

record we conclude that the per acre value of the lands in Tract H in
1818 was $1.28 and in 1821 was $1.35.

Tract H contains slightly more than 50,000 acres and is the smallest
tract to be considered in this decision. This relatively small
amount of acreage plus other factors previously discussed in connection
with size discounts, persuades that a 5 per cent discount is appropriate.
On the basis of the record and the above considerations, we conclude that the
value of Tract H on October 2, 1818 was $62,483 or an average per acre
price of $1.22. The Wea's one-third interest amounts to $20,828. Finding 71.
The value of Tract H on January 13, 1821, was $65,874, or an average per acre prhm
of $1.28. The Kickapoo's one—third interest amounts to $21,958. Finding 67.

Tract I. Tract I contains 351,756 acres in western Indiana and
constitutes the eastern half of Royce Area 98. The Wea and Potawatomi tribes

each have an undivided one-half interest in the tract. These interests are

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 354 421

valued as of October 2, 1818.

In valuing Tract I we relied on the sales data gathered by Dr.
Chisholm and selected therefrom 270 sales occurring between 1815
and 1819, inclusive, observing the same exclusions made by him plus
our own exclusion of any tract having less than 40 acres.

The 270 sales we selected contained 59,556 acres selling for a total
of $194,679, or an average per acre price of $3.27. However, these sales
were derived from an area that differed in significant ways from Tract I
requiring an adjustment in our valuation of that tract for reasons discussed
below.

As noted above, the sales data used by Dr. Chisholm involved lands
located largely in the American Bottom area along the Mississippi River and
having extremely fertile and desirable lands. In addition, there were a
number of established settlements in this area and much of the land was
improved. The fertile lands in Tract I were not as exceptional as those
in the sales data areas and some lands in Tract I required drainage before
they could be cultivated. Tract I was bordered on the west by Big Pine
Creek, on the south by the Wabash River, and on the east by the Tippecanoe
River. Although access to the tract was generally good, the journey to
Tract I from the Ohio River and then up the Wabash River was difficult
compared to the ease with which the sales data counties could be reached.
Tract I was outside the path of westward migration in 1818 and remained
so until the late 1820's with little permanent settlement until that time.

Since the sales data counties were well populated in 1818, it is

likely that the sales reflected in the data included improvements. Tract I

was almost totally unimproved at the time of valuation.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 422

The sales data counties were mostly the desired timbered lands whereas

Tract I had substantial amounts of prairie lands which settlers were reluctant
in 1818 to cultivate.
Tract I was bordered on the west by Tract G which had an 1818

value of $1.28. We find that Tract G and its per acre price comparable to that
of Tract I. Tract I contained slightly more than 350,000 acres and we believe
a 10 percent discount is appropriate. On the basis of the record and the
considerations we have discussed, we conclude that the value of Tract I on
October 2, 1818, was $405,223, or an average per acre value of $1.15.

The Wea's and the Potawatomi's undivided one-half interest amounts to

$202,612 each. See Finding 71.

Consideration

Consideration in Docket 313. In Docket 313 the Peoria plaintiff on
behalf of the Peoria and Kaskaskia,contends that the value of the consideration received by the Kaskaskia from the defendant under the Treaty of
August 13, 1803, 7 Stat. 78, totaled $11,158.64, and that defendant is
entitled to have this sum deducted from any award made to the Kaskaskia.
Defendant claims that the total consideration properly deductible is $11,580.

Under the Treaty of August 13, 1803, the Kaskaskia's perpetual annuity
of $500 in goods which they were receiving pursuant to Article IV of the
Treaty of Greenville of August 3, 1795, 7 Stat. 49, was increased to $1,000.00.
Both parties agree that the capitalized value of this $500 perpetual
annuity is $10,000 and that it is deductible from the award.

The third article of the 1803 treaty provided that whereas the greater

part of the tribe had been received into the Catholic Church, the United States

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 423

‘would give the Tribe $300 to assist in the erection of a church and also $100
annually for seven years for the support of a priest who, in addition to the
duties of his office as a priest, would instruct as many as possible of the

tribe's children. The parties agree that the $300 for the church is deductible
consideration. Plaintiff contends that the seven annual payments of $100
each should be capitalized at $578.64 and only that sum deducted from the

award, relying on Miami Tribe v. United States, 150 Ct. C1. 725(l960); Crow

Tribe v. United States, 151 Ct. Cl. 281 (1960); and Absentee Shawnee Tribe v.

 

United States, 151 Ct. Cl. 700 (l960)_gg§§, denied in all three cases,

366 U.S. 924 (1961). That ruling was rejected by the Court of Claims when

the issue was again raised in a later case, Pawnee Indian Tribe v. United States,
157 Ct. C1. 134, 138-139, 301 F. 2d 667, 668-669 (1962) cert. denied 370

U.S. 918. In Pawnee the court held that permitting deferred payments

of a short term annuity to be comuted to a cash value at treaty date

and deducting only that amount from the award as consideration was tantamount

to charging the United States with interest and would thus be contrary to

well established law that the United States is not liable for interest

in the absence of contractual or statutory authority therefor. Accordingly,

defendant is entitled to have deducted the $700 actually paid under the
temporary annuity provisions of the treaty.

Both parties appear to have assumed that the $500 promised by the

United States to procure necessary articles for the Kaskaskia and to relieve
them from debt, is a properly deductible item of consideration. Since
"necessary articles" under most Indian treaties were "food, rations or

provisions” which,under the Act of October 27, 1974, Public Law 93-494,

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 424

88 Stat. 1499, may not be deducted as payments on the claim, in the absence

of a showing to the contrary, this sum is not deductible. Prairie Band of

 

The Potawatomi Tribe of Indians Docket NOS.

, et al. v. United States,
15-C, 29-A and 71, 38 Ind. 01. Comm. 128 (1976), affirmed, 215 Ct. C1.___,
564 F. 2d 38 (1977).

Defendant is entitled to a credit as consideration under the 1803
Treaty, the $10,000 capitalized value of the $500 increase in the tribe's
perpetual annuity; $700 representing the seven annual payments of $100 each
for the support of the priest; and $300 for the erection of the church, making
a total consideration of $11,000.00. Finding 72

Consideration in Dockets 15—D, 29-B and 311. Under the Treaty of
October 2, 1818, 7 Stat. 185, the Potawatomi were promised a perpetual annuity of
$2,500 in silver. Both parties agree that this annuity was the sole
consideration given by defendant under that treaty and that the capitalized
value of that annuity is $50,000. It is uncontested that the tribe has been
paid the capitalized value of the annuity and that defendant is entitled to
a credit in that amount against the Potawatomi award in the subject dockets.
Finding 73.

Consideration in Docket 3l4—A. The sole consideration received by the Wea
under the Treaty of October 2, l8l8,was an $1,850 perpetual annuity payable in
silver. In Docket 314-A, the Peoria plaintiff on behalf of the Wea contends
that defendant has already received full credit for this annuity,referring

to the $34,478.16 credit allowed defendant against the award in Peoria Tribe

of Indians v. United States, Docket 314 (Amended), 9 Ind. Cl. Comm. 274, 28842 Ind. c1. Conn. 354 425

289 (1961), aff‘d on other grounds, 169 Ct. 01. 1009 (1965). Plaintiff is
correct. In Peoria,_§gp;g_we found that under Article 6 of the Treaty

of May 30, 1854, 10 Stat. 1082, defendant comuted the 1818 Wea perpetual
annuity of $1,850 for $34,478.16; that such amount was actually paid

to the wee Tribe; and that the defendant was entitled to credit-in that amount

against the award to the Peoria in that proceeding. In Docket 99 et al,

Peoria Tribe of Indians v. United States, 22 Ind. Cl. Comm 186 (1969) defendant

 

again attempted to have the commuted value of the 1818 Wea annuity
credited against the award in that case and the Commission denied the
claim on the ground that the credit had already been granted in Docket 314
Amended.

It is true, as defendant contends, that the capitalized value of
the 1818 annuity is $37,000. However, since the Government in 1854
chose to commute that annuity for $34,478.16, defendant is bound by that
choice. Since full credit for the annuity has already been granted to
defendant in Docket 314 Amended, defendant may have no credit for it in
this proceeding. Finding 74.

Consideration in Docket 315. Under the Treaty of July 30, 1819,
7 Stat. 200, as amended by the Treaty of July 19, 1820, (7Stat. 208), involved
in this docket, defendant promised and paid to the Kickapoo $2,000 in silver
annually for 15 years. Article 6 of the July 30th treaty states that the
United States delivered $3,000 worth of merchandise to the tribe on that
date. In addition, defendant promised and delivered to the Kickapoo

1,868,500 acres of land in the Territory of Missouri, hereinafter called

the "exchange lands”. The“tract in Missouri must be valued for the purpose

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 426

of consideration, as of January 13, 1821, the effective date of the treaty.

Under the Treaty of August 30, 1819, 7 Stat. 202, also involved in
this docket, defendant, in return for the cession described in Article 2,
and in return for the release by the Kickapoo of an annuity of one thousand
dollars then due them, promised to pay and did pay to the Kickapoo $200
in specie annually for 10 years and delivered $3,000, presumably in cash,
at the time of the signing of the treaty. The one thousand dollar annuity
which the Kickapoo released under the August 30th treaty included a $500 perpetual annuity granted to them under the 1795 Treaty of Greenville; the
$400znmi $100 perpetual annuities granted them under the Treaty of December
9, 1809, 7 Stat. 117; and the Kickapoo's interest in a salt annuity granted
jointly to eight tribes under the Treaty of June 7, 1803, 7 Stat. 74. The
xalue of the released monetary annuities, capitalized at 5%, is $20,000. The
similarly capitalized value of the Kickapoo's l/8 interest in the salt
annuity is approximately $500 (See finding 75 for details). The combined
salt and cash annuity has a capitalized value of $20,500.

The $30,000 paid to the Kickapoo under the Treaty of July 30, 1819,
as a 15 year annuity at $2,000 a year, and the $2,000 cash annuity paid for
10 years under the Treaty of August 30, 1819, totaling $20,000, plus the
$3,000 in cash paid under the August 30th treaty, are all deductible from
the Kickapoo award as consideration paid under the pertinent treaties.
Plaintiff's contention that the two temporary annuities are not deductible
in their entirety, but only their capitalized value, is without merit, as
noted in connection with the same contention of the Peoria plaintiff in
Docket 3l4~A, and for the same reason. The $3,000 worth of merchandise

promised in Article 6 of the July 30, 1819 treaty, will, in the absence of

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 354 427

proof to the contrary, be deemed to have been food, rations or provisions

within the meaning of the Act of October 27, 1974, prohibiting the deduction
of the value of such items as payments on the claim. Prairie Band of
Potawatomi Tribe of Indians, et al. v. United States, Docket Nos. 15-C, 29-A
and 71, supra. From the total amount of the capitalized temporary annuities
and the $3,000 cash payment, must be subtracted the capitalized value of the
$1,000 annuity and other obligations (salt annuity worth $500 commuted value)
totalling $20,500 which the Kickapoos released in the Treaty of August 30,
1819.

The Kickapoo plaintiffs concede that the the exchange lands in Missouri
granted to the tribe under the Treaty of July 30, 1819, constituted part of
the consideration for the tribe's cession of lands to the United States.
Plaintiffs contend, however, that the exchange lands should be valued
according to plaintiffs‘ estimate that defendant paid only $0.01 per acre
for- the lands when they were purchased by the United States from the
Osage Indians under the Treaty of November 10, 1808, 7 Stat. 107.

Defendant argues that the lands should be valued at their fair market value
as of the January 13, l82l,effective date of the treaty under which the

Kickapoo plaintiffs received the lands. The matter of the proper valuation

of "exchange lands" was thoroughly discussed in our decision in Prairie

 

Band of Potomatomie Tribe of Indians v. United States, Dockets l5—C et al.,

 

33 Ind. Cl. Com. 394, 400 ff. Under the circumstances in this case, the
provisions of the treaty, and the holding of the Commission in the Prairie

Band case, we are of the opinion that defendant is entitled to a credit of

 

the fair market value of the exchange lands as partial consideration.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 428

As evidence that equity will be served by such measure in this instance, we
take judicial notice of the fact that when the Kickapoo re-ceded the
1,868,500 acres of exchange land in Missouri to the United States as Royce
Area 179 under the Treaty of October 24, 1832, 7 Stat. 391, they ultimately
received the 1832 fair market value of such lands. Under the 1832 Treaty
the Kickapoo were given $143,000 and 786,000 acres of exchange land in Kansas.
They sought additional compensation for the transaction in Kickapoo Tribe of
Kansas v. United States, Docket 193, 19 Ind. Cl. Com, 67 (1968), which
resulted in a compromise settlement for an additional $540,000.

The Kickapoo plaintiffs presented no expert witness to show the value
of the Missouri exchange lands and no value evidence except Joint Exhibit X
which is a copy of the defendant's expert witness report in Osage Nation or Tribe
of Indians v. United States, Docket 105, 21 Ind. C1. Comm. 67, (1969), involving the same and additional lands. Defendant's expert in that case, Dr. William
G. Murray, valued the lands at 15 cents an acre as of April 28, 1810.

In Docket 315 herein, defendant again employed Dr. Murray as an expert
to value the exchange land in Missouri. Dr. Murray submitted an appraisal
report valuing the land as of July 30, 1819 instead of January 13, 1821.

He testified that there would have been little change in the value between

1819 and 1820 and we have found the same would have been true as of the 1821

actual valuation date.

In our findings 76 and 77 we have described the location and
physical characteristics of the Missouri lands. In general the lands were
in the western portion of the Ozark Plateau known as the Springfield Plain
with large, treeless prairie-like areas in the southwest portion._ It also

contained numerous swales, depressions and minor streams, many of which were

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 429

bordered by stands of timber. About two thirds of the tract was a combination
of timber and prairie land. The tract was drained by the Sac, Osage and
Pomme de Terre rivers and their tributaries. The soils ranged from good to
medium fertility and were capable of growing grain crops in the better
watered areas and grass for grazing in the less watered places.
The soils in the valleys were generally fertile except for large sections
which were steep, rocky and gravelly. Timber was not present in’
commercially exploitable quantities but was sufficient for the needs of
subsistence farmers. At valuation time the tract had no known
mineral potential. In Finding 78 we have described the climate of
the exchange area and the fact that on the whole the growing season averaged
180 days per year. The highest and best use of this land in 1821 would have
been for subsistence farming in the forested tracts along the river valleys
with some of the prairie expanses lacking the best soils, water and timber, being
useful for the grazing of livestock in connection with a sett1er's general
farming operation. Finding 79.

In Finding 80 we discuss the surveyor's notes in connection with the
earliest surveys in the exchange land tract, i.e., from 1833 to 1835.

In 1820 the non-Indian population of the Territory of Missouri was
66,586 persons. Most of these people lived in the eastern portion

of the territory along the Mississippi River with a concentration in northeastern Missouri around St. Eouis and near the Missouri River in the vicinity
of Boone's Lick country. The non-Indian population in southwestern Missouri
where the exchange lands were located, was less than two persons per square

mile in 1821. Finding 81.

42 Ind. C1, Comm. 354 430

There were no roads in the tract in 1821, only Indian trails.
None of the rivers in the tract were used for navigation by non-Indians. No
travel or trade routes had been developed through or near the tract
by non-Indians. By 1821, however, the Osage River had a reasonably forseeable
potential for navigational use. In 1821 the tract was not easily accessible.
Finding 82.

By 1821 the general area around and adjacent to the exchange land tract
had not been developed or settled but was still part of a vast wilderness
extending from near the Missouri River on the north, to and beyond the

Arkansas Territory on the south; from the rough Ozark highlands on the

east to the near level prairie lands of Kansas and beyond. The rate of
settlement in Missouri had reached a low point in 1820 when there were no sales
of public land in the entire territory and millions of acres of good lands

in Missouri available for sale enjoyed a much better location east of this
tract. The normal flow of immigration in 1821 was down the Ohio River, into
Kentucky, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and northeastern Missouri above St. Louis.
Finding 83.

In Finding 84 we describe the state of public land sales in Missouri
at and around the valuation date. In Finding 85 we describe Dr. Murray's
appraisal of this land as of July 30, 1819. Dr. Murray concluded that the
highest and best uses of the tract were for farming and stock raising.

Since there were no land sales near these lands in 1819, Dr. Murray chose
three Missouri tracts some distance to the east where there had been some
sales in 1819, 1823 and 1831. The three tracts chosen by Dr. Murray were

located in areas which were not comparable to the exchange lands and

therefore, the sales data is not helpful. In fact, Dr. Murray concluded

42 Ind. C1. Com. 354 431

that under the circumstances existing in western Missouri at the valuation
date, there was no market for the exchange lands. In reaching an. 1819

value of the exchange tract, Dr. Murray calculated what a buyer would have had
to pay for the land if, at 7% interest, he expected to recover the 1819
statutory price ($2.00 per acre) for public land, i.e, $1.64 cash in from 25 to
30 years. He decided that a buyer would have paid 23 cents per acre on this
basis and that the tract had a fair market value in 1819 of $429,755.

By 1820 the statutory price for public land had changed to $1.25
per acre cash and defendant's counsel calculated that the 1820 value of
the exchange lands would be approximately $0.17 per acre.

In reaching our own valuation of the exchange lands in January of 1821,
we considered all the evidence available, most of which is reflected in our
findings. We took judicial notice of our value findings and conclusions
in Docket 105 (ggagg), u r , and in Iowa Tribe v. United States,

Docket 135, 12 Ind. C1. Comm. 487 (l963),_a§fLQ 179 Ct. Cl. 8, ggxg. denied
389 U.S. 900 (1967). In the latter case we valued two/tracts in northern
Missouri on a thoroughly developed record. The 1,551,200 acre Iowa tribal
lands in northwestern Missouri in 1825, we valued at 45 cents an acre; and the
1,241,700 acre Sac and Fox tract in northeastern Missouri we valued at

80 cents per acre as of 1825. We justified the difference in value on the

basis of accessibility, settlement patterns and location, although we found the

two tracts to be comparable with respect to their physical characteristics.
We noted that sales activity within and adjoining the Sac and Fox tract reflected demand therefor,whereas no such activity existed in the Iowa tract region

in northeastern Missouri.

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 354 432

The Kickapoo exchange lands were generally less fertile than the
two tracts in Docket 135, and unlike the Iowa-Sac and Fox lands, were
frequently stony. The exchange lands were not as level as the Docket
135 lands and were further from the direction of settlement. In addition,
there was no market whatsoever in 1821 for the exchange land whereas in 1825
there had developed a market for the Iowa and Sac and Fox tracts. Finally,
economic conditions in Missouri and nationally were much better in 1825
than in 1821.

Missouri's application for statehood had been pending in Congress
since February 13, 1819,and it did not become a state until August 10, 1821
after the famous Missouri Compromise on the question of slavery. On January
13, 1821, the vicinity of the subject tract had no civil government and
was considered raw wilderness.

Based on all of the above considerations, our findings and the record
as a whole, we are of the opinion that the subject tract had
a fair market value on January 13, 1821, of $373,700, or an average per acre
value of $.20.

The total gross consideration in Docket 315 is summarized in our
finding 75 as $426,700. From this we deducted $20,500 representing the capitaliza
value of the perpetual annuity obligations released by the Kickapoo in 1819.
Accordingly defendant is entitled to a credit for the net consideration of
$406,200 in Docket 315.

In our finding 88 we have determined that the amount of consideration
paid by defendant for each cession in suit, and allowable against the plaintiffs'

claim in this proceeding, is so grossly inadequate as to be unconscionable

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 354 433

within the meaning of Clause 3, Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act.

Accordingly, the plaintiffs are entitled to awards for the difference between

the value of their interests ceded and the allowable amount of consideration

received, as summarized in the following table:

 

Allowable
Cession Value Consideration Award
Docket 313: Kaskaskia, Royce ‘$2,153,750 $11,000 $7,142,750
Area 48
Dockets 15-D, 29—B, 311: 357,046 50,000 307,046
Potawatomi Cession of Royce
Area 98
Docket 314-A: Wea cession of 377,874 0 377,874
Royce Area 98 and Tract H
Docket 315: Kickapoo cession 11,833,330 406,200 11,427,130

The above awards will be reduced by any gratuitous offsets which may

subsequently be allowed.

 
 

-A 7

o ' T. Vance, Commissioner

" ll’ —  
Lh(HLul. A. .HC4nA-lltl. 4‘
Richard W Yarbw oug , Comm -sioner

 
 

Brantley Blue, C

   

