1 Ind. c1. Comm. 230 23”

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMHISSION

Pawnee INDIAN TRIBE or OKLAHOMA. )
consisting of the four confeder- )
ated bands of Pawnee Indians, )
namely: Chaui or Grand Pawnee )
Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee, )
Pitahauerat or Tapyage Pawnee. )
and Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pawnee, ;
Claimant, )

)

vs. ) Docket No. 10

)

UNITED STAEESs )
)

Defendant. )

Mr. Arthur B. Honnold,
Attorney for Claimant.

Messrs. Malph A0 Barney,
and John F, Curran, with
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General A. Bevitt
Vaneeh.

JUL 1¢11350

FINDIEGS OF FACT

In this case the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma seeks an award
against the "sited States on eight separate claims. The first five
claims grow out of the alleged acquisition by the United States of a
tract of land containing some 33 million acres of land in what is now
central Nebraska.and Kansas, and extending from the Niobrara River in
northern Rebraska to the Arkansas River in southern Kansae. The claimant tribe base their claimed right to recover upon (1) immemorlal

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 230 231
-2- '

possession and occupation: (2) the alleged recognition of their right

to the claimed territory by the three treaties of October 9, 1833

(7 Stat. MR8), August 6, ISHS (9 Stat. 9U§) and September 2M; 1857
(11 Stat. 729) between them and the United States. The remaining
three claims are for the value of three small separate tracts of
Pawnee reservation land in Oklahoma alleged to have been sold by the
United States without the consent of claimant.

The Commission having made the foregoing introductory statement,
makes the following findings of fact:

15 The claimant herein, the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma, is a
tribe of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the
United States and has the right to prosecute this case. The Pawnee tribe
is composed of the four confederated bands of Pawnee Indians, namely:
Chaui or Grand Pawnee, Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee, Pitahauerat or
Tappage Pawnee, and the Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pawnee.

2. The Pawnee Tribe of Indians claims that prior to 1829 it held
original Indian title to a large tract of land in present States of
Kansas and Febraska, located within the following boundaries:

Beginning at the junction of the North and South Platte

Rivers in Eebraska and extending northeasterly along the

eastern boundary of the Fort Laramie Treaty of 1851 (11 Stat.

739) to the Niobrara River in northern Nebraska; thence east

along the Eiobrara River to a point some eight miles west of

its mouth; thence south and across the headwaters of Shell

Creek and down Shell Creek to its mouth whenait enters the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 230 232
-3Platte River; thence west along the Platte River about twelve

miles, thence south along Range 2 East to approximately Township Line Horth 9. and then extending from that point southr

west into Kansas to a point 25 or 30 miles east of the Great

Bend of the Arkansas River in southern Kansas. Thence west~

wardly following the Arkansas River to the Colorado State line;

thence north 18 miles along the Colorado line and then bowing
eastwardly and north to the place of beginning.

3. The Pawnee Tribe of Indians appears to have originated in the
far south or southwest, and in prehistoric times to have migrated northward until they reached the Platte River valley in the present State of
Nebraska. They were first contacted by the white man in l5Ul when the
Coronado expedition reached the province he called ”Qnivira" in what is
new central Kansas. Coronado reported the Pawnees living in a province
called Harahey, located to the north of Qnivira. In 1673 Marquette
located the Pawnees in the Platte River valley in Bebrasaa. During the
18th century the Republican Band of Pawnees lived on the Republican
River near the present Eebraska-Kansas line and the remainder of the
Pawnee bands were in the Platte—Loup River area in hebraska. By 1809
the Pawnees on the Republican River had moved up and joined the others
on the Platte River. and thereafter all Pawnees were located along the
lower courses of the Platte and Loup Rivers in villages which extended
from near the present town of St. Paul, jebraska, on the west to a point

near the town of Fremont, Febraska, on the east, a distance of approxi~

1 Ind. (11. Comm. 230 233

mately one hundred miles.

M. (a) 0n.Septenber 2“. 1829. a treaty (7 Stat. 327) was entered into
by the United States and.the Delaware Nation of Indians. which provided

in part as follows:

Ehereas the foregoing Treaty stipulates that the United
States shall provide for the Delaware Nation, a country to

reside in, Uest of the Mississippi, as the permanent residence
of their Fation; and whereas the said Delaware Nation, are now
willinggto remove, on the following conditions, from the countny
on James‘ fork of White river in the State of Missouri. to the

' Country selected in the fork of the Kansas and Hissouri Rivers,
as recommended by the Government, for the permanent residence
of the whole Delaware Uation; it is hereby agreed upon by the
parties. that the country in the fork of the Kansas and Missouri
Rivers, extending up the Kansas River, to the Kansas Line, and
up the Kissouri River to Camp Leavenworth, and thence by a line
drawn Westwardly, leaving a space ten miles wide, north of the
iKansas boundary line, for an outlet; shall be conveyed and forever secured by the United States, to the said Delaware Nation,
as their permanent residence: And the United States hereby
pledges the faith of the Government to guarantee to the said
Delaware Ration forever, the quiet and peaceable possession

and undisturbed enjoyment of the same, against the claims and
assaults of all and every other people whatever.

(b) The "outlet" strip of land granted to the Delaware Eation under
the foregoing treaty, and here claimed by the Pawnees, was within the terrin

tony ceded to the United States in 1825 by the Kansas Indians by treaty

entered into on.June 3. 1825 (7 Stat. ZUH), which provided in part as

follower

The Kansas do hereby cede to the United States all the
lands lying within the State of Missouri, to which the said
nation.have title or claim: and do further cede and relinquish,
to the said United States, all other lands which they new
occupy; or to which they have title or claim. lying West of
the said State of Missouri, and.within the following boundaries:
beginning at the entrance of the Kansas river into the Missouri

1 Ind.

c1. Comm. 230 234

-5~

river: from thence North to the North-West corner of the
State of Missouri; from thence Westwardly to the Nodewa
river, thirty miles from its entrance into the Hissouri;
from thence to the entrance of the big Nemahaw river into
the Missouri, and with that river to its source; from
thence to the source of the Kansas river. leaving the old
village of the Fania Republic to the West: from thence,
on the ridge dividing the waters of the Kansas river from
those of the Arkansas, to the Western boundary of the
State line of Hissouri. and with that line, thirty miles,
to the place of beginning.

From the cession aforesaid, the following reservation
for the use of the Kansas nation of Indians shall be made,
of a tract of land, to begin twenty leagues up the Kansas
river, and to include their village on that river: extends ing West thirty miles in width, through the lands ceded in
the first Article, to be surveyed and marked under the
direction of the President. and to such extent as he may

deem necessary, and at the expense of the United States»
The agents for the Kansas. and the Persons attached to the
agency, and such teachers and instructors as the President
shall authorise to reside near the Kansas, shall occugy.

during his pleasure, such lands as may be necessary for
them within this reservation.

(c)

. é '

included in this "Outlet" strip after the treaty of 1825 with the Kansas

Indians:

5.

treaty

(a)

of September EM, 1829, was located in and a.part of a territony

that had been hunted.upon and roamed over by a number of Indian tribes

that were hostile to one another, and said land had not been exclusively

used.and possessed by any one tribe or tribes for many years prior to

September 2h, l829¢

(b) That at the time of the treaty of September 2h. 18299 the

claimant tribe of Indians was living in permanent villages along the

The United States claimed full and complete title to the lan

The “outlet” strip of land granted the Delaware Nation by th

235
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 2.30 . _6_

IPlatte and Loup Rivers in what is new the State of Nebraska, and the
claimant tribe did not on September 2%, 1829. actually occupy, use and
jpossess. to the exclusion of other Indian tribes. any part of the said
“outlet” strip of land that was granted.by the defendant to the Delaware
Hat 1031::
5. (a) In 1833, and for several years prior thereto, there had.been

fighting among the Indians in the area south of the Platte River. The
United States desired to restore order and.peace among the Indians in

that area, as well as to persuade them to give up the.chase and change
to agriculture, because of the increasing scarcity of game.

(b) On October 9. 1833, a treaty (7 Stat. 338) was concluded
between the United States and the four confederated.bands of Pawnee
Indians. which.provided in part as follows:

ART. I. The confederated bands of Pawnees aforesaid
hereby cede and relinquish to the United States all their
pright. interest. and title in and to all the land lying south
of the Platte River.

ART. II. The land ceded and relinquished hereby. so
far as the same is not and shall not be assigned to any
tribe or tribes. shall remain a common hunting ground, during the pleasure of the President. for the Pawnees and other
friendly Indians, who shall be permitted by the President to
hunt on the sane. A

ART. III. The United States. in consideration of said
cession and for the purpose of advancing the welfare of the
said.Pawnees, agrees to pay said bands annually. for the
term of twelve years, the sum of forty—six hundred dollars
in goods, at not exceeding St. Louis prices. as follows:
to the Grand Pawnees and Republican villages, each thirteen
hundred dollars, and to the Pawnee Loups and Tappage Pawnee
villages each one thousand dollars. and said annuity to said
Grand.Pawnees is in full remuneration for removal from the
south to the north side of the Platte. and building againa

236
1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 230 L

-7.

(c) The area of land ceded and relinquished to the United States
by Article I of the foregoing treaty was unsurveyed and its boundaries
were not described in the treaty.

To (a) On October 9, 1833. when the treaty was concluded between the
United States and the claimant, one band of Pawnees occupied a permanent
village on the south bank of the Platte River in Eebraska, and the remaining bands of Pawnees occupied permanent villages on the Loup River north
of the Platte,

(b) It has not been estab1ished.by the record in this case that
claimant tribe actually occupied, used or possessed, to the exclusion
of other Indian tribes. any part of the lands lying south of the Platte
River, except the undefined area of land included within their one village
site on the south bank of the Platte.s 8. The United States paid the claimant tribe the sun of $lU9,622
under the provisions of the treaty of October 9. 1833.

9. There were certain members of the Pawnee Tribe who remained
south of the Platte River after the 1833 treaty was concluded. By 183?
these Pawnees had become restless and were attacking other Indian tribes
and committing depredations on White emigrant trains passing through the
area. This situation was brought to the attention of United States authorities in Washington and as a result. Lt. Colonel Ludwell B. Powellg as
Commanding Officer of the Battalion of Missouri Volunteers, was ordered
to visit the Pawnees on his way west and compel their removal north of

the Platte River.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 230 _ ' 237
-310. On August 6, l8u83 Lt. Colonel Powell. on behalf of the United
"States, concluded a treaty (9 Stat. 9H9) between the United States and
the confederated bands of Pawnee Indians. which provided in part as
follows:

Article 1. The confederated bands of the Pawnees
hereby cede and relinquish to the United States all their
right, title and interest in and to all that tract of
land described as follows: viz: Commencing on the south
side of the Platte, five miles west of this post, ‘Fort
Childs'; thence due north to the crest of the bluffs
north of said Platte River. thence east and along the
crest of said bluffs to the termination of Grand Island,
supposed to be about sixty miles distant, thence south
to the southern shore of said Platte River, and thence
west and along the southern shore of the said Platte
River to the place of beginning.

Article 20 In consideration of the land hereby

ceded and relinquished, the United States has this day
paid, through Captain Stewart ?an Lietg Assistant Quartermaster. United States Army, under an order from LieutenantColonel Ludwell 3. Powell, commanding battalion, Hissouri
‘Mounted Volunteers, to the said four bands collectively,

on the execution.of‘ihis treaty, the amount of $2,000e0O

in goods and merchandise. the receipt of which is hereby
acknowledged.

11. (a) That at the time the treaty of August 6, l8H8, was concluded, the Pawnee Tribe of Indians did not actually occupy, possess,
and use. to the exclusion of other Indian tribes, any part of the land
ceded under Article 1. of the treaty of August 6. 18MB,

(b) The United States delivered to the Pawnee Tribe supplies
_ of a value of $2,000.00 as provided under the terms of the treaty of
August 6. 18h8e
12. (a) In 1857, the United States Government entered into negoe

tiations with Indian tribes west of the States of Missouri and Iowa.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 230 ' i 238

-9...
for the purpose of securing the assent of the tribes to the settlement of citizens of the United States upon the lands claimed by said
Indians, and on September 2M, 1857, a treaty (11 Stat. 729) was concluded between the United States and the Pawnee Tribe of Indians,

which provided in part as follows:

ARTICLE 1. The confederate bands of the Pawnees aforesaid, hereby cede and relinquish to the United States all
their right, title. and interest in and to all the lands now
owned or claimed by them, except as hereinafter reserved, and
which are bounded as follows. VIZ: On the east by the lands
lately purchased by the United States from the Omahas: on the
south by the lands heretofore ceded by the Pawnees to the
United States: on the west by a line running due north from
the junction of the North with the South Fork of the Platte
River. to the Keha~Paha River: and on the north by the Kehav
Paha River to its junction with the Niobrara, L'eauqi Court,
or Running~Water river. and thence, by that river, to the
western boundary of the late Omaha cession. Out of this
cession the Pawnees reserve a tract of country thirty miles
long from east to west, by fifteen miles wide from north to
south, including both banks of the Loup Fork of the Platte
River; the east line of which shall be at a point not further
east than the mouth of Beaver Creek. If. however, the PEWHGQS9
in conjunction with the United States agent, shall be able to
find a more suitable locality for their future homes, within

. said cession, then, they are to have the privilege of selecting an equal quantity of land there, in lieu of the reservation
herein designated, all of which shall be done as soon as practicable; and the Pawnees agree to remove to their new homes,
thus reserved for them, without cost to the United States,
within one year from the date of the ratification of this
treaty by the Senate of the United States. and until that time,
they shall be permitted to remain where they are new residing,
without molestation.

ARTICLE 2. In consideration of the foregoing cession.

the United States agree to pay to the Pawnees the sum of

forty thousand dollars per annum, for five years, commencing
on the first day of January. A. D. eighteen hundred and fifty»
eight: and, after the end of five years, thirty thousand
dollars per annum, as a perpetual annuity. at least one—half
of which annual payments shall be made in goods, and such
articles as may be deemed necessary for them. '

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 230 239

-10And it is further agreed that the President may, at

any time, in his discretion, discontinue said perpetuity,

by causing the value of a fair commutation thereof to be

paid to. or expended for the benefit of, said Indians, in

such manner as to him shall seem proper.

(b) There are certain cessions made by the Sioux Indians on the
West, the Poncas on the North and the Omahas on the East, which overlapped the boundaries of the land ceded under Article 1 of the foregoing
treaty of 1857. In the trial record and its requested findings of fact,
the claimant has reduced its fourth claim herein for lands ceded under
Article 1 of the 1857 treaty to those lands bounded on the North by the
Niobrara River. on the East by the western boundany of the Omaha Tribe
cession of March 16. 185M (10 Stat. lOU3). as fixed by the United States

Supreme Court in the case of the Omaha Tribe vs. The United States (253

U. S. 275: 64 L. Ed. 901). on the West by the eastern boundary of the

Fort Laramie Treaty of September 17, 1851 (11 Stat. 7&9), and on the

 

South by the lands theretofere ceded by the Pawnee Tribe to the United
States (exclusive of the area reserved in said treaty), and which the
claimant now claims contains some 10,500,000 acres.

13. That at the time the treaty of September EN, 1857. was cons‘
cluded, and for a number of years prior. the only part of the ceded
territory occupied and possessed by the Pawnees was a comparatively

small unde’ined area located along the Platte and Loup Rivers in the
eastern part of the cession. with a considerable portion of the area
iso occupied lying within the tract reserved for their use under the

treaty, and the balance of the ceded area was wandered over and hunted

upon by the Pawnee Tribe and other Indian tribes, and no one tribe

1 Ind. Cl..Comm. 230 240

.;1,l
had the exclusive possession thereof..

1h.L During the period from June 12. 1858 to July 25, 19k? a total
Sum ef $U.2OU,l3l.68 was appropriated by the Congress of the United
States for the benefit of the claimant tribe under the provisions of the
treaty of September 2U, 1857.

15. In negotiating and making the three treaties that are set
iforth in the 6th, 10th and 12th findings of fact, the United States did
not recognize. nor did it intend to recognize or acknowledge the exclur
sive use and occupancy right or title of the claimant tribe in any of
the lands ceded under said treaties. other than the land contained in

the area reserved for their exclusive use and occupancy in the treaty

of September 2h, 1857a

Fifth Claim
16. Ca) Under the first Article of the treaty of September 23,
1857 (11 Stat. 739) between the United States and the Pawnee Indians,
there was reserved by the Pannees out of the cession made by theme

"a tract of country thirty miles long from east to west, by fifteen

miles wide from north to south * ’ *." When a resurvey was made of the

boundary lines of this reservation it was discovered that through an

error in the original survey the east and west boundary lines were but

twenty-nine and a half miles apart instead of thirty miles, thus leavn

ing a deficiency of M,8OO acres in the area of the reservation. as

described in the treaty. The Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs
brought these facts to the attention of the Secretary of the Interior

in a letter dated December 20, 1873, and reported in his letter that

241
.1 Ind. C1. Comm. 230

-12.

the lands were then thickly settled hy White settlers.

(‘b) Under the Act of I-Iarch 3. 1575 (18 Stat. 11.20. 14148) Congress
geppropriated the sum of $6,000 to indemnify the Pawnee Indians for
the 3,800 acres of land erroneously excluded from their reservation
in.hebraska by the survey of the boundary lines thereof.

(C) There is no evidence of the time when the land in question
'was taken by the defendant, and consequently there is no evidence of

its value at the time it was taken.

Sixth Claim

17. On Rovember 23. 1892. the United States and the Pawnee Tribe
entered into an agreement (I Kapp.h98) by the terms of which the
Pawnee Tribe ceded to the United States all of its reservation land \
in Oklahoma. In consideration of this cession the members of the
tribe were to receive allotments in severalty in the reservation. and
by Article IV “as an additional and only further consideration for
geuch cession and conveyance. the United States agrees to pay to said
tribe the sum of one dollar and twenty-five cents per acre for all the
surplus land in said reservation. after the allotments herein provided
for shall have been taken and approved by the Secretary of the Interior,
payable as follows: Eighty thousand dollars in coin, to be distributed
among them per capita at the subagency on said reservation upon the
ratification of this agreement by Congress. and the residue of the

proceeds of said surplus lands shall be placed to the credit of said

24
1 Ind. C1. Comm. 230 2

-13_
tribe in the Treasury of the United States and bear interest at the
rate of five per centum per annum, there to remain at the discretion
of the United States, the interest to be paid annually and.be distributed te said tribe per capita on said reservation." This agreement was to become effective when ratified by Congress.

0n.March 3, 1893 Congress passed an act (27 Stat. 512. SHH)
ratifying and confirming said agreement and appropriated the $80,000.00
to pay the Pawnee Tribe, and Section 12 of the act reading in part as
follows:
Said agreement is hereby accepted. ratified and confirmed. And the residue of the proceeds of the surplus lands
mentioned in said agreement shall be placed to the credit of
said tribe in the Treasury of the United States, and shall
bear interest at the rate of five per centum per annum. said

interest to be paid and distributed to said tribe as provided
in said Article four.

By resolution of the United States Senate, Senate Bill No. 10830
of the 61st Congress was referred to the‘U. 3. Court of Claims on
February 21, 1911. for a finding of fact and report thereon of claims
which the Pawnee Tribe might have or claim to have against the United
States, or for the failure of the United States to pay the tribe any
money due. One of the claims presented by the Pannee Tribe to the

Court of Claims. Pawnee Tribe of Indians vs. The United States, 512- ct.

C19. 1, was for surplus lands of the reservation in Oklahoma.after

 

allotment in severalty, ceded to the United States by the agreement

of November 23. 1892. The Court of Claims found that the $80,000 had.

been paid. "and allotments were made to each member, aggregating

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 230 243

  -2.14.

111,931.61 acres, leaving 171,088.37 acres of surplus lands, of which
755 acres were reserved for school and agency purposes, and continues
as tribal property. and the balance. 170,333.37 acres was disposed of
by the United.States ‘ * ‘." The court concluded a Just claim was
presented under the terms of the agreement for $1.25 per acre for
170,333.37 acres. with interest thereon at 5% per annum from Harch 3,
1893, the date of the agreement ratified by Congress. The 755 acres
were a part of the surplus land conveyed to the United States under
the agreement of November 23. 1892.

18. ‘Under the act of March 1. 1907 (jh Stat. 1015. 10th), the
United States issued a patent to the town of Pawnee, Oklahoma for
38.53 acres of land, in consideration of the sun of $l10.55§ or $1.23
per acre. The 85.33 acres were located within the 755~acre tract of
Pawnee reservation land mentioned in the preceding finding. This
sum of $1lOo55 appears from the evidence to have been credited to the
account of the Pawnee Tribe on or about March 1/, 1921, but no interest
was ever paid the Indians on the $110.55, although the agreement of
November 23, 1892 and the act of March 3, 1893 provided that the proceeds of the surplus lands should bear interest at 5% per annum. The
interest on the $110.55 from Harch 3, 1893 to March 17. 1921 has not
been paid to claimant.

Seventh Claim
19. ‘Under and by virtue of the act of March 3, 1909 (35 Stat. 781),

813) the United States on June 3, 1920 issued a.patent to the Home

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 23C 244

-15.
Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention, conveying 25.5“ acres
of land, mhich was also located within the 755-acre tract of Pawnee
reservation land mentioned in the 17th finding. The Home Hission.Beard,
end its predecessors. had been doing missionary work among the Pamnees
since 1880. and.this land had been previously set aside by the Department of the Interior for use in connection with this missionary work,

The claimant tribe received no payment for this 25.5” acres of land.

Eighth Claim
20. On Kay 18, 1937, Charles West. Acting Secretary of the Interior,
wrote to Will Rogers. Chairman of the Committee on Indian Affairs, House
of Representatives, reporting on proposed legislation to reimburse the

Pannees for a claim of $79.50 for certain rights of wayo The letter
was in part as follows:

Concerning the claim for $79.50, the record indicates
that a.right of way across the agency and school reserve
was granted to the Eastern Oklahoma Railway Company by approval of a nap of definite location on January 27, 19000
Later, on February ?, 1903, the Arkansas Valley and Western
Railway Company filed a map of definite location across
these reservations under the act of February 8. 1912 (32 State
p. H3). no record is found of any damages having been paid
in either case. At the customary rate of $50 a mile, the
total damages for rights of way would be $79.50

The "agenqy and school reserve" mentioned in the above letter was the

755-acre tract referred to in the 17th finding.

0

There was no evidence introduced as to the amount of land taken

for the two railroad rights of way.

/s/ ‘ pgggr 3, Witt.
Chief Commissioner

   

/s/ .Is.<_>_s.§.2__-.I_.»._<._>;“__I*«.T.«'-“'1'
Associate Commissioner

 

/s/ wn. E. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

