blind. c1. Comm. 165 ' 165

BHOE TEE IEIDIA1? GLAII-IS GOMI-;IISSIOZ;I

TI-"LE I*ESTEP‘T (OLD SETTLER) CEZEIROFEE
IEIDIAIES, on the relation of Dorothea
Owen, Thomas Roach, Ellis Crowell
Duncan. Elizabeth Schrimshezu-Lewis.
Alice I-?lournoy—Smith and E-Eastine
WOOd.8.1l9

Plaintiffs :

789 Docket NOo 

TEE UHITED STATES OF AI-IERICA9

\uI‘uI\-ul\u-n’\uI‘-IN-./\-I\-uI\uJ\-/Nu!‘-/\-ul

Defendant 5

-APP9e.rances: Noodson E. Iiorvell with whom was 
George E. lforvell and Wilfred A. Beam;
Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Ralph :1. Barney and Jules Ho Sigelo
with whom was 11:‘. ‘Assistant Attorney
General. A. Devitt Vanech.

Attorneys for Defendant.

82$’ 1 3 1949

D

OPINICE? 03‘ ‘FEB COEW-fl-iISSION

O'Ma.rr. Commissioner. delivered the Opinion of the
Commission:

L1 Ind. c1. Comm. 155 166 ...2....

This claim is presented.hy "The Western (Old settler) Cherokee
Indians; on.the relation of Dorothea Owen“ and.five other named individual
Indians against the United States to recover the value of lands alleged
to have heen.taken.£rom the Western Cherokee by the defendant without
adequate compensation. ‘

Taken.l1tera1ly. the title would indicate_that the Western

Cherokee Indians are considered a legal'entity having capacity to pros secute the claim. however» the following allegations of the petition show

that the suit has been brought by.descendants of members of a group. known

UL»-r van. valwavxavw J-uuual-L".i-.u.£.s9 J..U.L vllv

_ JR 1‘§-‘lo-I-0"-p.&
dug; Uta U

3 n
£.Ua...L 4..

cu-1526-Q
US:

at)‘ Uan 9-8" 0'

as o al vs
group or their descendants:

“That Dorothea Owen and the individuals therein associated with
her. are severally descended.from a member of that group of Indians identifie
ed as the Western. or Old settler. Cherokees. hereinafter called the Western
Cherokees. That such group has been so identified and recognized by the
defendant for more than one hundred twenty—£dve years past. That this proceeding is instituted on.behalf of such group of Indians, and for themselves
as individuals. and for the'use and benefit of all others who are similarly
situated and have like interestse That the name of each relator appears

upon the final rolls of Cherokees by blood. as approved, promulgated and

published by the Secretary of the Interior."

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 165 7 _ 157

..3....

We shall, therefore? for the purposes of this determinations
treat the named individuals as suing for the benefit of all nembersg or
their descendantsg of a group of Indians known as the Western Cherokees:
as authorized.by section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission.Act. (25‘UoSoCo5w
701). See Leyal Creek v. United States. Docket Eco 1.

The defendant has challenged the right of the plaintiff to
present this claim and the jurisdiction of the Commission to entertain it
byta timely motion to dismiss the petition on the ground that the Western
Cherokee Indians is not an identifiable group of American Indians under the
Indian Claims Commission.Act. This requires us to determine whether the
group is of the characterjpernitted to prosecute a claim against the'United
States before this Commissions

if the Western Cherokees is not an identifiable group as
contemplated by the Act. the claim is not maintainablo and we are not per—
mitted to adjudicate it. and it makes no difference whether it is presented
by the named individuals as representatives of the western Cherokees or by
the Cherokee Ration on behalf of the‘Western Cherokecso to the first
question to be determined is whether the Western Cherokees are an
"identifiable group of American Indians“. If they are then and then only is
it necessary to determine whether the suit may be brought by the individual
Indians in a representative capacity or by the Cherokee hationo

We gather from the facts alleged in the petition; from the

documents referred to therein and facts we may judicially notice, that

1 153. c1. Comm. 165   «C 168
I-01.59:the Cherokee Indians long prior to 1817 inhabited part of what was

or is new the States "of Tennessee, Alabama, Georgia and Iiforth Carolina.
Early in the nineteenth century the Cherokees living in the Southern
part oi’ their domain desired to continue the hunter life west of the
Mississippi river. game having ‘become scarce where they lived, and the
President. in order to satisfy the wishes of those Cherokees desiring
to move westyauthorized a party of those Indians to explore the country
‘between the Arkansas and White rivers. in what is now the State of Arkansas.
for the purpose of locating a new home. As a result of the explorations
the Indians chose the territory in Arkansas and on July 8. 1.81? ('2' Stat. 156)
a treaty was concluded ‘between the United States "and the chiefs. headmen
and warriorsg of the Cherokee Nation, east of the Mississippi river. and
the chiefs»; headnen and warriors of the Cherokees on the Arkansas river“
‘by whiehthezye was ceded to the United. States by the “Chiefso hoadmen and.
warriors of the whole Cherokee Nation" a part of the Cherokee domain Cast’
of the Mississippi river in exchange for an equal area of land lying in
Arkansas. Arts 5 of that treaty reads:
“The United States ‘bind themselves;

in exchange for the lands ceded in the

first and second articles hereof, to give

to that part of the Cherokee Nation on

the Ar1:ansas as much land '3‘ ’’v‘- =‘-'". as was

ceded by the Indianso (Italics supplied)
This whole treaty, which was made by the Cherokee Hation. shows a

division in that nation ‘between those remaining east (who ‘became known

as the Eastern Cherokees) and those who emigrated west (who ‘became known.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 165 a , 169

as the Western or Old Settler Cherokees) of the Mississippi river and is
a plain recognition of the Western group ‘by the United States as being a
distinct part of the Cherokee Nation. This recognition becomes more proohouheea by the acts of the United States following the 181? treaty.

A treaty was concluded by the Che rokoe Nation and the
United States on February 27. 1819 (7 stat.195) by which further territory east of the Mississippi river was coded to the United States and certain agreements were made. This treaty seems to have been made ‘by the '
Eastern Cherokees alone for it seems to affect the Eastern Cherokees main»
ly. However. in Art. 6 provision is made for dividing the annuity of the
Nation “two-thirds to the Cherokees east of the Mississippi. and one-third
to the Cherokees west of that river."

Coming to the treaty of May 6. 1828 (7 stat. 311) we find the
"chiefs and Head Men of the Cherokee ‘Nation of Indians. west of the
Mississippi. they being duly authorized and empowered by their Nation":
making a treaty with the United States by which the Indians cede their

Arkansas lands to the United States in exchange for lands located in the

_ Indian Territorya This treaty was made with the ‘Western Cherokees to

provide them. and such of the Eastern Cherokees who may wish to Join them:
a permanent home. That in conlcluding this treaty the Government was dealing with the Western Cherokees only. see Supplementary treaty of Febmary

111': 1333 (7 Stat. ltlilv) and United States v. Western Cherokees. 11$8.U.S. 425.
‘+70.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 165 ' 170

..6 Ebllowing the two treaties referred to above. the "chiefs:
Eead.Men and.Peop1e of the Cherokee tribe of Indians“ concluded a treaty
by which they ceded all their lands east of the Mississippi river, and
most of the Eastern Cherokees moved.west and were united with the Western
Cherokees. This treaty was signed December 29. 18359 and was agreed to
on.Decenber 31. 1835, by a delegation of Western Cherokees. (7 Stat. #78:
7 State 487).

Then there is the treaty of August 6. 1845 (9 Stat. 871) hh0rGby it was intended to settle the disputes existing between.the two sections
of the Cherokees. and it provided a formula for determining the value of
the interest of the Western Cherokees in the lands east and west of the
Mississippi and in.the funds of the Nations which interest of the Western
Cherokees was expressly recognized by the fourth Article of the treaty.
That article also defined the Western Cherokees as “all those Cherokees
west of the Mississippi. who emigrated.prior to the traty of 18359" and
articles 4 and 5 required that the amount ascertained to be due Western
Cherokees he distributed.per capita to “each individual of said.party
of ‘Old Settlers” or Western Cherokeoso" Incidentally. the Congress
appropriated money to pay the Western Cherokees the value of said interest
found to be due them»

The above is sufficient to show that throughout the long and
troubled history of the Cherokee Indians the Government and the Indians
themselves recognized the Western Cherokees as a well defined division

of the Cherokee tribe, namely. “those Cherokees west of the Mississippi

C 1 Ind. c1. Comm. 165 ' _ 171

.. 7 .. 

who emigrated prior to the treaty of 1835.? tfhether they can be otherwise identified does not appear important at this time because the
definition will serve to distinguish the Western Cherokees from the other
members of the Cherokee tribe.

The related question for determination is the character of the
claim here presented. We decided in the Loyal Creeks case. Docket No. 1. on
N33’ 5: 19498

"If such a group can be identified
and it has a common claim it is, in our
opinion, an ‘identifiable group of American
Indians‘ within the intent of the Act and it
need not be a political group in character."

and that identifiability was not in itself sufficient to permit the pro--secution of a group claim unless such a claim is one common to the group
and not simply a common suit for individual claims. Fortunately. all
questions as to the character of the claim and the capacity in which

the claimants come before this Commission have been set at rest by the
Court of Claims  the Supreme Court in the Old settler case. 27 C. Cls. 3.:

ll+8 U.S. #27. That case was filed in the Court of Claims under a jurisC

dictional Act reading: in so far as pertinent. as follows:

“That the claim of that part of the
Cherokee Indians known as the Old Settlers
or Western Cherokees is referred to court
of claims * '3 to determine what sun or sums
of money. if any. are justly due from the
United States to said Indians. arising from
or growin out of treaty stipulations and
acts of Congress relating thereto. * '3 “J

It will be soon that the “Cherokee Indians lmown as the

Old Settlers or Western Cherokees“ were authorized to sue, however. the

' 1 Ind. (31. Comm. 165 “ in

..8 H.

C

suit was brought by three persons “for themselves and as Commissioners of
- the'Western Cherokees” and they alleged that the claimants are the remaining
part of these Cherokee Indians who formed and composed the Western Cherokee
Nation. Both courts decided that the Western Cherokees, as such, had no
legal capacity to sue but that the members of the Cherokee Nation known as
the Western.Cherokees had a common claim which could be prosecuted by their
representatives, and judgment was accordingly rendered and the amount of
the award was ordercd.paid.out to "each individual of the claimants entitln
ed to participate in said per capita fund." 2? Ci Cls. 1, 61: approved by
the Supreme Court; lb8‘U.S. #27. 480~l.
The effect of the decisions by the Court of Claims and the Supreme
Court in the Old Settlers case, ? C. Cls. 1. l@8‘oS¢ @279 above referred
tea was to permit a suit in a representative capacity by an identifiable
group of Indians. part of a tribe, having a common claim, for the benefit
of the members of the group, or their descendants, even though (as the Supreme
Court said at page #79 of its opinion) “The ‘Old Settlers“g or Western
Cherokeesg are not a body politic, nor have they a corporate CXiSt0B£0o nor
any capacity to act collectively.” In that case it was necessary to apply
the equity rule permitting class suitso
It would seem that if the equity rule applies to suits to enorce
a claim such as that adjudicated in the Old Settlers case, suprag there can
be no questien.about the right of the named individual plaintiffs to prom
sesute their claim in view of Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commissien.dct

(25 UaS.CoAs 70139 which.ozpress1y provides for representative suits upon

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 165 , 173
.49..

behalf of an identifiable group of American Indians. unless linitcd.by the
provision respecting tribal organizations hereafter to be considered.

Counsel for defendant further contend. as they did in the Loyal Creek
case. Docket No. 1. that an identifiable group must be of a political
character. we decided in that case that an identifiable group need not be
political in.character and we believe our decision in that case applies to
the question.hcre advanced.

Our conclusion is. therefore. that the‘Western Cherokees is an.
identifiable group of American Indians under Section 2 of the Indian Claims
Commission Act.

The defendant also contends that the instant claim cannot be prosecuted
by the Western Cherokees because they are members of the Cherokee Nation or
tribe which has a tribal organization recognized by the Secretary of the.
Interior as having authority to represent all its members. which includes
the Western Cherokees. and therefore has. under the statute. the exclusive
privilege of representing the Western.Cherokees._ For the purpose of this
discussien*we will assume that the Cherokee Nation has a tribal organisation
which is recognized by the Secretary as having authority to represent that
tribe in its dealings with the United States in all tribal matters. The
defendant does not claim that the Western Cherokees are.organized. in.fact
it seems to be conceded by both parties that they are not.

g Haring decided that the Western Cherokees are an.“idontifiablc group

ef.American Indians" the question arises as to how the claim must be presented.

*1 ma; c1. Comm. 165 L 174
M 10 to '

that is. (1) in the name of the Western Cherokees. (2) bymcmbers or descendants of members of that group. or (3) ‘by the Cherokee Nation of _;Indians.

I we have already determined that the Western Cherokees have no
capacity to act collectively in that name. so further space will not be do_voted tothat q_'U.0St1OI1u t

Section 10 or the Act reads as follows:

9Any claim within the provisions of this
Act may be presented to the Commission by any
member of an Indian tribe, ‘band, or other
identifiable group of Indians as the represents»
, tive of all its members: but wherever any tribal
organization exists. recognized by the Secretary
of the Interior as having authority to represent
such tribes bani. or group. such organization
shall be accorded the exclusive privilege of

representing such Indianso unless fraud, ccllusions

or laehes on the port of such organization be

shown to the satisfaction of the Gommissiono“
The obvious purpose of this section was to provide a procedure for submitting the claims of the Indian.greups. namely. tribesg hand. or other
ide-tifiable groups, WhOo by Section 2 of the.Aet. are authorized to present claims against the United States and have them adjudicated by the
Conmissiono Two methods are provided» By the first. a member of the
claimant group ma3'present the claim as the representative of all the
members of the groupo It would seem that a member of a claimant group.nay
also present a claim when an organized group (which will be discussed later)
fails to do so because of fraud, collusion or laehes;

The second method provided by said Section 10 applies to cases where

a tribal organization.exists. and in such cases it is provided that if such.

1 Ind. C1. comm. 165 175
...11.--4‘

tribal organization is recognizcd'by the Secretary of the Interior as havu

ing authority to represent the claimant "such organization shall be accord»ed.the exclusive authority to represent’ the claimant. It is the applicaties of this part of the section that presents the difficult problem and

swhich the defendant insists requires the claim to be presented'by the

Cherokee Nation instead of representatives of the Western Cherokees.
It will be noticed that the statute refers to “tribal organization"

as being accorded the exclusive privilege of representing the claimant.

be it a tribe. band. or identifiable group. Identifiable groups are rarely. if over. organized like a tribe or band. which are generally of.a
political character. in fact no organization of an identifiable group has
beon.breught to our attention, except organizations formed.for the purpose
of presenting claims. but we are not aware of any case where such an
organization has been recognized by the Secretary of the Interior. and

it can hardly be said that an organization created for the purpose of
presenting a claim is a “tribal organization” as that term is generally
‘understood. So. it would appear that what Congress had in mind was to
give “tribal organizations" the exclusive right to present §;;§§l,§l§ig,
of the tribe or band it is organized to represent. Considered in this
sense there would be a sound and logical reason for according the tribal
organization the exclusive privilege of pressing its claim rather than
permitting a member of the claimant group to do so. for it would be the
orderly and representative way to handle claims of an organized tribe:
band or dcntifiable group. an . as we have stated above, it is to such

claims the provisions we are considering apply. But the fact that a

1 mi. :31. Comm. 165 I   176

tribal organization shall have the exclusive privilege (in the absence of
fraud. collusion and loehes) to present tribal claims does not lead to the
conclusion that the provision.was intended to give the tribal onganization
the exclusive right to present a claim of an unorganized identifiable group
composed of,a segment of the.members of an organized tribe. _Identifiable
groups (as we indicated in the Loyal Creek case, Docket Eco 1) are not
organized as are tribes or bands. but may have collective rights which are
enforceable, if they can be established. by a representative suit under the
express provisions of the first part of Section 10: we find nothing in the
subsequent provisions of the section that changes the right to submit
claims through the medium of members of the unorganized group. The statute
authorises submission of claims by such groups (See. 2) by a member thereof
(Sec. 10) and through attorneys retained to represent its interests (See. 15):
language much more definite than that used would be necessary to convince
us that the Congress intended that only a tribal organization may represent
an identifiable group within a tribe and thus control the handling of a
claim which neither it nor its full membership have an interest 130

Another objection to the claim being presented by representatives
of the Western Cherokees was made by the Government on the groundg as we
understand the argument, that the Western Cherokees lost their autonomy by
uniting with all the other elements of the Cherokee Eation in the treaty of
1845. andg as a'consequenee. lost their right to present their claim except

through or by the Cherokee Eation. Our determination thot the Western Cherokees

Q‘

1 :54. c1. Comm. 165 _ - _ 177

.13 ..

are an identifiable group and entitled to submit a claim through a

member or descendant of a member» ao’ing in a representative capacity.

8

would seem sufficient answer to the cbjeotione

For the reasons set foxih above, the defendant's motion will be

overruleé.

Chief Commissioner With and Commissioner Holt concur in the

above opinion.

September 13, 19h9

