‘ttte’

BZFO;c3 TEE I3-.“DL1..}3 CI...5.D*';S CIQIISSION

Tan UI1~I'E.‘.i‘tI-I UTE I:t=n3i=.>:s 03* ..:=..:—:,
Plaintiffs,
Docket N0. M5

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF'AMERICA,

\....d"'-.../\..n/\~..J‘-..-/‘\._./‘-../\-...J‘5-.../

Defendant.

Decided: February 21, 1957

FINDINGS Q nacr

 

The Commission.makes the following findings of fact:

1. d?laintiffs timely filed d/ this claim pursuant to the Indian Claims
Commission Act of.August 13, l9h6 (c. 959, 60 Stat. lOh9, 25 U.S.C., Sec.
70): and asserted the claim as one ari sing  1:ntia=>.r -i-.‘m=. Cans:-d'.i'i‘.11+.-inn of‘
the United States, or (‘o) from the ta‘;-cing bf)’ the United States of lands
owned or occupied by the plaintiffs'w'thout the payment o£'compensation
therefor, or (C) from unfair and dishonorable dealings on the part of.
defendant.

2. Plaintiffs are a band or group of'American Indians commonly known
and recognized by defendant as the Uintah Ute Indians who are resident on
the Uintah and Ouray Reservation in the tate of Utah. Since 1936, plaintiffs have been a constituent part of the "Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah

and Ouray Reservation," a tribe organized under the Indian.Reorganization

i.act of June l8, l93h (c. 576, L8 tat. 98h). (Pl. Exso l and 2).

 

__ _ d on January lh, l9h9; an amended
petition on October 12, 19h? nd *nendnents to the amended petition
to conform to the proofs war 3 ed February 2, l9S2, hy'leave of
the Ccmnissi n. The amendna.ts have been placed on the amended
'oetition hy'means of "pastars." Q

I
Ho
F-’
(D

1/ The original netition was

$1)

3. Prior.to the coming of the white man, there commenced an analgamation, merger, or coalescence of Ute groups (since collectively known
as Uintahs, plaintiffs), which groups occupied an area wholly within what
is the present tate of tah. That portion of plaintiffs who resided
generally in the area of the Uintah Valley (the area subsequently established as the reservation involved herein) were called "Uintahs," those
around Utah Lake "Timpanoags," or variations thereof, those around Sevier
Lake, Corn Creek and Sevier River "Pahvants," those east of the Pahvants,
in the area known today as San Pete County, Utah, as the "Sampitches."
Another group of Utes known as "Seuvarits” seemed to roam in the area
west of the wasatch.Mountains.'

The process of amalgamation, merger or nnalesoence of these
was accelerated by the coming of the white man, and was wholly completed
when, following the year 186b, plaintiffs were settled on what is now the
Uintah and Ouray Reservation.

To the east of plaintiffs‘ original habitat, in the area which is
now the_State of Colorado, were other Ute Indians. In aboriginal times
these Colorado Utes were divided into several groups or bands. Those
occupying the area.immediately east of plaintiffs were the'%hite River

tes (designated Zampa, Grand River and Uintah Bands in the treaties and
agreements between.the Colorado Utes and the United.States). (Pl. BX. 339,
p. 16). Those Utes occupying the area in Colorado to the south of the
‘White River Utes were known as the Tabeguache,.£uache,

weeminuche, and

Capote Bands.

5 L8

Pursuant to Article IV of the l865 treat” negotiated with the Confederated Bands of Utes of Colorado (Fdg. 8, aorta), the white River
Utes were located on a reservation on the E-fhite River in Colorado. The
Colorado Utes were distinct and separate from plaintiffs and did not permanently use or occupy any of the lands located in the area established

as the Uintah Valley Reservation, now known as the Uintah and Ouray Indian

Reservation.

h. By the Organic Act of September 9, 1850 (c. 51, 9 Stat. L53),
the Territory of Utah was created, and was described (Section 1) as
follows:

4- at -at all that part of the territory of United States
'5' %* 41- bounded on the west by the State of California, on
the 1'..orth by the Zferritory of Oregon, and on the east by
the suzmit of the Rocky’1*‘foumai_ns, and on the south by the

thirty-seventh parallel of north latitude, -1’: €:- -2.

Eleven years ‘later, by the Organic Act of February 28, 1861 (c. 59,
l2 Stat. 3.72), the Territory of Colorado was created, and was described
(Section  as follows:

6? ’«=- '11- commencing on the thirty—seventh paraHel of north
latitude, where the twenty-fifth rneridian of longitude west
from "a:'ashington crosses the same; thence north on said meridian to the forty-first parallel of north latitude; thence
along aaid parallel west to the thirty-second meridian of
longitude west of h'8shingi'.on; thence south on said meridian
to the northern line of I‘Ee-.»: Mexico; thence along the thirtyseventh parallel of north latitude to the place oi‘ beginning,
a- at at

As thus established, the Territory of Colorado included that part
of what had previously been a portion of the Territory of tah between

the 109th meridian of longitude (approzciwrtely the present boundary

5&9

between the States of Utah and Colorado) and the summit of the Rocky
Mountains. Colorado Territory did not include any of plaintiffs’
original lands.

5. The irst official Indian reservation.in the Territory of Utah
was established by Executive Order on October 3, l86l (I Kappler 900)

as a reservation for Indians, as follows:

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
Washington, October 3, 1861.

Sir: I have the honor herewith to submit for your consideration the recommendation of the Acting Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, that the Uintah Valley, in the Territory of Utah, be

set apart and reserved for the use and occupancy of Indian
tribes.

In the absence of an authorized survey (the valley and
surrounding countir being as yet unoccupied by.settlements
or our citizens), I respectfully'recommend that you order .
the entire valley of'the Uintah River within Utah Territory,
extending on both sides of said river to the crest of the
first range of contiguous mountains on each side, to be reserved
to the United States and set apart as an Indian reservation.

Very respectfully, your obedient servant,

CALEB B. SMITH, Secretary.

The President.

 

Executive Office,
October 3, l86l.

Let the reservation be established, as recommended.by the
Secretary of the Interior.

A . LINCOLN.
is thus originally established and as maintained until 1888, the

reservation. “braced an area of 2,h87,h7h.83 acres. (Pl. Exs. 320, 321)Until after l85h, and except as some of the plaintiffs may have
continued to occupy it as part of their original habitat, no Indians
were removed to the Uintah Valley pursuant to the 1861 Executive Order.
This situation existed until additional steps were taken by defendant,
subsequent to l86h, to remove plaintiffs to the reservation.

6. On.May'S, l86h (c. 7?, l3 Stat. 63): Congress confirmed the
Uintah Valley as a permanent reservation for those Indians of Utah Territory induced to inhabit the same, in the following language:

An Act to vacate and sell the present Indian Reservations in

Utah Territory, and to settle the Indians of said Territory in
the Uinta Valley.

Be it enacted by the Senate and House of Representatives

of the United States of‘£merica in Congress assembled, That

tne Secretar= of the lnteridr S; anT_he is"hEreb§:"§Ethorize

and required to caus the several Indian reservations heretofore made, or occup as such, in the territory of Utah,

excepting Uinta v*l--y, to be surveyed into tracts or lots, not
exceeding eighty acres each, under the direction of the commis- _
sioner of the general land-office, and.upon the completion of such
surveys shall cause said tracts or lots to be sold, upon sealed
bids, to be duly invited.by public advertisement, for a period not
less than three months, in a newspaper of general circulation published in the territory of Utah, and also a newspaper published in
‘Washington, to the highest and best bidder; said bids may be filed
‘with the governor of said territory at the seat of government thereof, and with the Secretary of the Interior in Washington; such bids
as may be received by said governor shall, without opening the same,
be forwarded to the Secretary of the Interior, when.the same, with
the bids filed with him, shall be opened in the presence of the
Secretary of tae nterior, the commissioner of public lands, and
the commissioner of Indian affairs, and any bidders who may choose
to be present at the opening thereof; and the Secretary of the
Interior shall apply the proceeds of such sales to the construction
of improvements upon the reservations which may be established
under the provisions of this act, or by other lawful authority,

or to the purchase of stock, agricultural implements, or such
other useful articles as to him may seem best adapted.to the

‘wants an‘ requirements of the Indians: Provided, That no tract

of land shall be sold under the provision§_3f"this section for

 

 

9

9
:3
T
:3

...J'..Jo(

less than its appraised value in cash, to be duly ascertained by commissioners appointed by the Secretary of the
Interior for that purpose.

Sec. 2. And be it further enacted, That the superintendent of lndian affairs for the territory of Utah be,
and he is hereby, authorized and required to collect and
settle all or so many of the Indians of said territory as
may be found practicable in the Uinta valley, in said territory, which is hereby set apart for the permanent settlement
and exclusive occupation of such of the different tribes of
Inciians of said territory as may be induced to inhabit the
same. i

 

Sec. 3. And be it further enacted, That, for the
purpose of ma ments in the Uinta
valley for the comfort of the Indians who may inhabit the
same, and to enable them to become self-sustaining by means
of agriculture, there is hereby appropriated, out of any
money in the treasury not otherwise appropriated, the sum
of thirty thousand dollars, which sum shall be expended by
the superintendent of Indian affairs for said territory,

shun: -1:-t

.......er th~;-,- instruction of the Secretary of the interior.

The area established as a reservation under Section 2 of the abovecited act was the area previously set apart by the Executive Order of
October 3, 1861. (P1. .':.‘xs. 298, 321, Royce H. 1, area 1:31). The plaintiffs were the only Indians of Utah “Territory induced to ‘inhabit the
reservation. The defendant made some efforts to encourage, or induce,
other Indians (Paiutes and Shoshones) resident within the Territory of
Utah to go to the reservation, butpfailed in its attempts.

7. Pursuant to authorization contained in the Act of February’ 23,

1555, C» 1:5, 13 Stat. 1132, a treaty was negotiated with the plaintiffs

which provided, inter alia, for establishment of the following reser 

.--L’

'Vc-.o'.l.On3

.- 5, '3
.__Jx‘~iE

\_;'t':’

Art. II. There is however reserved for the exclusive
use and occupation of the said tribes the following tract
of lands; viz.‘the entire valley of the Uintah River within
Utah Territory extending on both sides of said river to the
crest of the first range of contiguous mountains on each
side’ which said tract shall be, so far as is necessary,
surveyed and marked out, set aside and reserved for their
exclusive use and occupation nor shall any write person,
unless he be in the employ of the Indian authorities, be
permitted to reside upon the same, without permission of the
said tribe, and of the Superintendent of Indian Affairs or
United States Indian.Agent. It is however'understood that
should the President of the United States hereafter see fit
to place upon the reservation, any other friendly tribe or
bands of Indians of Utah Territory, to occupy the same in
common with those above mentioned, he shall be at liberty
to do so. (V Kappler 695).

Following the Act offmay 5, 186b, supra, and negotiation of the

Treaty of 1865, the plamtiffs were induced to remove to and inhabit

the Uintah Reservation. The foregoing treaty failed of ratific"+‘*“

8. By the Treaty of Harch 2, 1868 (15 Stat. 619, II Kappler 990),
negotiated in Washington, D. C., the United.States agreed to establish,
‘wholly within the Territory of Colorado, reservations for the use of
the “Confederated Bands of te Indians." By Article III of t at treaty,
the Indian signatories relinquished all claims and rights in and.to any
portion of the United.States or territories except such areas as were
embraced.within the limits of the reservation established by the treaty;
Under Article IV of the t eaty, it was provided that one reservation
would.be established.fbr the Grand River, Yampa, and Uintah Bands on the
n._ee River, and one for the other bands at Rio de los Pinos.

.at this sene.time, Harch 2, l865, plaintiffs were living on the

Uintsh Reservation in Utah. They had not,and did not therea_ter, assert

5

3

plaintiffs took part in the negotiations leading up to the execution of
the l868 Treaty. As originally concluded, it bore only the names of Utes
of the various Colorado bands. when the treaty was considered by the
Senate, an amendment, which did not relate to the land cession was
appended. This was returned to the Indians for their approval and the
amendment was assented to by a larger number of tes than had executed
the original treaty.

Among the h8 Utes assenting to the amendment, five are designated
"Uintah Ute Indians" -- Ah¥ump, An-tro, Fah, Quir-nauch, and Yah~mah-na.
None of those names appears on the treaty itself, and only two,.Antro
and Yahnahna, appear elsewhere in the evidence. Yahmahna was a'White
River Indian from Colorado and was not associated in any way with plain'\

tiffs. .Antro was a Uintah Ute from Utah, (Pl. BX. 350, Trans. pp. léh,

I-’

87),but he was never a principal chief of plaintiffs, did not sign the
Spanish Fork Treaty of l86S and was never officially identified at any
time above the station of "sub-chief."

t was clear to the government agents who negotiated the lE68 Treaty
that plaintiffs were a separcte and distinct group of Indians who were
not involved in that treaty and had no interest therein.

‘Neither the plaintiffs nor the government officials in tne Utah

Suoerintendency, who had jurisdiction over plaintiffs, were consulted on

['1

negoti~tions leading up to the l868 Treaty or the amendment thereto.

Inst-actions on negotiation of the l3é8 Treat were sent only to Governor

-u.

.A. C. aunt of Colorado Territory. (?l. mxs. léh, 350). .After the treaty

‘was negotiated.and the Senate had ratified it, as “mended, the "mencment,

\-,1; , ‘I I’: K,‘
'l.'§,f..g.";}

with ‘irections for presenting it to the Indians to obtain their agreement thereto, was sent only to the Governor of Colorado Territory.

(Pl. Exs. 170-1, 17h). Only Colorado officials signed the certification
of the treaty amendment. (Pl. Exs. 165, 180-3, P- 555)9. At the time of and following the Treaty of 1868 with the Confederated Bands of Utes, officials of defendant understood that the
Treaty of l868 affected only the Colorado Utes and that the cession of
lands in.Article III did not relate to plaintiffs or to the lands they
occupied. Both before and after the execution of the l868 Treaty, the
exedntive and legislative branches of defendant consistently and uniformly"regarded.plaintiffs as in rightful occupancy of the lands within
the Uintah Valley'Reservation in.Utah. The Uintah agency, in existence
during and prior to 1868, has been maintained ever since. bol_owing
ratification of the 1868 Treaty, Congress continued to make appropriations for the Uintah Utes in Utah and to enact special legislation
affecting the Uintah Reservation,'#hereas appropriations enacted.pursuant to the 1868 Treaty'were made and expended for the sole benefit of
the Colorado Utes. (Pl. Ex. 339).

lO. By an agreement approved by the Act of June 15, 1880 (c. 223,
2l Stat. 199) between the Confederated Bands of Ute Indians of Colorado
and the defendant, it was provided that the'Uhite River Indians of
Colorado_should be removed to and settled.upon the Uintah Valley Reservation in Utah. The pertinent provisions of the Act approving the agreement are:

The White River tes agree to remove to and settle upon
agricultural lands on the Uintah Reservation in Utah.

Allotments in severalty of said lands shall be made as
follows: . . . stating amounts of land to be given heads of
families, single adults, orphans and minors7.

Sec. 2. That the President of the United States be, and
he is hereby authorized and.enpowered to appoint, by and with
the advise and consent of the Senate, five commissioners, . . .
It shall be their duty to take a careful census of said Indians,
separating them under said census as follows:

First. Those known in the agreement above referred to as
Southern Utes.

Second. Those known as Uncompahgre tes.

Third. Those known as'white'River Utes.
Said census shall also show . .
size of Iamaly, etci7 and they shall al select lands and allot
them in severalty to said Indians, as h rein provided, and superintend the removal, location, and settlement of the Indians
thereon, and do and perform such other services as the Secretary

of the Interior may consider necessary for them to do in the
execution of the provisions of this act.

.[dc.ails as to_names and
I'\

.And.. . . they shall make a full report of their proceedings
to the Secretary of the Interior, which shall set forth, among
other things, the name of each person.to whom they may have
apportioned and allotted lands as herein provided for . . .

Sec. 3. That the Secretary of the Interior be, and he is
hereby, authorized to cause to be surveved, under the direction
of said commissioners, a sufficient quantity of land in the
vicinities named in said agreement, to secure the settlement
in severalty of said Indians as therein provided. And upon the
completion.of said survey and enumeration herein required, the
said commissioners shall cause allotments of lands to be made
to each and all of the said In7ians, in quantity and character
as set forth in the-agreement above mentioned, and whenever the
report and.proceedings of said.conmissioners, as required by
this act, are approved by the President of the United States,
he shall cause patents to issue to each and every allottee for
‘the lands so allotted, with the same conditions, restriction
and lin‘tations mentioned therein as are provided in said agreement; a '

V

d all the lands not so allotted, the title to which is,

{JP

2”!’

. . ‘Qby the said~agreerent oErtnd;Eonfederated:bands of the Ute
Indians, and this acceptance by the United tates, released and conveyed to the United States, shall be held and
deemed to be public lands of the United States and subject

to disposal under the laws providing for the disposal of the
public lands, at the same price and on the same terms as other
lands of like character, except as provided in this act:
Provided, That none of said lands, whether mineral or otherwise,
shall be liable to entry and.settlement under the provisions
of the homestead law; but shall be subject to cash entry only
in accordance with existing law; and when sold the proceeds of
said sale shall be first sacredly applied.to reimbursing the
United States for all sums paid out or set apart under this
act by the government for the benefit of said Indians, and
then to be applied in.payment for the lands at one dollar and
twenty-five cents per acre which may be ceded to them by the
United States outside of their reservation, in pursuance of
this agreement. dnd the remainder, if any, shall be deposited
in the‘Treasury as now provided by law for the benefit of the
said Indians, in the proportion hereinbefore stated,. . . .

ll. Pursuant to the Act of June l5, 1880, supra, in or about

 

August l88l, the White River Utes were removed.by defendant from the

White River Reservation in Colorado to the Uintah Valley Reservation in
Uta... The white Rivers have continued since that time to reside thereon
and have been acknowledged by defendant as having an undivided interest
with the plaintiffs in the use and occupancy of that reservation. Prior
to the Act of June lS,sl880, the white River Utes had no interest whatsoever in the Uintah Reservation, and did not willingly settle thereon.
(Pl. Exs. 271-2, 280).

The white River Indians were removed to the Uintan Reservation with.tiffs. (Pl. Ex. 280).

L1.

out the prior knowledge or consent of the pla
The plaintiffs were not a party to the l88O Agreement (Pl. 3x. 289) and
they did not consent to the settlement or allotment of the white Riv r

Indians on the Uintah Valley Reservation. (Pl. Exs. 28k; 292, p. 20l).

\)"1

12. Plaintiffs have not been compensated by defendant for the undivided interest in the Uintah Reservation taken by defendant for the
benefit of the'Hhite River Indians pursuant to the Agreement of 1880,

SUD Ta 0

-zuj--n

13. The removal of the white River Utes by defendant under the
Agreement of June 15, 1880, 21 Stat. 199, began in.August 1881, and continued thereafter for two or three years until the number of White Rivers
permanently'settled on the reservation approximately equaled the number
of Uintahs permanently residing thereon. So on the basis of the record
‘we find that the white Rivers occu_ied an undivided one-half of the area
of the reservation, or l,2h3,737 acres as of.August 15, 1882, to use a
ate th"t mry fairly be considered.midway between the time the white
Rivers tegan to occupy the reservation and.when their removal to it was

probab1y'completed.

Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O‘Marr

Associate Commissioner

wm. M. Holt

Associate Commissioner

5 S8

