BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS CCMHISSION

THE SNOHGMISH TRIBE or INDIANS, )
Petitioner, 3
vs. % Docket No. 125
THE UNITED STATES OF.aMERICA, 3
Defendant. 3
Decided: November 21; 1955
Appearances:

Frederick we Pest and
Malcolm S. McLeod,
Attorneys for Petitioner

Donald R, Marshall; with
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General, Perry W.
Morton, Attorneys for
Defendant

OPINIOE OF’THE COEHISSION

—-cu-urinal-2-m

Witt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case presents the claim of the Snohomish Tribe
of Indians. Petitioner is an identifiable group of American Indians
within the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. 10b?)
and as such is entitled.to maintain this cause of action (Finding 1).

Petitioner contends that the United States by the Point Elliott

Treaty of January 22, 1855 (12 State 927, II Kappa 669) secured a cession

of the aboriginal Indian lands belonging to said petitioner for an unconscionable considerationi The land oeded.to the government in the

Point Elliott treaty by various tribes and bands of Indians consisted

of a large area in that is now the northeastern part of the State of

h Séh

"Washington and petitionerfs claimi is based on but a specified portion
of the lands so ceded to the United States.

The only issues to be determined at this time are (1) whether
petitioner has the capacity under the provisions of the Indian Claims
Commission.Act to maintain this action, and(2) whether petitioner held
aboriginal Indian title to the lands described in the amended petition
(Trs 2nA, 2-B). Petitioner was permitted to amend its petition changing the description of the lands claimed to have been exclusively'used
and occupied by petitioner by Order of the Commission dated October 2h,
I955. The amended description enlarged the area claimed in the eastai

Since the first white contact with the native inhabitants of the
Puget Sound area historical sources have referred to the Snohomish
Indians as being located on and near the mouth of the Snohomish river
and on the southern end of Whidby Island (Findings 3, u, 5). Ethnoe
logical sources also locate the Snohomish Indians in the same areas

(Findings 9 to 1h).

‘with the settlement of the country west of the Cascade Mountains
gaining impetus in the early l8SO’s it became necessary for the United
States to extinguish the Indian title to the lands used and occupied
or claimed.by the Indians in that region. Governor Isaac Stevens of
‘Hashington.Territory,'who'was also Superintendent of Indian Affairs for
the territory, was instructed to unite the numerous bands and fragments
of tribes into tribes and to provide for the concentration of one or
more of such tribes upon reservations. In carrying out his orders to

negotiate with the Indians for the extinguishment of their Indian title

and claim to lands, Governor Stevens entered into a treaty with certain

tribes and bands of Indians on January 22, l8§5s at Point Elliott,

‘Washington Territory. Among the parties named in the treaty were the

Snoqualmoo (Snoquamie), Skai-wha--mish (S1-cykomish), N‘Q,uentl-ma-mish
(Pilchuck River Indians), Sk~tah—le~jum (Sultan Creek Indians), Stoluokwha-mish (Stillaguamish), and the Snohomisho Among the signatures on

the treaty appear chiefs or sub-chiefs signing on behalf of the Snohomish,

Skykomish, Snoqualmie and the Skwtahmlemjum. At some time following

the ratification of the treaty in 1859, the Tulalip reservation (sometimes called the Snohomish reservation) was established as required by

«Article 3 of the treaty. It is upon this reservation that many of the

Snohomish Indians settled following its creation and it is where many of
their descendants still live today (Findings Sw9).

To determine the extent of the lands ahoriginally used and occupied
by petitioner it is first necessary to determine what Indians comprised

the Snohomish "tribe" as of the date of the treaty. Defendant contends

that village autonomy existed aboriginally in the area; that the village
was the basic landmusing entity; and that the "Snohomish Tribe” named in
the treaty'"was_gn§ landrowning, political} social and economic ‘entity‘
cnlyh-not seven such entitiesmmand this was the village at the mouth of
the Snohomish River known as ‘Sadahobo‘ or ‘Snohomisho‘ The other six
entities are not parties to this case." (Defe Brag page 2).

The seven entities mentioned were developed in the testimony of
petitioner's expert witness, Colin Ellidge Tweddell (Tro 30, 83-lOh).

From his study of the Snohomish, Tweddell was of the opinion that seven

groups should be united into one group and called the Snohomish Indian

h S55

Tribe. These groups were: (1) The Sdohobc, the inhabitants of whidhy
island, Camano Island and the mainland on the coast from a little north
of'warm Beach to a little south of Edmonds and in this group the villages
each had.their own separate names and only the village at Snohomish city
was called "Sdohobc"; (2) the Sdodohobc whose village he locates at
Monroe; (3) the Tkwetlibubc oI'Pilchuck river inhabitants who had
villages at Machias and near to Snohomish city; (h) the Sqexwubc, living
upriver on.the Skykomish Riven from.Sultan to above Index, Washington
(these are the Skykomish Indians); (5) the Stktalidubc; although in»
formation as to their location is "somewhat confusing” and they have‘

been placed.by other ethnologists on Sultan River according to Tweddell,

he believes they should.be located.just above Monroe; (6) the Kwatsakwbixg
living north of warm Beach; (7) Besxuxuxultc, living between Index and
the Cascades. Twedell does not include the Skykomish lands within the
boundaries for the Snohomish on his map (Pet. Exa 8) because the Sky»
konish have a separate action with the Snoqualmie pending before the
Gommissiono

it is difficult to ascertain from the historical and ethnological

material of record.whether the Skykomish should.be considered a part of
the Snohomish. As Dr. Leslie Spier points out (Finding 12), George Gibbs
seemed to include the Snoqnalmie and Skykomish and some less nelluknonn
groups with the Snohomisho Spier was of the opinion that there was good
reason for separating the three. Swanton on the other hand inclndes the
Skykomish one the Staktaledjabsh as subdivisions of the Snoqualnieo A

careful study of the historical and ethnological material of record

  the lower end of Whidbey Island (Def. Exa 19 page II-h).

precludes extending the application of the term "Snohomish Tribe" to

include all the groups listed above by'Tweddells The Point Elliott
treaty enumerates specific entities as parties to the treaty and.among
them are the Skainwha-mish (Skykomish), the N'Quentlnma+mish (Pilchuck
River Indians), the Sk-tahulenjum (Stktalidubc-Sultan River Indians (2))
énd.the Snoqualnie (see Pet. Ex. 10, pp. 29«30).

Pertinent to a determination of the issue as to use and occupancy
of the area claimed is the question of whether petitioner; the Snohomish
Tribe of Indians, is the successor in interest to the claims of any of
the above enumerated entities as well as those other groups not named
in the treaty of 1855 but considered by Tweddell to be part of his

Snohomish Tribe. According to George Gibbs (1856) the Snohomish tribe

itself occupied only the country at the mouth of the Snohomish river and

Haeberlin

and Gunther in their study of the Snohonish list four principal villages
for these Indians - one four miles south of Tulalipg one at Priest Point
and two on the southern part of'Whidbey islands This group of villages
undoubtedly is the entity that was named as a party to the 1855 treaty;
There is substantial evidence that this group went upon the Tulalip
reservation following the treaty and have been reported resident thereon
to the present time. The N'Quentlsmasmish named in the treaty are the
Kwehtl-masmish or Pilchuck river Indians who also eventually went to the
Tulalip reservation.where they have since been amalgamated.with the

Snohomish. Although Haeberlin and Gunther list only four principal

Villages for the Snohomish at or near the mouth of the Snohomish river

h 56E

g their identification and location of their villages or landso

and on Whidbey Island, other ethnologists include as Snohomish those
lndians who lived upon the river from Snohomish City to Monroeo

Marian Smith lists this group as Tgwetlbabc with village sites at
'Snohomish at the mouth of Pilchuck creek and another below Monroe

(see also Suanton, Finding 13). This is Tweddell‘s Sdodohobc groups

The Commissioner of lndian.Affairs in 1877 reported the “Sdo-do-hoabish"
asra subordinate tribe to the énohomish and assigned to the Tulalip
reservation; The record with respect to the Skutahulewjum who were
named a party to the treaty is far from satisfactory with respect to
Tweddell

calls this group the Stkalidubc and locates them above Monroe although
admitting that his location for them is tentative. (Pet. E39 10,
ppo l8O and 2lS; Tr. 199). The record does not justify finding the

petitioner to be the successor in interest to the Sk~tah=le«jum.nor is

the record clear as to the location of the Sk-tah-le-jum villages or
landse

'lt is unnecessary to dwell at length again on the existence of
"village autonomy and the economy of thelndians of these villages on
and near Puget Sound. (Findings lh and 15; Pet. Reqo Fdg. 9; see also

The Nooksack Tribe V3 The United States, 3 Ind. c1. comm. n79, h83;

 

The'Muckleshoot Tribe v. The United.States, 3 Ind. Cl. comm, 658, 6623


 

Although the extended village groups found to have been living

‘within the boundaries of the land.held in Finding 17 to have been
exclusively used and occupied by petitioner's predecessors in interest
were autonomous, their village areas were more or less contiguousg and

they shared a common culture and dialect of the Salish language different

h 565

‘ "l. . .'.
‘ 1 tar-.'~ "I. .-'.-‘-‘- " ..
' _a' .' _ -‘z .
_  

from that of adjacent village groups and considered themselves a distinct
group and were so considered by defendant and the neighboring groups
and.have been so designated by ethnologists and historians who have
studied the Snohomish. In those areas distant from the villages where
there was a sharing of the resources with other Indians from without

the area claimed such as at Holmes Harbor (Tr. 79; Fdg. 9), on Camano

(Island north of Camano City (Fdg. 9) and south of‘Hukilteo (Tr. 198;

Fdg. 12) the record does not justify finding the exclusive use and
occupancy necessary to include such claimed areas within the aboriginal
possession of petitioner's ancestors.

Defendant alleges (Answer, par. 2) that petitioner's claim is
barred by the decision of the Court of Claims in Duwamisha et al., V.
United States, 79 0. Cls. 530 (cert. den. 29; U. s. 755). This Com»
mission in The Nooksack Tribe V. The United.States, l Ind. Cl. Comm.

333, held that the decision in the Euwamish case, supra, did not bar

the Nooksack who were petitioners therein from presenting a claim based
on original Indian title before this Commission. In its decision in the
Nooksack case the Commission was of the opinion that the Court of Claims
dismissed.the Nooksack claim on the ground that it had no jurisdiction

under the Jurisdictional Act to entertain a claim for the value of land

based on original Indian title. The same reasons for denying defendant‘s

plea of res judicata is applicable in the instant case. The claims of
the treaty tribes under the Jurisdictional Act (b3 Stat. 886) were

limited to those claims "growing out of said treaties."

r %In conclusion the Commission is of the opinion that as of the date
of the Point Elliott treaty, January 22, 1855, the ancestors of'petie ,
tioner held original Indian title to the land described in Finding 1?.
Such questions as the consideration paid to petitioners the acreage and
value of said lands, and the rights of said ancestors retained or
acquired in such or other lands must await a further hearing and
additional evidence.

Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner
‘We concur in the foregoing:
Louis J. O*Marr

Kssociate Commissioner

wm. M. Holt
Kssociate Commissioner

