BEFGRE -£ErI§DIA¥ C “THS COMKZSSION

‘I’?-EE SUQUAIQISEI TRIP:-E OF ITIDIAEES,
Petitioner,

vs. Docket No. 132

1C1

 ULXTITED srcres or ezsrarca,

\..../'*-»..J\....-N-....J\....a'-..../\...J\.,./'-../'

Defendant.

Decided: March 25, l9§7

Appearances:

‘P
I

Frederick "=. Post and
Malcolm S. McLeod, .
Attorneys for Petitioner.

Donald 3. Eéarshall, with

Cu slultca. it I-5-ha cod. 0 03-qJ|—J.J-.£J I-JG-'-.'.J. U
Attorney C-ener al Perry in? . Morto n,
attorneys for Defendant . '

OPIETION C-F ‘l’LE COM§iISSION

0’Marr_, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case presents the claim of th Suquaznish

Tribe of Indians. It is alleged that tne Suquamish Tribe lived

separate and apart from all other "‘ri‘oes in the Puget Sound area,
occ.np3'ing their lands exclusively to all other tribes. (Pet. Par. V).

It is further alleged by petitioner that on January 22 , _l8S_',-5, the
Suquamish and other tribes executed the Treat of Point Elliott (12 Stat.
92?, II K‘-pp. 669) 1-sit‘: defendant ‘qr the terms of which a large amount

9

9 I’, _: ‘ g 1 -I ‘I 0 - 9 o cs
04. land in the Puget Sou::~ area was ceded E‘-.I'1C. reli nc;_n:».sr1eo. to toe

9

T -3- ‘ Q‘ ' ¢ ‘-"‘ """'F % vs V OJ 0
DI‘-lvecl -etc.-.-oes (ret. rar. vi). C’: the large area ceoed petitioner

contends thot a specific part thereof was exclusively used and occu_ ied
‘U57 the Suquamish Tribe. The lands which the petitioner claims original
Indian title to are described in Finding 3 (the petition was amended
twice to include lands not described in the original petition). The
area claimed is located in what is now the northwestern part of the
State of Washington in the Puget Sound area and lies between Hood

Canal and Admiralty Inlet.

Petitioner contends that the consideration received under the
terms of the Point Elliott treaty of January 22, l8S§, supra,  the
cession of these lands was unconscionable and that the United States-by
obtaining the cession in such‘ a manner "acted unfair and dishonor-ably,
and against the standards of equity a..d conscience" (Pet. Par. Kill).
The parties stipulated that the present proceedings would be limited

to a determination of the issues of (a) whether petitioner has the

,-capacity to maintain this action and (b) whether or not petitioner

held original Indian title to the lands described in the petition at
the date of taldng (Tr. 2-A, 2-B, Hearir , Seattle, Washington, June 10,
1952) .

Defendant contends among other things that aboriginally there were
several autonomous political, social, economic, land-using units in the
area claimed and that the Suo_ua.;.ish Tribe was the village-tribe near the
present town of Suquanish, Washington, and that any recovery allowed in

nis case must only be in favor of the descendants of that viuage-tribe

and that there is no substantial evience of the area exclusively occu*:1
5:0
:1.

6?

any of the villa;-'e—tribes ~r.-:it..in the claimed area nor is there

3
til I I"
r_'__ I _,.
‘* mp)"

 

evidence that the “sucguamish v.i.llag.:e-tribe is a successor in interest
to any or all of the village-tribes thot aboriginally existed in the
claimed areas" (Def. Br. pp. l-3). Defendant further urges that petiti ner‘s evidence does not disclose the present identity, residence,
or ancestry of the individuals, or groups of individuals who compose

the Suquamish Tribe; that the claim is barred by the decision in

Duwamish Tribe v. United States, 79 C. C15. 530; and that the Commission

 

erred in permitting the petitioner to amend its description of the area
claizned so as to include additional lands a_ter the date for filing
claims, August 13, 1951, had passed. Defendant contends that the amended

pleadings thus present new claims which should be barred as not being

timely presented.
This Concussion in deciding The Snohonish Tribe 1:. The United States,

11 End. Cl. Comm. 5119, The hue}-rleshoot '1'ri‘oe v. The United States, 2 Ind.

Cl. Comm. 34211, and The Elooksack Tribe v. The United States, 1 Ind. Cl.

 

Comm. 333 , held that the Duwamish case, supra, was not res adjudicate. oi‘

 

the claims of those tribes involving orig‘-,'ir.al Indian title since under

the jurisdictional act involved therein the Court of Claims did not have
jurisdiction to determin such claims. For the reasons set forth in the
above previously decided cases the Commission concludes that the present

claim of the Suquamish Tribe is not barred by the decision in the Euwamish

case, supra.

 

As previously stated defendant contends that the Commission incorrectly

sustained petitioner's motion to amend to include lands in the area claimed

a 0 -Q
I

-n.- .3. o ‘N 0 I c O
that were not described in the crigira- petition.

as

""5 In
L=ef.'endant ‘r ges tn “t

the claim of original Indian title to these additional lands presents
new claims which are barred by the Indian Claims Commission Act. In

permitting the amendments to the petition to include these additional
lands the Commission was of the opinion t.~t the amended petition did

not include new claims. Rule l3(c) of the General Rules of Procedure

of this Commission provides:

Whenever the claim or defense asserted in the amended
pleading arose out of the conduct, transaction, or occurrence
set forth or attempted to be set forth in the original pleading,
the amendment relates back to the date of the original pleading.

This Rule is identical to 'au:Le 15(c) of the Federal Rules of Civu
Procedure. ‘With respect to this Rule, Moore‘s Federal Practice, Volume
3, pages 850-856, states in part:

Rule lS(c) is based on the idea that a party who is notified of litigation concerning a given transaction.or occurrence is entitled to no more protection from statutes of
limitation than one who is informed of the precise legal
description of the rig-ts sought to be enforced. If the
original pleading gives fair notice of the general fact
situation out of which the claim or defense arises, an
amendment which merely'makes more specific that has already
been alleged generally, or which changes the legal theory
of the action, will relate back even.though the statute of
limitations has run in.the interim. ‘Ehile it is still the
rule that an amendment which states an entirely nen'claim
for relief will not relate back, the Federal Rules have
broadened the meaning of the concept "cause of action,"
shifting the emphasis from a theory of law as to the cause
of action, to the specified conduct of the defendant upon

"5

which the plaintiff relies to eniorce his claim. % % %

The amendments to the petition in this case do not change the gist of

uthe action, or the subject of the controversy. ?etitioner claims the

United States took a cession of petitioner‘s lands which it .eld by

Original Indian title for which defendant allegedly paid an unconscionable

[..J

ol

consideration and in so doing acted unfair and dishonorahly. The amendments do not change the claim or assert new claims.

Since the first white contact Suouamish Indians have been located
generally in the area of land on the great peninsula between Hood Canal
and Admiralty Inlet in the northwestern part of what is now the State
of Washington. (Findings 1 through 10). Aboriginally there were three
or more autonomous villages nithin the area.claimed by petitioner. As
this Commission has previously found in.M ckleshoot Tribe v. United States,

supra, Eooksack Tribe v. United States, supra, and Snohomish Tribe v.

 

United States, supra, village autonomy prevailed aboriginally in the

 

Puget Sound area. Although the Suquamish villagers did have a feeling
that the lands around their villages belonged to them they did share

gathering, fishing and hunting lands contiguous to their village areas
within.part of the claimed area'wich other villages of the same group,

As with many of the Indians in the Puget Sound area.the Suquamish were

water oriented deriving most of their food from such source (Fdg. 2?).

Following the organization of the Territory of Washington out of
the north half of Oregon Territory in 1853, Governor Isaac Stevens of
‘Washington Territory, who also acted as Su_erintendent of Indian Affairs
for said territory, urged the necessity of makiig treaties with the

Indians within the territony of Washington. Governor Stevens was directed

to negotiate such.treatiee and instructed to endeavor to unite the

numerous bands and fragments of tribes into tribes. agents were appointed’

to prepare the Indians for negotiations and chiefs were commissioned for

various groups or hands of Indians in the territozv.

One Of the treaties negotiated by Governor Stevens pursuant to his
instructions from the Commissioner of Indian A"fa:Irs and under the
authorization of the Act of July 1, 1851:, .10 Stat. l5, 330, was the
Treaty of January 22, l8-5'5 (12 Stat. 927), commonly known as the Point
mliott treaty. The treaty wovided for a cession of land to the United
States for a stated consideration by tr-:enty—two named tribes "and other
allied and subordinate tribes and bands of Indians -X‘ -11' "=12." The Suquamish
Tribe of Indians was named in the treaty preamble as a party and seven
signatures are those of the Suquamish chief and sub-chiefs. The terri'b01'Y ceded by said treaty is located in northwestern Washington but
petitioner clams original Indiantitle to but a part thereof which is
described in Finding 3.

The evidence indicates that as of.‘ the date of said Point Elliott
treaty in 1855 there were two or three permanent villages within the
area claimed by petitioner.‘ There appears to have been a village near
Chico on Dyeslnlet, one at the present site of Suquamish and one at

the head of Liberty Bay near Poulsbcr though the Indians were known

hr the name of their village, all of these Indians in this area were
called Suquamish by the whites and after the treaty were so reported
the Government in estimating their

by the agents and off cials o

number and reporting their loc ation. By the terms of the treaty a reservation was established at Port I-adison '5-zdthin the area claimed and

follot.-.-ins the treaty the Suomrnish Indians, r1um‘oerin.=.: about LSO, were
.L 9 0 -I. up n 0: 4'5 3 0 "W
repor bed on o- in the inn-:cia.te vicinity oi the reservation (rda. 3.6).

m‘ g Q . u 0 O 0 Qt
inere 7.-.-ere ties of kinship bet:-reen these vi..." lages whose '.L1'1..""='-£‘..—}..'*.'.€‘;IT1'.S all

-t'.. r.. I *s*.::~:e:*"'

came to be known_as Suquamish, they spoke a common dialect and had a
common culture, and they shared gathering, fishing and hunting areas
which were contimous to their immediate village areas. It can readily
be seen from the evidence that these villages amalgamated at or about
the time of the treaty and have since been known as the Suquamish Tribe
in the reports of Government agents and officials charged with administration since the date of the treaty. It is also readily apparent that
their descendants live today in that part of northwestern Washington
and that petitioner is the successor in interest to the claims of said
village-tribes.

‘Based upon the findings of fact herein made, and all of the evidence and testimony of record, the Commission concludes that as of the
date of the Treaty of January 22, 1855, the ancestors of petitioner
held original Indian title to the lands described in Finding 29, and
that the United States acquired said Indian title to said lands on
Harch 8, 1859, the effective date of the treaty. Such questions as the
consideration paid for and.the acreage and value of said lands, and the
rights ret"ined in said lands by petitioner's ancestors must await a
iurther hearira and additional evidence;

Louis J. O'I*'!arr
Associate Commissioner

