BEFORE TE INDIAN CLAIIJIS COIrI}.{ISSIOI¥

rhifhtcdxnnshoor mm or Ihmmzs
on relation of Napoleon Ross,
Chairman of the General Council,
Cla.ima.nt,
v. Docket No. 98

E UNITED SEATES CF AMEELICA,"

Defendant.
Decided: August 25, 1955

Appearances :

Frederick 1?. Post, with whom was
Malcolm S. Hcleod,
-Attorneys for Claimant.

'5.

Donald R. Marshall, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION QE  COM}-:{ISSION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition herein was filed by the Chairman of the General Council
of the Muckleshoot Tribe of Indians and alleges that the defendant deprived the Mucldeshoot Tribe of its lands, with the exception of 3,3-.191
acres, without compensation. The defendant's answer set forth, among
others, the following defenses: (1) "rhnt the claim of the claimant
herein is ‘oarre-d by the decision of the Court of Claims in the case

entitled Duwamish, et 211., ‘V’, The United States, No. E?-275, reported

in ‘[9 C. C13. 530 (cert. den. 295 U. S. 755)‘! and (2) Ehat the claimant

I

3 670

herein is not a “tribe, band, or other identifiable group of American
Indians“ within the meaning of the Indian Claims Commission Act of
August 13,1916, 60 Stat. 1011-9, 25 U. s. Sec. 7o(a).

Defendant then filed a motion for a preliminary hearing on the
above defenses. As a result of that hearing it was determined by this
Commission that the defenses should be denied and it was so stated in

the opinion and order of the Commission filed on may lh, 1953. The

order states in part as follows:

THEREFORE, for the reasons set forth in the opinion of the
Commission, this day rendered, IT IS HEREBY ORDERED AND
ADJUDGED that the judgment of the Court of Claims in said

Cause No. F-275, reported in 79 C. Cls. 530, does not
. constitute a bar to the prosecution of the above—entitled
cause before this Commission, and that the special defense

based upon said judgment is hereby denied; that the claimant,
The Muckleshoot Tribe of Indians, is a.tribe of.American

Indians entitled to present its claim to the Indian Claims
scommission under the provisions of the.Act creating such
Commission, and said defense of the defendant relating to

the capacity of the claimant to assert its claim, is hereby
denied. Pursuant to a motion filed by claimant and consented to by defendant,
the Commission entered an order on January'3l, 1952, limiting the hearing
on the merits to the determination of the questions of (1) whether
claimant, under the law and facts to be adduced, had aboriginal or Indian
title to the lands described in the petition at the time of the alleged
appropriation thereof by defendant, and, if so, (2) whether defendant
unlawfully deprived claimant thereof, postponing until after such determination, should it be favorable to claimant, the proof as to the value
of the land or as to any other questions of fact raised by the pleadings

and which had not been previously determined by the Commission. Theree

--.—- -.

"3 67

after evidence was concluded by both the claimant and defendant, and said

issues were submitted to the Commission for determination.

ma-"3

dun-.n..-.

Claimants herein, the Muckleshoot be of Indians, claim the following area of land by right of aboriginal possession:

Commencing at the southeest corner of Township 21, Range

5 EWM; thence north through the western edge of the town
of.Auburn to the town of Pialachie; thence to the north—west tip of Lake Cow; thence to the north tip of Lake
Sawyer; thence to the town of Kangley; thence to the peak
of Mt. Lindsay; thence to the peak of Goat Mountain; thence
to Stampede; thence along the crest of Cascade Mountains

to Naches Pass, to Chinook Pass to the peak of Mt. Rainier;
thence north to the headwaters of the West Fork of White
River; thence along the divide between tributaries to the
White River and tributaries to the Puyallup River to a
point one mile south of the town of Buckley; thence to the
place of beginning, consisting of H9l,520 acres more or less.

These lands are a.part of those ceded by various tribes or groups of Indians
in the_lrea§y'of Point Elliott of January 22, 1855 (12 Stat. 927) and

lie west of the Cascade mountains in the present state of Washington.
Claimant alleges their value to be $3,500,000.00 and that they were taken by
the defendant in.l855. It is further alleged that the ancestors of the
claimants did not participate in the Treaty of Point Elliott since they
did not sign it, altho'vh they, or a.part of them,were included in the
preamble thereof. ‘With the issues for trial being limited to Cl) Ins
dian title and (2) mllawful appropriation by defendant, the claimant
was placed under the burden of showing first that the'Muckleshoot tribe,
or an identifiable entity or entities presently represented by the
Muckleshoot Tribe, had used and occupied the area claimed to the exclusion of other Indians.

as indicated previously, this Commission

had already determined in its former findings and opinion of hay lh,

‘N

-C

.1

» because of the fact that the area was settled so late.

1953, that the claimants herein are presently an identifiable group.
Essentially; the same proof relied upon in that opinion along with more
detailed.proof adduced in the later hearing serves to further convince
this Commission that the ancestors of claimants were identifiable groups
using and occupying in the manner peculiar to the Indians of the Puget

Sound reasonably definable areas of land over which.they exercised such

control as to indicate an exclusive occupancy.

When the Indians of this area were_first contacted by white men,
it was found that certain groups of Indians were living in the area of

the Green and White Rivers. These same groups were mentioned consistently

as being in.that area. .Admittedly, these reports are comparatively late

There is no indication, honever, that these groups were at any other location at a

previous time. In the absence of any'proof to the contrary, we may

assume that these same groups had occupied that area.fron tine innenorial.
Governor Stevens, in pursuance of his instructions to report on the
location and boundaries of the various_groups of Indians, locates the
Smal-kaemish at the head of White River, the Skopwah-mish on the upper
White River, and the Stakahnish on the nain.White River. Dr. George

Gibbs mentions these same groups in his estimate of their population in

185k and locates then in the same relative area. These three groups

are listed in the preamble of the Point Elliott Treaty, although none

of them signed the treaty. They are again located by Governor Stevens‘

map of 1857 as being around the area of the Muckleshoot Reservation

which had.been established by that time. These Indians were also known

as Green River Indians and White River Indians. Both of these designations
were geographical terms and the ones called Green River Indians were also
lmovzn as Skopamish, Sko-pabsh, or kopeamish, and the Nisl-tap, Neccope,
Eescope, or Nooscope, while the White River Indians were also called
Smulkamish, S’Balahco, Snalkakah-nish, Snulcoe, or Sohal—Ruck, Klikitats,
Niskaps, and Skopamish. It appears that it is quite likely that it was
possible to find members of the same group on both the White and Green
Rivers. Imr. Arthur C. Ballard, claimant's witness; testified that after
considering all the above-named groups and possibly other spellings of

the same names, the names Sknpamish and Smulkamish represented all of

the groups and that these groups are identifiable as present day'Munk1e. shoot Indians.

During the period'when the Indians of this area were‘heing treated_
with by Gpvernor Stevens it was the policy of the Government to create
and consolidate Indian groups wherever possible. Such is indicated in
the correspondence of Governor Stevens. It was a.necessary corollary
of the movement of Indians to the reservations. The process was also
hastened in this case by the hostilities between the whites and Indians.
It appears from contemporary reports that possibly as early as 1855
certain hostile Indians sere gathered up by'the military and.held at
what was known then as Fort Muckleshoot and was at the For Island cons
ference of.August, 1856, decided upon as another reservation site. On
January 20, lS57, the President approved the recommendation, and the
former military post became Muckleshoot Reservation.

When.the reservation was established, certain of the Indians in the

surrounding area were planed on it. The reports or the Indian agents

r1\'

3 674

infthe area, despite what appears to be confusion on their part with
regard to-_ the names of the groups, indicate that the White and ‘Green
River Indians were consolidated on the Ivfucldeshoot Reservation. It
wasn't until approximately 1868 that these Indians were referred to as
Mudcleshoots, and not until 1870 that the first designationas I.h:Lckleshoot iribe was used.

It has been conceded by the defendant that there existed aboriginally three villages in the Muckleshoot area. One was located on the
Green River above the present town of Auburn, one near the junction of
the Green and '.'.'hite,River_s around Soos Creek, and one on the White River
near the southeast corner of what was to be Muckleshoot Reservation.
However, the defendant contends that these villages followed the accepted political pattern of the Puget Sound area in that they were
politically autonomous and each constituted a single land-using unit.
It is evident that this is basically correct and it has been so found.
However, this Qommission cannot agree with defenda.nt’s further contention
that as a result of the autonomous nature of the villages in this case
that it must necessarily follow that each of the villages would be
obliged to m:eintain its own action to recoverfor the value of its
particular area. The evidence indicates that the Indians of this area
consisted of separate, distinct and autonomous villages, each such
village or settlement having the exclusive use (in the sense that
members of other villages could use same only with the permission of

the permanent occupants thereof) of their villge settlement area, and

that outlying territories such as berry picking and root gathering spots

3 675

or fishing waters were used in common by the occupants of all the villages. The practice of exogamy, which was so prevalent among these
people, created ties of kinship and friendship among them unich led to
a natural tendency to share with each other. .As a.result of this way
of life there developed close cultural ties among these people. .All

these ties existed prior to 1857 when these Indians were consolidated

-by the defendant at Muckleshoot reservation.‘ From 1857 or possibly

a little earlier these Indians were treated as an entity by the defendant and as a result gradually became completely'merged until by

1868 or 1870 they were designated as a unit by the Indian agents and

"others who dealt with them.p It appears to this Commission that to

deny the Muckleshoot Tribe the right to recover for lands~occupied by

the villages whose people were so closely associated economically and
culturally on the grounds of lack of political cohesion would be to
misconstrue the beneficent purpose of Congress in enacting the legislation under which this claim is maintained. This seems particularly
true when considered in the light of the type of cultural and economic
structure existing among the Indians of the Puget Sound area. The heretofore mentioned practice of ezogamy'and the subsequent ties of kinship
and cultural life and more or less economic cohesion Warrants the assertion
by the descendants of this day and time, as an entity, of the claim for
the losses sustained by the original groups of which they are descendants.
This being true, it becomes a question as to what area they jointly and

severally occupied.

.as previously indicated these three villages and many single

dwellings housing more than one family were located between the Green
and White__Rivers at and immediately above their confluence. It has
been testified that they also used and occupied an area running east
to the top of the Cascade Liountains and roughly bounded on the north
by the divide between the Green River and Cedar River and on the south
by the White River and on the west by the White Riverjahere it turns
north after being joined by the Green. A preponderance of the evidence,
however, points to a use area considerably smaller than the area de--sribed immediately above. Bearing in mind the estimated number of
Indians as being from 88 to 130 and the admittedly abundant subsistence
afforded by nature inthis time and area, it does not seem that these
Indians were obliged to roam far beyond their village area for their
living.,_ As was common‘ in the-country around Puget Sound the economy of
the Indians was primarily marine .-hether based on the ocean, bays or
rivers. Such was the case with these. Indians; They ‘depended upon
salmon runs for a major portion of their subsistence and supplemented
that with roots, berries, and potato patches." Such hunting as was done
in the mountains was minor, and more particularly‘, ‘in conformance with
the accepted practice of the area,’ was done over the same areas as many
other groups. These Indians did occupy definite sections of the country,
and such occupancy was controlled by their need for subsistence area.
As stated above they had a small population and abundant fish, roots,
berries and game, when they hunted it. Such huntig as they did was in

the fall of the year when the larger game animals had come down from

the mountains to the prairies for the winter.

367

C

As stated in the Nooksack case, Docket N0. M5 of this Commission,
as was held by this Commission in the Quapaw case, Docket No. 1U,
"It is perhaps not required that the boundary lines be as accurately
defined as a surveyor would like them but some general boundary lines
of the occupied territory must be shown, and it must be shown that the
occupant had the possession to the exclusion of other tribes; constructive possession is not sufficient{"'
The facts in this case fall within that situation. The claimants
have not been able to satisfactorily maintain their claimed boundaries
in the face of the non—exclusive use pattern followed by the Indians A
with regard to the area outside of the subsistence area surrounding
their villages. In other words. claimants‘ ancestors did not exclusively
use and occupy the area claimed in their petition or their requested
findings. as mentioned before, however, they did use and occupy a.part
of the area claimed and based upon the record in this case the Commission feels that the occupancy of that part was exclusive. To state
again a fact uhich is apparent to all, it is extremely difficult to
establish facts after the lapse of time involved in matters of Indian
litigation. In attempting to establish boundaries and occupancy on the
basis of fragmentary facts and often uninformed opinions and the work
of ethnologists who must of necessity base their conclusions upon much
the same information, it becomes necessary to take a connon sense
approach based upon experience with matters of this nature. The Court

of Claims has expressed this in the following language in the case of

the Snake or Piute Indians v. The United States, 125 C. Cls. 2M1, 25M:

The problem of establishing such exclusive occur
pancy title by immenorial possession as of a date

too remote to admit of testimony of live witnesses,
and where no deeds or patents exist, is not a simple
one. At best, the ultimate fact of beneficial ownership by exclusive possession and occupancy can only
be inferred and found from many separate events and

- a variety of documentary material ——It is the feeling of this Commission that the evidence introduced
and the testimony of the Witnesses heard warrants finding 22 made
herein with regard to the area aboriginally used and occupied ex»
clusively by the ancestors of claimants from time immemorial. The
area described in that finding is as follows:

Beginning at the southwest corner of the town of
Auburn and running southeasterly along the White
River to the place where Red Creek joins said
White River; thence in a northeasterly direction
to the town of Fangley; thence westerly to the
town of Kent; thence south to the point of
beginning.

1.

Claimants allege that the area claimed by them was appropriated by

defendant in 1855. We are unable to agree with that contention for the
following reasons. In the first place the date alleged by claimants
was January 26, l855. It would appear that this is a.mistake and the
date meant was January 22, 1855, which was the date of the signing of
the Point Elliott Treaty by the other tribes and bands in the area.Who
were affected by that treaty. However, the treaty itself provides that
it shall become effective only when ratified by the Senate and proclaimed by the President. This was not done until March 8, 1859.

Admittedly the ancestors of the Muckleshoot Indians did not sign the

Point Elliott Treaty. However, the lands claimed by them lay within the

3 578

area ceded by that treaty and it seems that sufficient action on the
Part of defendant to constitute a taking of claimants‘ lands would
have to be said to have occurred only when the treaty became effective.
Certainly the defendant did not single out the lands of claimants and
appropriate them alone prior to the ratification of the treaty. The
action of the military in placing certain of these Indians on Fort
Muckleshoot during hostilities could not be said to be a taking. It
was necessary protective action on their part. The defendantts contention that the taking should date from the time of the Oregon
Donation.Act of 1850 (9 Stat. M96) is not tenable for the reason that
Congress obviously did not construe that as an attempt to appropriate
the Indians‘ land in view of the enactment of previous legislationy

(9 Stat. U37) calling for the negotiation of treaties with the Indians
of what was at that time the Territory of Oregon. Nor would they have
provided in the legislation creating the Territory of Oregon (9 Stat.
323) that nothing therein should be construed to impair the rights of
persons or property of the Indians so long as those rights remained unextinguished by treaties.

Based upon the above reasoning the date upon which the defendant
can be said to have officially deprived the claimants‘ ancestors of
their right to the use and occupancy of the area delineated in finding
22, was March 8, 1859. In view of the decision in the Otoe and
Missouria Tribe of Indians v. The United States, 2 Ind. 01. Comm. 385,
aff'd by Court of Claims on may 3, 1955, the claimants herein are
entitled to compensation for the deprivation by defendant of their

ancestors‘ interest in the above area as of March 8, 1859.

Any allotments made to claimants from the reservation lands or
other lands in the area may be shown at the time of the hearing on

acreage and valuation, along with any other offsets which defendant

may be able to establish.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Concurring:

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

me “In 
Associate Commissioner

 

5

O1

