7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322

BEFORE THE II\1'DIf_:‘«.I~I cm]:-1.3 CO}EI~1ISS ION

THE NORTHml‘~I PAIUTE NATION ANID THE
BANDS THEREOF, EX  WALTER
VORH_C-E , .~2.V'3RY l*HNI~TE1~'1UCC.é‘x, I"1£\I£ '
JOE 11.3, F.??.Ai'rIBC J OHN, AI-EDR.E':-':" DICK,
 Sz1I'IPSON , HAST IN-"3-S PAN CHO ,
W'.U..LIE STEVE, 1'? '_E{..I4I.'1'&-of HABD'DI,

SULL FM! THOH, EARL FRAIEK, ‘:I.EISLET.‘;'
KENO,  KAISER, AIS-3E.'F:‘.T ALECK,
I-I_=~”xP.RY SAMPSON , AIIN DO§'JII‘IGTOI-I,
ROSS H_t‘sRDDI , OCHO 'L=FII4I*1'EFiUCCA 3

THE ‘iu’;3al.I{I;'fi RIVER TRIBE OF THE
is-IALKE.-I RIVER RESEIVATIOFI; THE
PEP;-‘«.I*'iID L21Kl£ TRIBE OF THE 
LAKE REBERVA DION; THE. YERDIGTON
PAIUTE  OF THE YIE?.I3°5GTON
RESE?.VATION; THE RE'I\?O-SPI-'4E?.KS
INDIAN COLONY 3 THE PAIUTE SHOSHONE
TRIBFS OT? TNT. ";{q1'_.1_QyJ *:m<:':':;_v.wTr.m.

r-__.._.. .----._.-.,
THE soar 1«1cDE;.':=>;r-LIT? PAIUTE SHOSHOEE
TRIBE,

Petitioners ,
v.

THE UNITED STATES OF Al~E'iICA ,

x.../~....w~...zs._./'-...a~....r~.....-v~....z-.../°-ezs. ./~..2\._2\./x./~.zu_.x\./x./~.x~../-./x./~./\.,/so/-.,»~e.x

Defendant.
Decided: Path 214, 1959

Appearances:

David Cobb, I. S. 1-Jeissbrodt,
Jay H. Hoag and Clarence G.
Lindquist,

Attorneys for Petitioners

Leland L. Yost and Bernard M. '
Net-:‘o~.:.rg , 1»: ith whom was I-‘Er .
Assistant Attorney General,
Perry ‘:3. I-Iorton,

ttorneys for Defendant.

Docket No. 87

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 382

OPINION OF TEE‘. COMMISSION

‘*

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in Docket No. 87 was originally filed with the Commission in behalf of the Northern Paiute Nation of Indians and its various
bands by the Walker River Tribe of the walker River Reservation; the
Pyramid Lake Tribe of the Pyramid Lake Reservation; the Yerington Paiute
Tribe of the Yerington Reservation; the Reno-Sparks Indian Colony; the
Paiute Shoshone Tribes of the Fallon Reservation; the Fort I‘-1cDermitt Paiute

3: Shoshone Tribe and by" Walter Vorhees as a member of and representative of
said Northern Paiute Nation and allits members. A subsequent amendment
to the petition added 1? more individual Indians as named petitioners.
While the origmal and amended petitions included a nurber of causes of
action, the Commission has permitted severancerfrom the petitions of.‘ all
Claims other than the original title claims of the ‘Northern Paiute Nation
and its constituent bands. I

Accordingly, the only cause of -action to be considered by the Commission at this tine arises from the allegation that at and prior to Ifirst
White Contact the Northern Paiute Nation, which was divided into various
bands or groups, exclusively used and occupied a large area of land. The
petitioners contend that these lands were taken by the United States without payment of just compensation and by means not conforming to star£la*ds
of fair and honorable dealings.

It is the position or the petitioners that the Northern Paiute Nation
was at the time of the takings and is at the present daya clearly definable and distinct Indian group and that, although in aboriginal times it

7' Inde Clo CONE:  

was comprised of at least 26 bands, each Northern Paiute band had many
strong ties which hound it to all its neighboring Northern Paiute bands.
This interrelationship of the bands and the alleged fact that the Northern Paiute Indians spoke the same language, shared a common Indian culture,
recognized themselves as belonging to one people, occupied one contiguous
area of land, and formd an ethnic group sepa. ate and distinct from all
other peoples establishes, the petitioners contend, the right of the
Northern Paiute+Nation to receive compemation for the area of land vfnich
it claims was taken by the United States without the payment of compensation. .

The defendant contends that the Northern Paiutes were not a united
nation nor even a group of localized bands but rather consisted of an indeterminate number of wandering individual families, speaking different
dialects of the same language. They allegedly had no political organization, no identity of culture or of language, no mutual recogition of each
other and no realization of the territory over which they roamed. The
defendant also objects to a recovery in this action for the reason that,
assummg that it is established that there 1~Ias_ no Northern Paiute Na't";:':o:'%a.
holding Indian title to all of the territory occupied by the so-called
Northern Paiute Indians, the case necessarily breaks down into the sen-a:.';;~a‘3.ote

oh

actions of a number of separate bands, each asserting a claim to e:<clu.,s:ive,
aboriginal occupancy of separate definable areas and that, as such, the
individual claims of the individual bands are improperly joined in one action brought by the Northern Paiute Nat ion.

7 Ind. c1. Corn. 322 351'.

The area claimed by petitioners is approximately 78,000 square miles
or 50,000,000 acres extending from Owens Valley, California to about the
h5th parallel in the State of Oregon. It is about 300 miles wide at its
widest point and extends approximately 600 miles north.and south. This
area includes more than half of the State of Oregon, the western.half of
Nevada and small portions in California and southwestern.Idaho. This area,
which lies largely in the physiographic province of the Great Basin, is
bounded on the west by the Sierra Revada, Cascade and other mountain ranges. It is, and was.in aboriginal times, an excessively arid and infertile area. The eidernal boundaries of the claimed area are shown on a
composite man marked petitioners‘ Exhibit 9&2.

That porition of the claimed territory which is in the present States
of Oregon and Idaho was acquired by the Snited States under the Treaty
of June 15, l8ho, with Great Britain. The area to the south in Eevada
and California was acquired by the United States on February 2, l8h8, from.
‘Hexico under the Treaty of Guadulupe Hidalgo.

The early reports of unite explorers and settlers, as outlined in our
Finding of Fact Eo. 8, told of te Indian occupants in the Oregon portion
of the claimed territory generally describing them as Snake Indians who

were related to the "Diggers" to the south. The early reports also told

~:'.;<:: ""'

of Indian occupants in many locations throughout the claimed area in west‘Vern'Eevada, describing the: as “Pi-Ttes“ or "Root Digger” Indians. L

wise the early reports told of Indian occupation in the southern ncrticn

I‘

‘L . v H‘ 1' ':o P . FN ' ‘* in I5 v 4-In-V-u "— -. -I--up-K.‘-4" A
or the area in Omens valley, Callrcrnia. All Ox the earl; resorts CESC;4~LC

7 Ind. c1. Com. 322 385

the aboriginal occupants as a wretched lot, living on roots, ants, locusts,
grasshoppers and fish. They were foot Indians who lived with scarcely anr
clothing, in small groups, with no permanent shelters and, it appears,
roamed the land without any permanent villages. The Indians were variously
described in the early reports as Snakes, Bannocks, E-Iarrucks, Shoshokoes,
Diggers, Digger Snakes, Dogs, or Paiutes.

On August lb, 18148, the Territory’ of Oregon was established, which
included the present States of Oregon, 'w'ashington, and Idaho. On September 9, 1850, California was admitted into the Union, and on that same
date the Territorj,-' of Utah was established, which territory included the

land  T|_.?,'i"_,F-‘T‘ bP.f".F3T‘.’IP ‘i'.‘.“}F= .c‘.".:'—‘>':i'.D O‘? 1'-?r_'.~.1i.7'.'-jr_'i_9._, 'pH:_.*:u‘_r~cg:_'f_‘+.:._-up .‘_n€. Uh-'-u'+n6’ .~"~H-v--¥-_r-«.-.1" - ‘ '|I"-‘ , —aI I-IIInag..1g.II-I:‘|I-III» \‘€t|-I-o€1—I¢ud'

military officers and otior government agents assigned to the area reported
on the Indians inhabiting various local:E.ties throughout the claimed territory’. The government officials in the Oregon territory reported on the
presence of Shoshones or Snakes. The government officials in western
E-Ievada ‘emote of the Paiute Indiaxm in that territory, an.d ‘there were also
reports of the Indians living in the 0".-I'eI’1S Vall 1-’ cour.tI'y.

"\

. Petitioners‘ expert anthropologist, Dr. Omar C. Istewart

'1 '+~o'! ‘ ’‘
cesc.1oes the

U

-1

3...

E-Forthern Paiutes as a group of Indian linguisticallv, cultur ally ::':.::s-:;E 

t°T'i~"—1l.’>’ United ‘trith srcller un_it5; called banrls, I-:itE:in the  ii’?-:.=eser

I‘ .‘ " 0 0 u . ‘  .
Danes he cescribezrl as being :3oliti::....=="« If; a*.;ton::-::cus '-.-ritn sr:1a'i_.l ”;“."*£‘L‘,-.T.".".'..‘..*._’-_.i'  

an’; '3 533916: irformel soci_l="- or ion. I-Ee f.‘ounc’-. no eelrl.‘-';:f..;:,::.'.i;:., 1
&

\

f':"?"C.Q*'\ '?'.r\"'::.+'l"~.:::~'~ :7}: *-‘V47 M *"‘*'W'~'*""" """'T"_‘. L-~ '~'-.*:-.-*0?‘-‘f"'-':..":?
CJ-... ‘.2 coupe-.1 \.J-o-2.... 5 \..g 3 |.;A..A.__.....\_, |._;;¢_-..__,_ g__ , *;_g_' _;_ ‘___, é \_J\_,\._‘.,

9.‘. In - .‘_'

1%’ oincang the 1-:1:ole
. q ‘S I F5 I q n ‘ ‘ _

evidence o.-- the davelopnent 0:. i:1f.'lL: :::._:...._.'=l leaders '..-r:';o covered .1_a::'+j;e:

areas '.-'it‘n'L_n t-he Yorthern P

7, Ind. c1. Corn. 322 386

recognized leader who possessed any authority above the local band chief.
In his report of his extensive studies of the !orthern.Paiutes, entitled
"The Northern Paiute Bands," Dr. Stewart wrote:
Occupying a single physiographic province, speaking similar
dialects of one linguistic family, possessing cultures and

traditions in common, the Horthern Paiute bands, without doubt,

formed one tribe. The unity was tenuous, but no indications

of internal strife were discovered; on the contrary, hunting

grounds were shared, and Old Hinnenucca, in the early'days of

white contact, nearly united the bands under one political

leadership. The cultural uniformity of the tribe and its

nice adjustment to its environment definitely establish unity,

and on this basis I an of the opinion that the Northern.Paiute

took possession of their entireterritny'when they first entered the country and have occupied it up to its present limits

for a comparatively long time. (Pet. ?". 9C8, p. lhh)

Dr. Julian H. Steward, an anthropologist who testified for the defendant, described.the Eorthern Paiutes, in aboriginal times, as small
groups of rarely more than half a dozen families who were scattered over
a wide area of land obtaining their subsistence from seeds and.roots,
larger groups generally occurring only during the winter and the fishing
season. Dr. Steward stated that the Eorthern.Paiutes were not politically
united, and.the so-called bands were merely local groups wit. names derived from.the important food of the locality. Dr, Steward did.recognize the Northern Paiute as speaking a mutually intelligible diclect,
possessing a basically sigilar culture and associating with one another
more often than with members of other tribes.

The Commission believes that there were within the territory claimed
in this case, in aboriginal days, certain Indians who, as described by the
early explorers and settlers, the government officials, and anthropologists,

-nu-s

possessed certain distinct similarities. notably the Indians of the area

7 Ind. c1. Corn. 322 '   _ 387

spoke the same language, shared a common economic life, and, in general,
had a similar Indian culture.

Mthough in aboriginal times they were variously classed under a
variety of names, the Indians gradually became known as Paiutes and finally distinguishing them from the southern branch of the family as Northern Paiutes. This term Northern Paiutes, while not originating in the
aboriginal period, has been used for many years to refer to those aborigines living in the Great Basin who spoke Mono-Paviotso. While the
Indians speaking Mono-Paviotso also included the Monos west of the Sierra

Nevada mountains and the Fort Hall Bannocks of Idaho, both of those groups

are-re CO?*rp‘:‘iS9'i of very di “..f.'crc::t Z::;i ::.::: from t.hosc dcsczribed in the territory claimed in this case. This, however, presents no problem since petitioners have specifically excluded the Ivionos west of the Sierra Nevada
mountains and the Bannocks from the action bronght in this matter.
The defendant has no trouble identifying those Indians embraced

within the term Northern Paiutes, defining then in its Proposed Finding of
Fact ll as "those portions of the Mono-Paviotso speaking peoples living

east of the Sierra Nevada, who were at the time of white contact, primitive foot Indians. This includes (l) the Indians of Owens ValI].ejv'  '?:.‘ne.

\eastern I-Iono’s (3) some Indians in (a) the Honey Lake area and ot.hef:° é;;:=<:t:rtions of Northern California, (b) perhaps the southwest portion of Ii..C5ia.;;“.=,o
and (C) the southwest part of Oregon.“ Government officials have a;l.ss:_:
used tm term Northern Paiute to refer to the Indian occupants  "?'”n'.‘-:#<:

general area.

‘L . 11- a-c-"ax--r--u-Ir-5 O‘'''‘-''- B " .-. J‘ . w‘- '
:1: 2.3 apparent that, '..ha...evei may have been L.."1€‘1.T.' status

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 388

nation in aboriginal times and regardless of their existence as so-called
"tribes", “bands”, or "nation", the Indians living in most of the territory claimed and their descendants have become known as Northern Paiutes.

The petitioning §orthern.Paiute Nation brings this cause of action
under Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, l9h6
(60 Stat. lOh9) which provides that the Commission shall hear and determine certain claims, as enumerated therein, which are brought against
the United States "on behalf of any Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of American Indians residing within the territorial limits
of the United States or Alaska." In conjunction with this jurisdictional
provision of the Act we must also consider section 10 which provides that
any claim within the provisions of the Act may be presented.by any member of an Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of Iniians as
the representative of all its members. (Section 10 further provides for
certain limitations on presentation of claims on behalf of Indians who
have a tribal organization).

The Commission has concluded that the horthern Paiute Indians are
a clearl; defined group of.American Indians nithin the meaning of the term
"identifiable group“ as used in sections 2 and l0 of the Act and, accordingly, this Commission has jurisdiction to hear and determine the claims
brought'by members of such groups on beh ‘E of all its members.

The defendant maintains that if there never was, in-aboriginal times,
a Horthern Paiute Nation existing as a single group or entity aith Indian
title to all of th territory occupied by Northern Paiute Indians, then

petitioners cannot assert their claim in its present form. Befendant

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 389

reasons that the case would, in such event, necessarily be broken down into the separate actions of.‘ a nuznber of separate bands each claiming separate areas and that, therefore, the separate causes of action are improperly
joined and should be severed ani tried individually.

The Commission considers it immaterial, for jurisdictional purposes
only, that the Northern Paiute Nation may not have been an aboriginal
land using entity but may rather have been composed of numerous, separate
bands or groups. The fact that it was, at the time the claim was filed,
a group of Arnerican Indians capable of clear and unmistakable identification brings the “Northern Paiute Nation" within the term "identifiable
group” as used in the Act. (Indians of California V. United States, 122
C. Cls. 3h8)

Defendant also asserts that the amended petition of April 15, 1957,
wherein the causes of action were severed to present in Docket No. 87
only the original title claims of the Eorthern Paiute Nation and its
constituent bands, sought to assert claims on behalf of additional bands
and f or further areas thereby attempting to plead new causes of action
after the ezmiration of the time within which claizrs might be filed with
the Commission. The Coximission is of the opinion that petitioners have,
by that amended petition, done no more than sever the claims not prese::tfi“i 
at issue and better define the territory allegedly used and occupied in
aboriginal times by the Eorthern Faiute Efation so as to, corjfonn with the
evidence produced at the hearing. Fetiti oners did not thereby plead any
new causes of action.

Ham found the Northern Paiute Indians to he an "ids-ntirfiable

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 390

group" for jurisdictional purposes, we must now turn to an examination of
(l) the aboriginal band (5) or group(s) who are now broadly referred to

as Northern Paiutes and the territory aborigirally possessed by such group

or groups, if any, and (2) the existence of members or descendants of menh
bers of such group or groups.

In setting forth findings of fact with respect to the aboriginal occupancy of the territory, the Commission has broken the claimed territory
into three major areas, the first area including the land in and about
Owens Valley; the second area including most of the western Nevada territory with a small portion in California; and the third area in Oregon,
southwestern Idaho, the northeast corner of California, and the extreme

northwestern portion oi‘ Nevada.

Owens Valley Area

 

The Owens Valley area of Paiute aboriginal occupation is primarily in
the State of California extending from Owens Lake to slightly north of
Mono Lake and including a small area in Nevada south of Walker Lake. The
area, although seam’.-arid, held greater natural resources than ct-'.d most of
the claimed territory to the north. accordingl r, the Owens Valley area
land was able to support a more concentrated Ezdianpopulation.

Since this land was not on the route of.‘ the emigrant trains and since
it did not attract settlement until its mineral resources became of interest about l8SS, there were few reports from early explorers or settlers
in the area. Indians were reported to be living along Owens River in l8L:S,

and the lhdian population of Owens Val_"2_ey was estimated at l,COO in l8S5.

One of the earliest reports by Capt. J. ‘:1. Davidson, in l8S9, described the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 391

Indians as having no principal chief or leader but rather a patriarchal form

of government and that the Indians were living in an almost isolated condi- tion, having but little intercourse with other tribes. In l862 Indian

Agent ‘rlarren ‘E-Iasson reported the ezdstence of a boundary south of Walker
Lake River which separated the “Fab. Ute" from the Owens River Indian country. Likewise Captain Edwin A. Rowe, a United States cavalry officer,
recognized that the Owen River Indians wereiseparated from their Herthern Paiute neighbors and described" the Indian boundary line w .ich divided

the Paiutes from ‘the Owens River Indians.

In 1875, Stephen Powers, who had been appointed by the Secretary of
the Interior as a special commissioner to collect Indian materials for the
Centennial Ebchibition of l876, visited the Indians in Owens Valley. He
reported that the Indians were Paiutes although th 3/ were locally called
Iéonos and he wrote of them as “members of the Piute Nation distincly,
tho ah there never was any solidarity or community feeling in this 3’~Tation,
and the different sections or tribes were sometimes at bitter feud with

each other."

Dr. Julian  Steward, def'endant‘s expert anthropologirst, has dc>:r1-e
extensive field research in the Owens Valley are and is cons :Z.<;3.»'—:?3re=.1i‘?.
of the eminent authorities concerning that area. On the basis  

studios Dr. Steward reported that the Northern Painte o’ Owens:  

7

were s®di"-Iided into "true composite land-owning bands" and that each.
of the bands carried on a number of gro‘p activities. I-Fhile he H31

the Deep Springs and Fish Lake valleys as ”sestern iI'1de*__‘JE3I‘1dE3.';":."'7 Ind. Cl. Conn ‘322 . 392

Paiute villages," he described the Northern Paiute in.those areas as having internarried with each other and other Owens Valley Paiutes. He found
that the occupants of the various areas visited other areas for dances and
rabbit drives. In his hiographic sketch on "Panatubiji, an Owens Valley
Paiute," Dr. Steward described the life of an aboriginal Paiute occupant
of the Owens Valley area. It appears that Panatubiji was free to and did
travel about and use the resources of the entire area although there was
no reference to Owens Valley Paiutes making use of or even visiting the
Paiute territory to the north in Western Nevada.
In considering the aboriginal occupation of the Owens Valley area

the Commission has found it significant to note the opinion-of another
eminent anthropologist, Dr. Willard 2. Park, who made extensive studies

of the Paviotso or Northern Paiutes of western Nevada (the area to the
north.of Owens Valleyi. Dr. Park described the Owens Valley Paiutes as
close linguistic and cultural relatives of western Nevada Paiutes although,
he stated, the latter regarded themselves as an entirely distinct group.

'Western Nevada Area
The western Nevada area of alleged Paiute occupancy extends from

just north of Mono Lake, California, to the extreme northwestern part of
Nevada including small areas in California along the western Nevada border.
It is in this area that we find the greatest concentration of Paiute Indian population in aboriginal times, and it is in this area that most of
the petitioning reservation organizations are presentljrlocated and from
‘which many of petitioners’ ancestors originated.

The southern part of the area is separated from the Mono Lake region

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 393

by high terrain, and it is divided from Owens Valley by a desert area.
There were practically no geographical boundaries  the east where the
Shoshone Indians were located. On the north rather extensive deserts
intervened between the Pyramid Lake area and the Summit Lake area. On
the west the Sierra Nevada mountains rose sharply to divide the Northern Paiute from their western neighbors, with the exception of a small
area on the eastern slope of the mountains which was occupied by the
Washoe Indians.

The early reports from the explorers, military officers, Indian
agents and settlers told of Paiute occupation around Walker Lake and around
the Walker River. Host of the reports described the Paiutes as living in
relatively small bands although there is no great consistency in the designation of the specific bands in this area. Major Dodge described three
bands in the general area while Agent Campbell placed one band in the
area. cl

Stephen Po:-zers described the Indians living on the Walker River Reservation in l876 as a branch of the Paiutes called "Ahgyweit" (trout eaters).
Anthropologists Loud, Kelly, Park, Steward and Hodge descri'he.<i.tZé.  ‘E-:r...;:i'
Lake area as occupied by Northern Paiutes who were kno=.~:n as   
Dr. Omar C. Stewart placed three Northern Paiute bands in the area

To the west and north of the ‘Jalker River and Lake area. 1¢e3.E% 
W3-30? internal drainage area along the Carson River, vfnich arr ;? “é.;:.;A:«’.—..;
Sierra Nevada mountains in California and Lilo’.-;rs northand east ".."s':"L‘-‘...?.;"‘£‘.'.“J1I<'.':'j"

Nevada to Carson Lake and Sink. Again we find that the ea:[_~;;,p   ;  A

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 3914

military officers and Indian agents reported that Indians lived in this
area, describing them as “Diggers" or “Root Diggers" or "Py-utes.”

I-Lajor Dodge in his JanuaI'3* I4, 1859, reports described the various bands of
Paiutes locating three bands along the Carson River and three bands in

the country around Carson Lake and Sink, the latter three being the same
three bands which he said also used the land around Walker River. Agent
Gampbell in 1866 stated that the same Paiute band which lived around
Walker River and Lake also used the country along Carson River and upper
lake, and he reported another band of Paiutes in the territory at Lower
Carson Lake. Petitioners’ expert anthropologist, Dr. Stewart, placed the
Toe do kado band in this area and anthropologists Kelly, Loud and Park
also described the sazre Paiute band as living in the general area.

North of this area of Paiute occupation is Humboldt Lake which is

fed by the Humboldt River, extending north arrl eastward into Shoshone
territory. Indians described as Paiutes or "Root Diggers“ were reported
by the early explorers and government agents to be living in this area.
Dr. Stewart placed the Kupadokado band in the area around Humboldt Lake
and Sink. Both Loud and Hodge located Northern Paiute bands in the area.
Defendant's Dr. Ste:-zard reported that the Northern Paiutes occupied the
country westlof the Sonoma and Hot Springs I-Iountains. Dr. Park listed

one of his five Northern Paiute bands as living along the Humboldt River
from the Lake to the present site of ‘rlinnezrzucca. As detailed in our Finding of Fact No. lh(d) there were several references describing the boundary
which separated the Paiute Indians of this area from their eastern Shoshone

neighbors. That eastern boundary is substantially the same as the boundary

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 395

of the area claimed.by the petitioners in.this matter and the anthropologists,
including petitioners‘ anthropologist, Dr. Stewart, and defendant's anthropologist, Dr. Steward, are in substantial agreement as to the extent of

the Northern Paiute use and occupancy in this area.

To the west of Carson.Lake and.Sink and north of Carson.Rirer was
another center of Indian occupation in the vicinity of Truckee River and
Pyramid Lake. The Indians were described by Fremont in l8h3 as speaking
a dialect of the Snake language, and Bryant, in l8h6, and Hurt, in 1856,
met Paiutes in the area. .Najor Dodge listed four Paiute bands in the
general area and also reported that members of the Washoe Nation lived to
the west along the base of the Sierra Nevada mountains in an area which
he described as extending from Honey Lake on the north to the west fork
of Walker River on the south. Agent Campbell, in 1866, located a Paiute
band of some 700 Indians in the vicinity of Pyramid Lake.

Dr. Stewart placed the Kuyuidokado band of Northern Paiutes in the
area, and Dr. Park included the same band as one of his five main western
Nevada Northern Paiute bands, which band he found centered around Pyramid
Lake and the mouth of the Truckee River. Loud located one Northern Paiute
band on the Truckee River and another band around Pyramid Lake. .Anthropologists Kelly and Hodge also listed Northern Paiute bands in the area.

4.

To the west of Pyramid Lake is Ninnemucca Valley, Nevada, while U0
the north and west is Honey'Lake and Smoke Creek, California. The early
reports of explorers in the area are of little help in identifring the Indian inhabitants of the Honey Lake and Smoke Creek areas. Lajor Dodge

wrote that “Nun-a-mucca” was the head chief of the Paiute Nation "ed that

7 Ind. (:1. Corn. 322 _ ‘ I 396

he and his band of about 155 generalxy stayed on Smoke Creek, near Honey
Lake.

The early'settlers in the Honey Lake Valley entered.into a treaty of
peace in l8S7 with “Win ne ma cha” and in l8S8 a treaty of peace was also
signed between ”Ninnemacha" and sub-agents of the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for California. However, in reporting on this treaty,the
snb-agents made reference to their inability to treat with the Pit River
Indians and the'Hashoe Tribe who were also in the area. t was also reported that Chief “Winnemooke" would not let his people stay in Honey
Lake Valley because the other Indians were stealing and, if his people
stayed around there, they would be accused of stealing also. In I856,
Capt. Weatherlow told of his settlement in Honey Lake Valley and wrote
that the Paiute tribe of Indians then occupied the Valley in common with
the whites and were upon the most friendly terms'with them. In l860 Hr.
Lander wrote of a meeting with “Pah-Ute“ chiefs at which‘Winnemucca complained that the tribe had.been.robbed of their lands in Honey Lake, Long,
Steamboat and other valleys.

Dr. Stewart identified the Kanodokado as the Northern Paiute band
living in the Smoke Creek area and the Wadadokado'band living about Honey
Lake. There were some differences of opinion between anthropologists
Kelly and Park as to the extent of the territory occupied by the Northern
Paiutes in this area. However, the petitioners have encluded most of the
disputed area from the territory claimed by them in this action. IThe Commission has concluded that the Northern Paiute area of exclusive use andar

occupancy included Honey Lake Valley to the eastern shore of the Lake and

O

7 ed. C1. Com. 322 ~ 397

the area to the north of Honey Lake extending west to within about ten miles
of Susanville. t seems clear from the evidence that the Northern Paiutes
of the area had their ancestral homeland in and about Honey Lake Valley and
that the white settlements in the area caused the Paiutes to withdraw and
restated in raiding parties from Indian tribes to the west who prayed on
the white settlements.

In the area north and east of Smoke Creek and extending as far east
as the vicinity of Winnemucca, Nevada, and in the area east of Pyramid
Lake to within a few miles of the Humboldt River, there was land which was
extremely barren including the Black Rock Desert ene similar arid areas.
The land was remote from established routes of travel and is today sparsely populated. This area, as detailed in our Finding of Fact No. 15, has
not been shown to have been exclusively used and occupied in aboriginal
times by Northern Paiute Indians. Even the materials prepared by Dr.
Stewart, petitioners‘ expert anthropologist, indicate the weakness of petitioners’ claim in this area. In his Kamodokado area Dr. Stewart only

referred to Paiute occupation in the vicinity of Gerlach, Nevada, just
north‘ of I-Zud Lake, and he stated that that territory was allotted to the
Kamodokados because it had not been claimed by any other band. Simil€%.Z*T‘:‘*.f}?'
the area west of the Humboldt Lake and River area was reported by 
tev-rart to be occupied by the Kupadokado band although he gave no evidrrzactltz
of specific areas oi‘ Paiute use or occupation in that,area west of 
boldt. Dr. Stewart reported that the extensive Black Rock Desert was <:»..:;.-A
Cupied by Northern Paiutes although, at the same time, he tes‘:.i.:?;”:':.=:i>d  

the Sawawaktodo band was aware that their country went to the  

7 Ind. 01. Com. 322 398

on the other side of the desert were the other people. Telhile Dr. Stewart
recited evidence of Paiute occupation around the present town of Ninnemucca,
Nevada, he failed to offer any evidence upon which to base a conclusion
that his Sawawaktodo band occupied the area extending to the west of I~Iinnemucca. Dr. Stewart included Paradise Valley as a Northern Paiute area
occupied by the Yamosopo band although he could offer little information
concerning the aboriginal existence of this group and his Northern Paiute
:'1.n.'£‘ormant reported that band to be mixed with Shoshone.

Other anthropologists have indicated that most of this barren area
was unoccupied or, in the case of Paradise Valley, that it was an area of
joint use and occupancy. Dr. Blyth reported the occupants of Paradise
Valley to be half Paiute and half Shoshone and defendant's expert, Dr.
Steward, also considered those Indians to be a mixture of Shoshone and

Paiute. Accordingly, the Commission has concluded that the area referred

_ to in Finding of Fact No. 15 was not exclusively used and occupied .'n

aboriginal times by Northern Paiute Indians.

Oregon Area

 

In the northern portion of the claimed territory is the land along
the northwestern Nevada border, with a small area in California, in south
central and eastern Oregon, and in southwest Idaho. This area extends east
and west from the Cascade Nountains to approxmately LLO miles east of the
Snake River and from just south of the Oregon-Nevada border north to the

#0 _,_., _z_,
113 0.1. latitude.
To the east the area extends into the southwestern portion of.‘ Idaho

and is shown on petitioners‘ trap (Pet.  9&2) as a cross-hatched area,

which indicates that Dr. te*.-zart, petitioners’ expert anthropologist, found

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 ‘ 399

a dispute over the land.which he could not resolve. Since petitioners have
conceded that there was conflicting evidence concerning the Indian occupancy of the cross-hatched area and have submitted a proposed finding to
exclude that territory, the Commission has accepted petitioners‘ concession of the lack of proof of exclusive Northern Paiute use and occupancy
of the area and more detailed consideration of the cross-hatched area is
unnecessany.

In the extreme northwestern portion of the claimed area petitioners
place th Hunipitoka or Walpapi band of Northern Paiutes. It was with
this band that Superintendent Huntington negotiated a treaty of cession
on August l2, l865 (lb Stat. 683). Under the terms of the treaty, signed
by eleven chiefs and headmen of the "Noll-pah-pe tribe of Snake Indians”,
there was a cession to the United States of all the tribe's right, title
and interest to the country occupied by them. The treaty further provided
for certain considerations agreed to be expended by the United States for
the benefit of the'Ualpapi Tribe of Snake Indians. Thereafter, the Walpapi Indians removed to the Klamath Indian Reservation and by subsequent
statutes the stipulated consideration *as appropriated for the Indians.

The Commission has found_that the Halpapi Indians constituted an
aboriginal land.using entity, existing as such, separate and apart from
the Northern Paiute of Snake Indians with whom they were and have been
generally associated. ~

The claims now before this Commission are rested upon a non-treaty
taking of the petitioners‘ ancestral lands. As petitioners state in their

brief at page 7h, they are, “seeking to establish that the United States,

U

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 I hOO

O

3

by means that did not conform with standards of fair and honorable dealings
and without payment of any compensation, deprived their ancestors of their
Indian title to their aboriginal homeland." (Emphasis supplied) The question of the nature of petitioners‘ claim in this action was under consideration in connection with the dispute arising in Docket No. 1C0, filed, among
others, by another band of Northern Paiute Indians, the Yahooskin band.

At that time petitioners stated in its "éotion for Clarification of Order
Dated May l9, 1955," that “the claims of the Yahooskin band.for the said
land that have been presented to the Commission in Docket No. lOO are
rested upon facts and.law distinct and separate from the claims of the lahooskin band for the same land that have been. presented to the Commission

1'.’
CD

in Docket No. 87. In.Docket No. 87 these claims are rested upon a takin
‘without treaty and without payment of compensation. In Docket No. lCO,
these claims are rested upon a treaty and upon payment of unconscionable
consideration." (Emphasis supplied)

The Commission agrees with petitioners‘ interpretation of the cause
of action which they have pleaded in this Docket No. 87. Like their neighboring Yahooskin band, the Halpapi were treated with- ad compensated for
the cession of their claimed lands. Therefore, any action for an alleged
taking by the United States of the Walpapi land should, it seems be rested
upon the revision.of their treaty of cession upon the basis that the amount
paid by the United States constituted an unconscionable bonsideration for

the cession of the lands to which they allegedly held Indian title. Such

an action would, by petitioners‘ own admission, be based upon facts and

7 Ind. C1. com. 322   1:01

lar-: distinct and separate from those pleaded in Docket No. 87.

t would appear then that petitioners have included the so-called Wal-papi area only to the extent that the I-Ialpapi band might be found by the
Commission to have been a constituent part of an aboriginal land using
Northern Paiute entity. Accordingly, having round the Walpapi band to
have been a separate and distinct land using entity whose claim, if any,
against the United States for taking of its ancestral lands has not been
pleaded in this case, no consideration can be given to this area in the
claim presented by petitioners in this Docket No. 87.

South of the Walpapi area is the territory assigned by-petitioners to
the "Ya.huskin“ Band of Northern Paiutes. On October lb, 18614, Superintendent
Huntington negotiated a treaty of cession with the Klamath and Modoc and
Yahoos‘:c:Z_n Band of Snake Indians, which treaty was duly ratified on July 2,
l866 (16 Stat. 707). The Yahooskin band moved onto the Klamath Reservation, near Klamath Lake on the southern border of Oregon, where theh descendants have lived to the present day.

In the case of the Klamath an.d Ifiodoc Tribes and the Yahooskin Band of

Snake Indians v. The United States, Docket No. lOO, a claim has been pre 

sented on behalf of the descendants of the Yahooskin Band of snehe 
with whom that treaty was made. The clam is based on an   1 
by treaty of cession of their aborigv;ne_"l.l.ly held land and the  

unconscionable consideration therefor. 1-Ehile it appears that th»:=: 

4tioners in this Docket No. 87’ have not pleaded any cause of action to 
clude the all eged taking of the Yahooskin lands for an uI1C:r'.‘::."‘:-" 

sidcration, the claim with respect to this area is not diSpC;:~;- .g

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 1402

ground since this Commission has already, by order entered Kay 19, 1955,
in this Docket No. 87 and Docket No. 100, dismissed the claim asserted
for and on behalf of the Yahooskin band in Docket No. 87 upon a finding
that said band was entitled, under section l0 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, to be accorded the exclusive privilege of representing the
descendants of the Iahooskin band in.their claim before this Commission.
Thereafter, by order of the Commission on June 6, l957, the finality of
the order of May 19, 1955, was stayed without prejudice to its later reinstatement following final determination by the Commission of the claims
presented in this Docket No. 87. The purpose of this stay was to toll
the time for appeal to the Court of Claims of the decision of the Commission in its order of May 19, l955, in order that petitioners might be
able, if t ey so desire, to make a single appeal to the Court of Claims
in the matter of this Docket No..87. The Commission will not at this time
vacate its order staying the finality of the order of May 19, 1955, since
the order to be made pursuant to this decision will be interlocutory.

For the reason stated above no consideration can be given in this
Docket No. 87 to the so-called'Yahooskin area of the claimed territory.

To the east of the Yahooskin area there was a group of Snake or Piute
Indians described by several anthropologists, including petitioners’ expert,
Dr. Stewart, as the'Wada Eaters or Hadatoka. The descendants of the Indians in that area brought an action before this Commissionvas the "Snake
or Piute Indians of the Former Malheur Reservation in Oregon," Docket No.
17. In our opinion of December 28, 1956 (h Ind. Cl. Comm. 57la) we found

that the petitioners‘ ancestors, who were parties to an unratified treaty

; or Paiute Indians.

LL03

7 Ind. 322 ,_

Cl. Com.
of December 10, l868, had exclusively occupied and used in Indian fashion
from time immemorial the area of land included within the former lialheur
Reservation in Oregon. Accordingly, that group of Northern Paiute Indians
identified as the Snake or Piute Indians of the Former Malheur Reservation
who represented those Northern Paiute Indians descended from the parties

to the unrati_fied treaty of December l0, l868, having been found to be

the descendants of an aboriginal land using entity and having brought

their own action independent of this action, have no interest in Docket
_No. 87, and their aboriginally owned territory having been determined in
Locket No. l7, no considerationuneed not: be given to that area;

To the southeast of the Yahooskin lands was an area occupied by Snake
The early explorers and military officers reported the
area east of Lake Elbert and Goose Lake in Warner Valley and around Warner Lakes and to the south ir Surprise Valley and Long Valley to be occupied
by Snake‘ or Pi-ute Indians.

Petitioners’ expert, Dr. Stewart, placed the Kidutokado band in the
area and Dr. Kelly, who did very extensive work in that territory, placed
the Gidutikadu band of Northern Paiutes in the area. Her C3.eSC.'.E:"”I:*f."‘§’.}'Tl.i‘.?Zf'l of
the limits of the land occupied by this band was substantially tlze :-3a.r::~s:: 
that described by Dr. Stewart. Dr. Elbgitmg, whose studies x~:e.r.:'»::: 1 “

._‘.E, rm‘

cerned with the h'adato1<a band of Northern Paiutes , placed a nor 
band in the Surprise Valley area but limited the extent’ of their occu_ ation
to a smaller area arourri ‘.-Earner Lake and to the south across the Nevada

border.

To the east oi‘ this area there was a stretch of barren or  ‘:17;

_=_;n

:3.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 not

which, although sparsely populated, did contain areas of Indian occupation
in aboriginal times. Paiute Indians were reported by anthropologists to
have lived in aboriginal times at Summit Lake, Nevada. Anthropologists
Kelly, Whitg-, Hodge and Stewart reported Paiutes living in the N.cDerIrdtt region of Nevada on the Oregon border.
In I870, Agent Douglas reported on his meeting at Fort Iv‘IcDermitt

with '.U.LO Quih‘s River (Nevada) and Steens Mountain (Oregon) Indians.

Agent Douglaswas trying to persuade the Indians living in that area to
move dovm to the Truckee River or Pyrarrdd Lake Reservation promising
continued government aid and subsistence if they would so move and guaranteeing them nothing if they remained about Fort McDermitt. The Indians indicated that the country around Steens Iéountains and Quinn River was their
territory, and they emphatically refused to go away from their lands to

the Paiute Reservation in Nevada. I

In the southeast corner of Oregon extending to the north is the

Owyhee River area,‘ another section of sparse population, today as well as
in aboriginal tines. Both Dr. Steward and Dr. Stewart stated‘ that Northern Paiute Indians lived in the area in aboriginal tines. Dr. 'E~Ihiting reported that the Tagu Eaters lived in the area about Ottyhee River and Jordan
Valley but that there were no Paiute bands i“a::ther to the east. Dr. Kelly‘s
informant told her of Paiute Indians living east of Steens Mountains, which
would apparently be in the Ovryhee River region.

‘To the west and northwest of the O‘.-ryhee River area was the MalheurI
Harney Lake region occupied by the Nada Eaters Bands of Snake or Piute

Indians, referred to above as the petitioners in Docket No. 17.

J

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 ° hos

To the east, southeast, and northeast of the Owyhee River region is
the large area which was cross-hatched by petitioners on their map, Exhibit No. 9&2. As we have previously mentioned this cross-hatched area
represented that territory which petitioners recognize as not exclusively used and occupied by the Northern Paiutes and that area has been excluded from further consideration by the Commission.

North of the Owyhee River is a large area concerning which there appears considerable doubt concerning the identity of the Indians who
reportedly occupied and used the area. The early explorers used the term
Snake and the term Bannock to describe both the foot Indians who lived on
roots, crickets, rodents, small game and fish as well as the horse people
‘who possessed many traits of the plains Indians and traveled great distances in search of game, furs and trade. The Bannocks are specifically’

excluded from the scope of this claim because they were clearly a people

- separate and distinct from.the Northern Paiute Indians with whom.we are

now concerned.

The anthropologists also indicated a lack of agreement among themselves
concerning the identity of the Indians found in the area in aboriginal times.
Dr. Stewart, petitioners‘ expert anthropologist, stated that his Koa aga
itoka band which he placed along the Snake River at the mouths of the Owgtftw
Boise and Malheur Rivers and Weiser Creek has occupied a much disputed and
questionable position. Dr. Stewart found that, although the accounts of
the early explorers in the area were not definite, they would show that
there was as much historical evidence to unite the Snake River Indians of

the Boise area with the Paiute as with the eastern groups. Dr. Steward

7 Ind. 01. Com. 329 ' LL06

concluded that the area was frequented by mounted northern Shoshone and Bannocks as well as some Northern Paiute and western Idaho Shoshone and that
the area was a thoroughfare often used by the Bannocks, northern Shoshone,
Nez Perce, Cayuse, Walla Walla and other tribes.

The Commission has therefore concluded that the petitioners have failed
to prove their entitlement  that area since it cannot be shown that they
exclusively used and occupied the area in aboriginal times.

The area north of the uadatoka band cannot be included within any
Northern Paiute territory since it appears that that area was also outside the territory exclusively used and occupied by the Northern Paiutes.
There were early reports placing ”Snake” Indians in the area, but the
"Snakes" were described as buffalo hunters, indicating that they were
differenut lndians from the Digger twe of "Snake s" included within the
Northern Paiute designation. tThere were also reports of Cayuse Indians
in the area.

Dr. Ste:-zart did not include the area in his original study or" the
Northern Paiute bands, although he has included it in this action as territory occupied by so-called Pa-tichichii-tika band of Northern. Paiutes.

Dr. Verne 3'. Ray placed the Cayuse Indians in thedarea.

Having thus reviewed the material evidence relating to the aboriginal
use and occupancy of the claimed area and having excluded those areas wherein there is no proof that Northern Paiute Indians exclusively used and occupied the land claimed, we no»: tLu‘n to the question of the group or groups
which constituted the land using entity or entities in the area found to

have been occupied by the so-called Northern ‘Paiutes.

7 Ind. c1. Com. 322 ~ ho?

We have found from the evidence that there was no overall chief or
political authority over all the Northern Paiute Indians in aboriginal
times. The most influential Northern Paiute,  the ‘late aboriginal period was I-Iinnemucca, but he never had authority over all Northern Paiutes.
As Dr. Stewart stated, "Prior to the arrival of the white people, bands
united for special hunting, fishing, dancing, pinon-nut gathering, rarely for war; but no one was generally recognized as possessing any anthority above the local band chief. It seems thatthe Northern Paiute were
ripe to become politically united; this, however, never happened.“

The early explorers as well as the government agents and military
officers reported various areas to be occupied by Indians who lived in
separate and distinct groups. There was no recognition of any overall
Northern Paiute entity which used and occupied the entire area from Owens
Valley to central Oregon. In general the Oregon area was considered to
be territory exclusively used and occupied by Snakes, the Nevada area by
Paviotso or Paiute, and the Owens Valley area by Monos or Paiutes. There
was some realization that all these Indians possessed certain general similarities but certainly it was never felt that they occupied this expansive
territory in common orthat they, as a group or entity, ‘had col.ZZ.e<:t:*é;.;:.'ve
rights to the land.

The historical accounts indicate that many of the smaller   *
"bands" of Northern Paiutes had strong feelings regarding their "trad;?;_vt:;;t>:1m
31 homelands. There, were groups who expressed this attachment to certain
areas which constituted their territory where they had for 'f1'1c'3..'-,"‘*-_‘___'3-"‘   I‘

and occupied the land in Indian fashion. These Indians eI::phati:;;—a;L..‘Ly

7 Ind. C1. Corn. 322 _ 1,08

rejected offers of settlement in neighboring Northern Paiute territory
since it wasn't their land. As we found in the case of The Snake or Piute

Indians of the former Halheur Reservation in Oregon v; United States, Doc 

ket No. l7, h Indian Claims Commission S7la at 596, the government selected
a tract for the Halheur reservation because it was "the area recognized by
military officers and officials of.the Interior Department dealing with

Indians in southeast Oregon as the established home country of therbands I

of Snake or Pinte Indians who were parties to the unratified treaty of De 

cember I0, 1868, and was the only areawhere those bands were willing to

live. . . other bands of Snake or Piutes inhabiting other areas in southeast

Oregon and adjacent areas in Nevada and Idaho were brought to the reser'vation to reside but most of them refused to reside there permanently and
returned to the lands formerly occupied by them. There were also some
bands of non-treaty Snake or Piute Indians in southeast Oregon who refused
to leave the territory they considered as their home . . . " (emphasis
supplied) ‘
The anthropologists also have recognized this lack of any collective
‘use and occupancy of the area by the Northern Paiute Indians. At best
petitioners‘ expert, Dr. Stewart, calls the Northern Paiute hands a tribe
whose unity was tenuous but who, he felt, shared the area in common as a
tribal territory. However, it is quite evident that the scholarly works
of this eminent anthropologist were based, as is the-case with most anthropological studies, upon many diverse factors and considerations some

of which are of little importance to a consideration of original Indian

title which is the issue confronting the Commission in this case. Dr.
J -‘:3

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 hO9

Stewart has placed great weight on the fact the Northern Paiutes were one
linguistic family, that they had common cultures and traditions and that
they did not engage in internal strife. As a step in reaching his conclusion thatthis linguistic entity had aboriginal possession of the vast,
contiguous territory assigned by him to the Northern Paiutes, Dr. Stewart
has arbitrarily assigned extensive areas of land to certain of his Northp
ern Paiute bands without recitation of any affirmative evidence that the
members of the band occupied or ever even ventured into the area. He
even divided areas between bands while explaining that one band‘s territory extended to the edge of the desert and the other‘s territory began on the other side of the desert.‘ He assigned a large area to one band

on the basis that no one else claimed it. He placed one Northern Paiute
band in an area of 2000 square miles even though the only informant who
could remember the band as distinct told Dr. Stewart that the area was
mixed with Shoshone and shared a part of the hunting area with them. He
assigned his largest area to a Northern Paiute band.while stating daere
‘was as much historical evidence to unite the band with the Faintes as
with the eastern groups.

Any determination of Indian title to an area of land.must be based
on affirmative evidence establishing actual exclusive use and occurizcg of
the area from time immemorial. Constructive possession is not o*i"’
to establish Indian title. The law in this regard is clear and well settied. See Quaoaw Tribe v. United States, 1 Indian Claims Commission E593

 

United States v. Santa Fe Pacific R. Co., 31b U. 5. 3393 Cramer v.

 

States 261 U. S. "219; Assiniboine Indian Tribe v. United States: 77 C1. C15.

7 Ind; Clo Coma  

316; Wichita Indians v. United States 89 C. Cls. 378.

The other anthropologists whose works have been submitted by both
parties in this case differ with Dr. tewart on the question of the unity
and common sharing by the Northern Paiutes of their aboriginally held lands.

Dr. Steward, whose studies of the Owens Valley are arse uncontradicted
as to their substance (although petitioners do differ with some of his conclusions), we found the Northern Paiute of Owens Valley were subdivided
into true composite land owning bands, each of which had a strong community feeling and a number of cooperative activities. In contrast he reported the Nevada Paiutes to be no more than small groups of wandering
families with none of the stability which characterized the Owens Valley
Indians.

Dr. Park, whose studies centered on the western Nevada area, found
that fivemain Paviotso bands occupied most of the claimed territory in
western Nevada. While describing the Paviotso as close linguistic and
cultural relatives of the Surprise Valley and Owens Valley Faiute, Dr.

Park stated that the Paviotso regarded therrselves as an entirely distinct
gTO1lp.

DI‘. Whiting, who studied the Oregon area, particularly the Nada ltlaters
of the Malheur-Harney Lake region, lirzited the list of those Northern
Paiute bands with whom the '-.-=§'ada Eaters had frequent intercourse to seven
bands in the Oregon area, excluding completely the Nevada area Paiutes.

Further the status of the aboriginal Northern Faiutes and the geog'aphy of their lands make it doubtful that they could have collectively med

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 1:11

67

and occupied the entire territory. The aboriginal Northern Paiutes were
foot Indians who devoted virtually all their time to *’seeui~ing the land
for food. Vast areas of barren, unproductive desert land or rugged mountain country separatal many of the more fertile localities in their territory. The area extended for some 600 miles from Owens Lake, California

to central Oregon.

Based on om‘ finniings that the Northern Paiutes, in aboriginal times ,
were completely lacking in any overall political organization with no
overall chief, that they were never recognized, designated or dealt with
by government officials as a single land using entity or nation, and that
they did not collectively use the entire Northern Paiute territory, the
Commission has found that the Northern Paiute Nation was not an aboriginal
land using entity.

Petitioners have argued that we should follow our decisions in the
Nooksack Tribe of Indians V. United States, 3 Indian Claims Commission 1:79

and I-iuckleshoot Tribe of Indians v. United States, 3 Indian Claims Commis 

sion, 658, in finding that the Northern Paiute Nation held Indian title to
the entire territory. They would place the so-called bands of  ‘.3..‘=3’.""-.-‘,-".',_’-»i-“
Say there were at least 26 and probably more in the position. of  try" 
mous, separate villages of the Puget Sound Nooksack and I-Iucklem::.,:a::t LE1";dians. Petitioners then urge that ties of kinship, culture,  «:::1Ilg1,‘=...EI=;;_'-:"%;‘:
bound the Northern Peiutes into one single lmd holding entity. We C8311‘-Oi;
agree that the facts in this case warrant the treatment of the 

Paiute Nation in the same fashion as we did the Nooksack and  P

Indians. The latter tribes were small tribes (Muckleshoot from: éi;5?ff% 

7 Ind. 01. Corn. 322 1,12

130 members and Nooksack approximately 1450 members) of fish eating Indians
whose land using activities were limited to small areas of occasional hunting or berry picking. Their life centered on the bays and rivers. The
areas found to have been exclusively used and occupied by the tribes were
small and compact (the Euckleshoot area contained l0l,620 acres, the
Nooksack area contained 80,590 acres and.both tracts were but'l2 miles
long at their extremes). The Eooksack and Huckleshoot Indians were
recognized, designated and dealt with by government officials as tribal
entities with collective rights to their aboriginally held lands.

This case, involving a vast area of 50,000,000 acres, 600 miles long,
allegedly occupied by a "Nation" of fron.o,0O0 to 10,000 Indians who were
constantly exploiting the meager resources of their lands, who were never
recognized, designated or dealt with by government officials as a tribal
land using entity and.who did not colleétively use the territory, is
clearly distinguishable from the Ncoksack and Kuckleshoot cases, as they
might be applied to the overall territory. However, the decisions in
the Nooksack and Mnckleshoot cases do have a definite application to
smaller areas which were collectively used by groups of Northern.Paiutes,
aS‘will be hereinafter discussed.

.It =ust.also be remembered that the factors to be considered in determining the land using entity are not the same as those involved in the
question of whether petitioners constitute an identifiable group for
jurisdictional purposes. One of the purposes of the Indian Claims Commission nct was to enlarge the category of groups who might present and

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 L113

,4.
‘.4?

prosecute claims, for Congress intended that all tribes, bands, or groups
of American Indians shoud have their day in court and have their claims
adjudicated. For jurisdictional purposes it is sufficient that tm petitioners were, at the time the petition was filed, a group of American Indians which was capable of identification regardless of their status in
aboriginal times as separate bands or villages. Indians of Cal£ornia
v. United States, 122 C. Cls. 3148. As the Court of Claims stated in

that decision, at page 359, “In View of the obvious purpose which Congress

intended to accomplish by the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act,

as disclosed by its history, it is our opinion that the provisions relating to me jurisdiction and authority of the Commission to hear and determine clairzzs presented, should be liberally construed" (emphasis supplied.)

 

_ But the Court in clear and unmistakable language pointed out that such

liberality related only to the jurisdiction and authority to hear claims.

It said, at page 356, "For jurisdictional purposes, which relate only to

the authority to entertain the petition and to hear and determine claims

the merits and the nature of the proof that will be required to establish

the claims are not @olved" (emphasis supplied).

 

So while the petitioning Northern Paiute Indians constituted, at the
‘C-ime the petition Has filed, an identifiable group for jurisdictional purposes, the proof in this case has failed to establish a Northern‘ Paiute
Nation as the aborigmal land holding entity under the well established
law concerning Indian title.

Since this action ‘as also brought for and on behalf of all the 

“Sing 81" Oups of Northern Paiute Indians, we now turn to the consideratpion.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 2 I hlh

'of those groups.

The first such aboriginal land using group was composed of those
Northern Paiutes who were in aboriginal times generally referred to as
Monos or Paiute of Owens Valley and who had exclusively used and occupied in Indian fashion.fron time immemorial that portion of the claimed
territory described in.Finding of Fact No. 21. The evidence, as detailed
in our findings of fact, establishes that this group of Northern Paiutes
collectively used and occupied their lands in a condition which was
separate, distinct and isolated from their neighboring Northern.Paiutes
in Nevada. The evidence has affirmatively established that the Owens
Valley Paiutes used and occupied the localities throughout the described
area, and they were recognized andciesignated by various goverrsent officials as a group of Indians who existed in their own territory separate
and apart from.the other Northern Paiutes.

The second group of aboriginal land using Northern Paiute Indians
wasthe Paviotso or Paiute who occupied the area in western Nevada,
with small portions in.California, as described in detail in our Finding
of Fact No. 22. This group of Northern Paiute Indians collectively used
and occupied the entire area described in Finding of Fact No. 22 and
seldom ventured into the lands belonging to their southern neighbors,
the Paiutes of Owens Valley, or their northern neighbors £rom'whom they
were separated by extensive desert and waste land. ‘lhe Paviotso or
Paiute of the western Nevada area regarded themselves as a group separate
and distinct from both the Owens Valley Indians and the Paiutes or Snakes
to the north. hhile the Indians in this area were comprised of small

individual families who were to a certain extent organized into various

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 M5

bands or goups, they did enjoy a common use of the entire area. They
were recognized and designated by government officials as a separate

entity or goup of Paiute Indians.

To the north of the area occupied by the Paviotso or Paiutes of

_ western Nevada was the area along the northwestern Nevada border and in

southwestern Oregon, with a small portion in California, which had been
exclusively used and occupied in Indian fashion from tire i.mm.emorial

by groups of Northern Paiute Indians who were, in aboriginal times,
generally referred to as Snakes, Digger Snakes or Paiutes. Included
among these groups of so-called Snakes were certain bands who had, in
later aboriginal times, developed into land using groups existing separate
and apart from the other d"Snake“ Indians in the area. These bands, whose
status .as separate and distinct aboriginal land using entities has previously been discussed, were the Walpapi, the Yahooskin, and the Snake

or Piute Indians of the former Nalheur Reservation. These groups and
their territory have been specifically removed from the scope of this
action for reasons which have already been detailed.

The evidence has established that the remaining bazris or groups of
"Snake" or Paiute Indiars exclusively used and occupied in Indian fas1r";:‘:o:1
that portion of the claimed territory described in our  of Fact
N0» 23. Those "Snake" Irziians used and occupied all of the described
lands in common. They existed separate and apart from the Paviotso or
Paiute Indians to the south and were so recognized and designated by
government officials.

AS previously stated the Commission has rejected petitioners’ argu-ment that our decisions in the Nooksack and Huckleshoot cases should

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 at .» , M15

control in considering the question of the holding of Indian title to
the entire area by the Northern Paiute Nation. However, with respect
to the smaller areas in Owens Valley,‘western Nevada and Oregon we find
that the evidence supports a determination of Indian title as was done

in the Nooksack and.Muckleshoot cases. The three Northern.Paiute areas

awere occupied by groups of Indians who, while lacking any political unity,

did have the similarities of language and culture generally possessed
by all Northern Paiutes and, in addition, did collectively use and occupy‘
their respective areas and were recognized and designated by the early

government officials as sharing the described areas in a common use of

'the land..

‘I

The Commission sees no merit to defendant‘s argument that oecause

«there‘may have'been a feeling of individual or family ownership of the

pine nut trees, such areas must be excluded from any award. The aborigines‘
concept of "ownership" is immaterial to our determination of Indian title.
If, as we have found, the Indians had exclusively used and occupied in.
Indian fashion a definite area from time immemorial, it matters not what
legal concept the Indians may have had concerning their use and occupancy
of the land.‘

IHaving thus.determined the aboriginal land using entities'whom the
petitioners have represented in this action, we must consider the existence
of members or descendants of members of each of the groups, for it is
well established that in cases of this type which rely on proof of ownership of specific areas by specific aboriginal tribes, bands, or groups,

it must be shown.that there are living members or descendants of members

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 i a 1117

who could participate in an award made on behalf of such groups. (See

Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 15. United States, 11. Ind. Cl. Comm. 223).

o

with respect to the first group, that is the Monos or Paiutes of
Owens Valley, petitioners have not included the testimony of any Northern
Paiute who can definitely trace his ancestry to a member of that aboriginal group. However, the Commissionhas been able, from other evidence
of record and documents not included in this record, to establish the
e:-r.iste_nce,on the date the petition was filed in this matter, of descendants of the Paiutes of Owens Valley. The evidence, as outlined in
our Finding of Fact No. 21;, recorded the population figures for the Owens

Valley area from 1855 until l9SO. The works of Dr. Steward have identi-'

--’ F ---D--—---- -0-», _/J J ‘In--In-1-I-4-D ‘UV-full-0'!»-I‘-I ‘Inf-h -In-uh. V  \A-H-rind \f\.vJ-AN-I|»‘.A-LI.‘-I83

of the original Paiutes in the area.

The latest available figures compiled in the years l9l;5 and l9SO
list at least 8lS Painters living on various reservations or hidian colonies
in the Owens Valley area.

Many of the named individual petitioners and a number of other
Northern Paiute Indians who testified in this action presently live in

the Nevada area and have ancestors who were members of the aboriginal

Paviotso or Paiute group of western Nevada. Evidence of the 
of living descendants of the aborigines in this area and st::.*‘::Lr,j:::a: ,cernx the present Paiute population in the area is contained ‘:3 

Finding of Fact No. 25. ..
One of the Northern Paiutes ".-duo testified in this case, iIT}j,':a:.v;r"

Gill, is descended from Northern Paiute Irnim who were 

7 End. Cl. Com. 322 hi8

the aboriginal Snake or Piute Indian group of the Oregon area. The
figures with respect to the present ?a‘ute population in this area is
set forth in our Finding of Fact No. 26.

Accordingly, the Commission has found that there were, on the date
the petition was filed in this matter, living descendants of th aboriginal members of each of the aboriginal land using entities described
in our Findings of Fact Nos. 21, 22, and 23.

In aboriginal times the Northern Paiutes in the various areas had,
at test, a meager existence. Since they lived on land which was among
the poorest in this country, it was necessary for them to use the scanty
resources to the limit. As white settlers and travelers moved into and
across the area they brought cattle which ate grass thereby destroying
many of the seeds and.roots upon which the aboriginal Indians fed, and
the white men out pine nut trees for building and fuel thereby destroving
one of the main sources of their food. Thus, by the gradual influx of
white settlers, miners and travelers in various areas throughout the
entire Horthern.?aiute territory, the Indians were deprived of many of
the means by which they had exclusively used and occupied the area in
their Indian fashion. There were numerous reports of starvation and
great suffering by the aborigines as a resu t of the increasing encroachment of the whites upon their lands. There were also in some

..-..\...*.1

sections military actions taken by the United States to suppress Indian

1"
up

uprisings and to force th- “orthern -aiutes from their lands and onto
various reservations where thcy could not interfcre vith the white van’:

use of the land. The government agents in the area were constant?3

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 322 1319

striving to promote peaceful relationships between the Indians and the
white settlers whozhad moved onto their lands. Thus, without the payment
of compensation, the United States acquired, controlled and treated the
lands oi‘ the various Northern Paiute groups as public lands.

The defendant argues that the Indians by their removal from certain
areasof their territory to reservations or white communities voluntarily
abandoned any Indianntitle which they might have held. The Commission
sees no merit to this contention. When, by reason of the depletion of
their food sources by white settlers, the Indians were faced with starvation, r_e‘;aoval to reservations or white settlements where they might
receive supplies_ does not constitute a voluntary abandonment of their
Indian title to their lands. Nor does the fact that _not all the Northern

Paiutes took to the warpath, to resist the white encroachments or resisted

to the point of necessitating their removal from some areas by military
forcemean that theyerelinquished or abandoned their Indian title.

because of the gradual influx of whites in the area at varying dates,
it is_not possible to seta precise date of taking of the lands in question.
In view oi‘ the fact that the Commission has divided the claimed territOTY into three. areas eachuexclusively used and occupied by a separate
and distinct aboriginal Northern Paiute group, the question of the dates
of taking must necessarily be considered for each such area. The Commissiozi
will not now make such determinations but will leave this question either
to the parties to agree upon average dates of taldng for each area, or,
in the absence of such agreement and upon further briefing ofpthis

question in the light of this decision, the Commission will fix average

dates of taking for each of the described areas.

7 Ind. 01. Com. 322 1:20

The Cozmission has, however, fixed the date of taking of those
areas included in the present State of California. On March 3, 1851,
Congress passed (9 Stat. 631) an action under which it was provided
that all claims to land in nae State of California had to be presented
to commissioners within two years for confirmation, and, at the end of
that time, all lands the claims to which had not been presented were to

be deemed to be held and considered part of the public domain of the

;.l

Unite States. Two years later, Congress passed an Act, on March 3,
1853 (lo Stat. 2141.1) providing that from that date the public lands of
California were to be surveffed and preemption rights were ganted to
settlers. From that date, ‘Each 3, 1853, the United States for all
intents and purposes treated the lands of the Northern Paiutes in
California as public lands and so considered said lands to be public
lands. (The Mohave Tribe v. The United States, Dockets 283 and 295,
consolidated, decided March. 19, 1959, 7 Indian Claims Commission 219).
The Commission concludes that the petitioners have the right to
maintain this action for an on behalf of all descendants of the Northern
Paiute Nation. The‘Com::1issic.~n further concludes that those land using
entities described in Findings of Fact Nos. 2l, 22, and 23, namely the
Monos or Paiutes of Owens Valley, the Paviotso or Paintes of western
Nevada, and the "Snake" or Paiutes of the Oregon area, which entities
were constituent parts of the present so-called Northern Paiute Nation,
held Indian title to the respective areas of land described in Findings
of Fact ?~l'os. 21, 22, and 23, and that said Indian title “as acquired hr

the United States from the three aforementioned land using Northern

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 322 h2l

Paiute entities without the payment of compensation therefor, and thereby

entitling the aforementioned land using Northern Paiute entities to recover under Section 2, Clause (14) of the Indian Claims Commission Act.
The case shall now proceed to a determination of the dates of acquisition
of those portions of the three land areas outside the present State of
California, the acreage of each of the three areas involved, the value

of each of the three areas on the dates they were acquired by the United
States without payment of compensation, and the amount of offsets, including money or property given to or funds expended gratuitously for

the three land using entities, allowable under the Indian Claims Commis sion Act .

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

We concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Chlel 0II1‘mlSSlOI1€I‘

Louis J. O'Marr

Associate Commissioner

