7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 79).! 805

BEFORE THE IIIDIAN CLA.II{S coz=::~r:ss"rc:*

THE Y.KIHA TRIBE OF INDIAES,
Petitioner,
V.

Docket No. 161

THE UNITED STATES,

Defendant.

" \....-ix./'\...#'\-...-f\._.J\..../\../--....-I‘-...#

THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE
COIHILLE RESERVATION as the

Representative of the.Moses Band,
Petitioner,
v. Docket No. 22h

THE UNITED STATES,

N.../\..../‘\...4"5~...-'\.../\..aI\n..!\n../\.../\../\~..J'

Defendant.

Decided: July 28, 1959

Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell,
Attorney for Petitioner in
Docket No. 161 ~"

.1. S. Weissbrodt, with'whom~ ‘PW it
were David Cobb, Abe'W} Weissbrodt,M,_
Rella R. Shwartz and Lyle Keith;“e a"
Attorneys for Petitioners in

Docket No. 22h.

John D. Sullivan, with whom.was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General,
Perry“H.iMorton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION _g§’_ geg co:-msszor

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h   . 806

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The cause of action in Docket Do. 161 has been brought by the
Yakima Tribe, which is more fully described in its approved contracts
employing counsel, dated July 20, 1958 and December 10, 1958, as the
Yakima Tribe of Indians of the Yakima Indian Reservation in the State
of Washington. The cause of action in Docket No. 22h was originally
filed by the confederated tribes of the Colville Reservation as the successor to the claims of and as representatives of the Moses Band and by
two named individuals as representatives of the Moses Band. ‘The petition
was subsequently amended to include the constituent tribes of the Moses
Band, which tribes were alleged to be the Columbia, Chelan, Entiat and
'Nenatchee.

Both petitioner in Docket No. l6l and petitioners in Docket No._22h
asserted that they were entitled to represent the bands or tribes of Indians which aboriginally possessed a certain area located in the northern
portion of the territory ceded to the Dnited States by the Treaty of
June 9,rl8S5 (12 Stat. 951) (hereinafter called the Yakima Treaty) which
ceded area is described by Charles C. Royce in his compilation of Indian
land cessions as Royce area Boh, shown on Map l of the State of Washington.

By order of the Conmission dated May 23, 1957, the two Dockets Nos.
161 and 22h were consolidated for the purpose of trial, and it was ordered
that a separate trial be had to first determine:

"(l) whether the petitioners,or any of then, have
authority, under the Indian Claims Commission Act, to

present claims for the_taking of the area described in
Paragraph 8 of the petition in Docket No. 22h, as amended;

7 Ind. 01. Com. 79t 807

(2) whether the petitioners, or any of them, held
Indian title to the said area, or any part thereof;

(3) the date of the taking, if any, of the said area,
or any part thereof by the defendants.”

Hearings were conducted in conformance with the order at which
time petitioners in Docket No. 22h filed a motion for leave to intervene as petitioners in the claim presented by the Yakima Tribe of
Indians, Docket No. 161. At the conclusion of the hearing petitioner
in Docket No. 161 filed a motion to dismiss Docket No. 22h insofar as
Docket No. 161 is concerned.

Petitioner in Docket No. 161 maintains that it is the full successor in interest of the aboriginal bands which comprised the Yakima
Nation.which aboriginal bands, it alleges, included the Wenatchee,
Entiat, Chelan and Columbia Indians. It also contends that the Moses

, Band was not an aboriginal tribe or band holding Indian title to anye
definable area and that the Moses Band Has not composed of nor the

successor of the Wenatchee, Entiat, Chelan, and Columbia tribes or,

, bands.p Therefore, petitioner in Docket Do. 161 maintains that it has

,__$he paramount right to prosecute the claim, and it seeks to have theo

petition in Docket No. 22h dismissed insofar as Docket No. 161 is
concerned.

The petitioners in.Docket No. 22h contend that they, in a representative capacity, are entitled to maintain the action on behalf of
all members of the Columbia, Chelan, Entiat, and'Henatchee, a majority"
of the members of which tribes, it is alleged, moved onto the Colville

Reservation. The petitioners maintain that the Moses Band was comprised

.
..u ': -"
.u_..! :5}

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 795 805

of the Columbia, Chelan, Entiat and'Henatchee bands or tribes each of
which.was a separate and distinct aboriginal land using entity and
that those four groups did not become a constituent part of the Yakima
Nation. The petitioners contend that the Columbia, Chelan, Entiat and
'Wenatchee Indians refused to move onto the Yakima Reservation, did not
receive any benefits from the treaty, and refused to associate them;
selxfeshaith the Yakima Nation. C
It is the defendant's position that the Yahima Tribe, petitioner

in bochet.No. l6l, is not entitled to represent the Chelan, Entiat

and Columbia Indians because, italleges, those tribes were not parties
to the Yakima Treaty and have never been a part of the petitioning
Yahima Tribe. Defendant further contends that the Chelan, Entiat,

'Wenatchee and Columbia Indians are not members of the Moses Band and V

that therefore petitioners in Docket No. 22h are not entitled to represent the Chelan, Entiat,'Wenatchee and Columbia Indians.

Based on the evidence of record, as detailed in our Findings of
Fact, the Commission has found that the Colunbia,'Wenatchee, Entiat
and Chelan Indians were represented at the Yakima_Treatp'council,con- _
sented to the treaty, and were included among those Indians which formed
the confederation of tribes or bands into the Yakina Nation. Mr. George
Gibbs, who later was to write the Yakima Treaty, visited the claimed
area in l8S3, and his subsequent report, which is quoted in pertinent
part in Finding of Fact No. b, described the term hisquouse as including
the Indians on the Columbia between the Priest‘s and Ross rapids, on the

Pisquouse or'Winatshapam river, the En-te-at-kwu, Chelan lake, and the

E .

7 Ind. 01. Com. 791: I 809

Methow or Barrier river. This description includes the claimed aboriginal lands of the Columbia, Wenatchee, Entiat and Chelan Tribes. Mr.
Gibbs described the country of the Pisquouse as lying immediately north
of that of the Yakima's. Although, he noted that they had so much intermarried with the Yakimas that they had almost lost their nationality.

‘Thereafter, in l85h, the acting commissioner of Indian Affairs
instructed Governor Isaac I. Stevens of‘Washington Territory to negotiate treaties with the Indian tribes, bands and groups of'Washington
Territory for the extinguishment of their claim of title for lands
within the territory. Governor Stevens was instructed to unite the
numerous bands and fragments of tribes into tribes to be concentrated
upon reservations to be set apart. The various Indian tribes and bands
from the general area, including the area in the northern part of.i
Royce Area 36h which was under consideration at the consolidated hearing,
were invited to a treaty council at Walla Walla, Washington.

The official proceedings of the treaty council record that there‘
were delegates from.various Indian groups including the Pisquouse and
Wenatshappam Indians.r The record reported that Chief Kamaiakun described
the Indian tribes or bands who consider him as their head chief to in- 7
clude the Pisquouse and that during the council several headmen of the
Pisquouse were present and unanimously assented to Kamaiakun's decision.
The record reports that:

"Kamaikun was present at the General Council during

the day but did not speak; and in the evening immediately

after the Council he called upon Gov. Stevens for the

Treaty and signed it: Owhi and Shloom did the same, as

also the Palouse Chief Kahlatoose, and all Chiefs present,
named by Kamaikun as being under his jurisdiction."

ll-, .- i
I,;,_,a_,.’.‘

7 Ind. Cl, Com. 79h 810

Both uiltaneinok and his younger brother Hoses attended the treaty
ccuncil'as members of the Columbia band and, it is reported, Qui taneinok
spoke favorably for the treaty. The treaty was signed by Te~cole-kun
and La—hoom, both chiefs from the Pisquouse area. The preamble of the
_akima Treaty recited the tribes and bands of Indians which were to
constitute the Yakima Nation and included the Pisquouse and Wenatshapam.
The area which was ceded by the Yakima Treaty as described in Finding

of Fact ?(b) included substantially the same area as that claimed by

the Columbia,'Nenatchee, Entiat and Chelan Indians as their aboriginal
lands and that area was clearly included in the map prepared by Governor
tevens to depict the ceded area, which map was included with his letter
transmitting the treaty to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

In View of the evidence, as summarized above, the Commission has
concluded that the term Pisqucuse was a general name nhich included the
‘Wenatchee, Entiat, Chelan and Columbia. Further, the'Wenatchee were
included in the confederation under the name'Wenatshapam, *

Accordingly, by the terms of the Yakima Treaty, which was ratified
on March 8, l8S9, the confederated tribes or bands named in the preamble
to the treaty became merged into the newly formed Yakima Nation; Thus
the confederated Yakima Nation became the successor in interest to the
formerly separate tribal entities and all of the rights of the former
separate tribal entities were merged as of March 8, 1859.’ Since by
the terms of the Yakima Treaty the confederated tribes and bands ceded,

relinquished and conveyed to the United States all their rig t, title

and interest in and to the lands occupied and claimed by them as

‘Oh

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 791: 811

described in Article I, the United States, on March.8, ldS9, the effective
date of the Yakima Treaty, extinguished the Indian title of all the tribes,
bands or groups within the area described.

The'Commission has further found that many of the Indians whose.

tribes or bands were included in the Yakirza Nation confederation refused

to move onto the Yakima Reservation which had been created under Article

II of the Yakima Treaty. Neither the Chelan, Entiat, Wenatchee nor
Columbia moved onto the Yakima Reservation as a tribe, although individual members of each of the four tribes did remove to. that reservation.
In fact Chief Kamaiakun also refused to move onto the Yakima Reservation
or accept any of the treaty benefits.

In about 1862 Moses became a leader of the Columbia Indians and
in succeedingyears grew in influence among the Indians of the area
until his followers included members of the Chelan, Entiat, Wenatchee
and Columbia Indians as well as individual Indians from other neighboring
tribes. Thereafter, on April 18, 1879, and on July 7, 1883, Chief Moses

entered into agreements relinquishing all right, title and interest of

. , his people in and to any and all of the lands claimed by them and agreeing .

first to remove to the Columbia Reservationgand then, by the later agreement, to the Colville Reservation. Chief Moses and his followers did,

in fact, move onto the Colville Reservation and the members of his band
or the descendants thereof have continued to reside on that reservation A

- until the ‘present date.
While the Commission has not and does not consider it necessary

to find that the Moses Band was the successor of the Columbia, Chelan,

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 791: 812

Entiat and'Henatchee Indians, it does find that the so-called Moses

Band included certain members and descendants of members of the Columbia,
Chelan, Entiat and Wenatchee Indians which bands or tribes had been
merged by the Yakima Treaty into the Yakima Nation.

_In conclusion, therefore, it appears that while a majority of the
members of the constituent bands or tribes of the Yakima Nation did
eventually remove to the Yakima Reservation and are included in the
organization known as the Yakima Tribe of Indians of the Yakima Indian
Reservation in the State of'Washington, it is true that there nere
certain members or descendants of members of the constituent bands or
tribes of the Yakima Nation who did not move onto the Yakima Reservation
and are not represented by the Yakima Tribe, petitioner in Docket No.
161. In this regard it is clear that the petitioner in Docket No. lél
does not represent the members or descendants of members of the original
Yakima Nation who followed Moses and did not move onto the Yakima Reservation. .As petitioner in Docket No. 161 states on page 39 of its
brief in Eupport of its motion to dismiss, filed June 18, 1938:

"Thus Hoses and that portion of his people'aho formerly
had rights under the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855, twice
voluntarily relinquished those rights under the so-called.

Moses Agreements of 1879 and 1883, and can no longer claim
any rights as Yakima Indians under the Yakima Treaty; *

-§--l’<--L* * * they cannot now also claim rights as members of
the Yakima Nation entitled to any interest in the claim
of the Yakima Tribe in Docket No. 161."
The Commission does not agree with petitioner in Docket No. 161

in this regard. The Indian title in the Colnmbia,'¥enatchee, Entiat

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79b ' 813

and Chelan Tribes was extinguished by the Yakima Treaty and by the
terms of the treaty those Indians became a constituent part of the
Yakima Natipn. Any award for injuries inflicted on the Yakima Nation s
by the actions of the United States in taking the Indians‘ aboriginal
lands for an alleged unconscionable consideration should be for the
benefit of all members or descendants of members of all the constituentg
tribes or bands of the Yakima Nation as such nation was created and
existed by the Yakima Treaty, and such rights were not relinquished
under the so-called Moses Agreements. Since petitioner in Docket No.
l6l cannot be called the full successor to the Yakima Nation as it

was created and existed pursuant to the Yakima Treaty and since both
petitioners in Dockets Nos. 161 and 22b include members or descendants of
members of the bands or tribes comprising the Yakima Nation, both petitioner in Docket No. 161 and petitioners in Docket No. 22h are entitled
to present claims for the taking of Royce Area 36h. See McGhee (Creek
Nation essi) v. The Creek Nation and the United States, 122 c. Cls. 380;

1-jt-nun:-n-.-._______,.*,

Delaware v. United States, 2 Ind. Cl. Comm. éS3;.Aff*d 130 C. Cls. 782,

 

79h—795, reversed and remanded on other grounds.

The motion to dismiss Docket No. 22h insofar as Docket No. 161 is

concerned is denied.

In view of the facts of this case it is clear that petitioner in
Docket No. 22h has an interest in Royce Area 36% which neither petitioner
in Docket No. l6l nor the defendant is interested in protecting.’ In '
fact petitioner in Docket No. l6l seeks to exclude from possible recovery

311 Parties, who, though originally members of the Yakima Nation,

,a; 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h Blh

supposedly relinqpished their rights under the Yakima Treaty and accepted
other lands or who voluntarily enrolled and affiliated with other Indian
tribes on other Indian reservations. Accordingly, the Commission concludes that petitioner in Docket No. 22h should be allowed to intervene
in the action brought by petitioner in Docket No. 151, and it will be

so ordered. ./

’/

Q
I

In View of the decision made with respect to representation, the
Commission will not at this time proceed with determinations concerning
the limited area described in paragraph 8 of Docket No. 22h, as amended.
The parties are instructed to proceed.with the trial concerning the remaining portion of Royce Area 36b, presenting evidence as to the aboriginal

holdings of each of.the remaining separate aboriginal entities which be 

came merged into the Yakima Nation.

I t 1 _ Wm. M. Holt
' p Associate Commissioner.
J - . ‘.

 

I concur:g

Edgar E. Witt :   --   ; r
Chief Commissioner ' D

