December 27, 1957 85~a
Retyped

THE OMAHA TRIBE OF NEBRASKA, AND AMOS LAWSON, CHARLES J. SPRINGER, JOHN F. TURNER
AND HENRY F. FREEMONT, EX REL. OMAHA TRIBE OF NEBRASKA, OMAHA TRIBE AND NATION, :
INCLUDING ALL GROUPS, BANDS AND MEMBERS OF SAID OMAHA TRIBE AND NATION, Plaintiffs

V.
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, Defendants

00 on V00
0 ‘DO 90 oo

ORDER
On August 12, 1957, the defendant filed its motion to dismiss the amended complaint, which was

filed herein on October 6, 1953, and on November ?, 1957, said motion and the plaintiffs‘ opposition
thereto was argued before and submitted to the Commission, by the parties, and taken under advisement,
and now the Commission concludes as a matter of law and in accordance with the opinion this day filed

herein’
(l) That as to any claims contended for in plaintiffs’ brief (although not alleged in the amend~

ed complaint, Count I) for damages resulting from trespasses committed by third persons not alleged to
have been participated in by defendant, the amended complaint does not state a cause of action;
(2) That as to any claim contained in Count I of the amended complaint for damages resulting

from trespasses committed by or in which the defendant participated the motion of defendant must be
overruled but the allegations thereof must be made more definite and certain as hereinafter required;

(3) That Count II of the amended complaint does not state facts sufficient to constitute a cause:
of action against the defendant; furthermore, the cause of action attempted to be asserted by plaintiffs is barred by the decision or judgment of the Supreme Court in the case The Omaha Tribe of Indians
v. United States, 253 U.S. 275, by which said court, on appeal from a judgment of the Court of Claims
53 C. Cls. S49, decided adversely to the plaintiffs herein on the claim set forth in said Count II.

IT IS THEREFORE ORDERED AND ADJUDGED:
(1) That the motion of defendant as to any claims contained in Count I of the amended complaint for

damages resulting from trespasses, if any, comitted by third persons and not: participated in by defendant, is sustained and such claims are dismissed; '

-(2) That the motion of the defendant as to any claim contained in Count I of the amended complaint
for damages resulting from trespasses committed by or in which the defendant participated, is overruled
provided however the plaintiffs shall, within 60 days from the date of this order, amend Count I of its
petition by setting forth therein the time, manner and place the alleged trespasses were committed by

or participated in by defendant;
(3) That as to Count II of the amended complaint, said motion of defendant is sustained and said

count is hereby dismissed;
(4) That with respect to Count III of the amended petition, said motion is overruled but the defendant may, if it so desires, present a similar motion directed-.at any amended Count III which may

hereafter be filed herein.

Dated at Washington, D.C. this 27th day of December, 1957.
Edgar E. Witt, Chief Commissioner

Louis J. 0'Marr, Associate Commissioner
Wm. M. Holt, Associate Commissioner

 

 

