BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

1-an CO1\IFEDERA.TED TREES or )
TE COLVILLE mssnvnrrxon, )
ET 53..., )
)

Petitioners, )

V. g Docket No. 181

THE UNITED.STA‘I'ES_ or nmnlci, )
)

Defendant. )

Decided: February 29, 1956

Appearances:

I. S. Weissbrodt, with whom

were David Cobb, Abe W. Weissbrodt,
and Lyle Keith,

Attorneys for Petitioners.

John D. Sullivan. with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE C0£HISSION

'¢$t:;Q 

 

0”Earr, Commissioner. delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petition in this case presents the claims of six tribes, namely,
Colville. Okanogan, Sanpoil. Nespelem, Lake and Methow, arising out of
the alleged taking my the United States of lands aboriginally used and
occupied by said tribes without the payment of compensation therefor.
The six tribes are now part of the organization known as the Gonfederated
Tribes of the Colville Reservation, nhich is recognized by tie Secretary
of the Interior as having authority to represent the Indians enrolled

on the Colville Indian Reservation in the State of Washington, including

the petitioner,tribes. The petition was filed with this Commission by

1% 187

said Confederated Tribes, as representative of the above-named_tribes
and by certain named individuals as representatives of the respective
tribes. (Findings 1, 2, and 3).

The case was presented and the proof was offered by the respective
tribes. The proof conclusively shows that, while for administrative
purposes the several tribes on the Colville Reservation have operated
under an organization known as The Confederated Tribes of the Colville
Reservation, large numbers of each of the petitioner tribes reside on
said reservation and belong to said organization and by reason of the
fact that each petitioner tribe is suing separately an award herein can
and will be made for the separate tribes.

The only question before the Commission at this time is whether the
defendant is liable to any or all of the petitioners, leaving for future
determination the amount of such liability, should it be established.

Petitioners state that the issues before this Commission at this
time are threefold, namely: (1) What areas of land were aboriginally
used and occupied by each of these petitioner tribes?; (2) When and how
did the United States take the lands so held?; (3) What compensation, if
any, was paid to each of petitioner tribes for the taking? (Pet. Br-s
page 1). The parties have stipulated that the United States has never
entered into any treaty of cession with any of the six tribes and that the
United States has never paid any of the petitioner tribes for their lands
lying outside the boundaries of the reservation established by the ExeCU$1N

Counsel for defendant contends the issues

Order of July 2, 1872. (Tr. 8).

before the Commission are twofold: (1) Were all or any of the six claimants

at the time in question a politically organized, property—owning unite 8nd

lg. 13:

therefore, the party suffering a loss, if any?; and (2) Did the petitioners
or any of them have aboriginal Indian title to any of the lands for which
claim is made? (Def. Br., page 28).

The lands for which petitioners seek to establish Indian title and
for the taking of which they ask compensation are located along the upper
reaches of the Columbia River and its tributaries in the northeastern section
of the State of Washington in what are now Okanogan, Douglas, Ferry,
Lincoln, and_Stevens counties, (Finding 5). Since the advent of the white
man into this region, historical records have, in a general way, located
these Indians in certain portions of this territory. The hes have
always, except in rare instances, been said to have resided along the
Columbia River from the Canadian_border down to a point just above
Kettle Falls; the Colville have consistently been named as living along
the same river from just above Kettle Falls down to Hunters, Washington;
the Sanpoil, according to these records, have always been known to make
their home along the Columbia south of the Big Bend and on the Sanpoil
River, while their neighbors, the Nespelem, are reported on the Columbia
and Nespelem rivers; the Okanogan have always been described as living
on the river of that name; and, finally, the Methow have been generally
located west of the Columbia and on the Mathew River. There is no history
of record of any migration of these Indians from these general locations
where they remained during the white Contact period until placed upon the
Colville Reservation following its establishment by Executive order on
July 2, 1872.

The findings of fact made herein are exhanstive and detailed for

each of the petitioner tribes with respect to their history, political

composition, subsistence pattern, use and occupation of land, and their
contact with the white man. These findings are made upon facts disclosed
by the tremendous documentary record in this case, consisting of some
six hundred exhibits including a great number of ethnological studies
previously made of these Indians and by the testimony of two qualified
ethnologists, Dr. Verne F. Ray, for petitioners, a recognized authority
on the Indians of this region, and Stuart A. Chalfant, for defendant.
Since the findings are numerous and exhaustive, they are not paraphrased
herein, but are referred to where pertinent to a determination of the
issues.

Several subsidiary matters must be mentioned before discussing the
main issues involved in this case. Although the amended petition —— the

petition was amended solely to sever claims not pertinent to the issues

now before the Commission —- contains allegations with respect to recognition by defendant of title in these tribes to their lands, the petitioners

do not urge such recognition in their briefs nor request an ultimate
finding with respect thereto. In any event, the evidence of record does
not support finding title by recognition. The evidence does support the
conclusion, however, that the Indian title to lands outside the reservation was extinguished by the United States without the payment of
compensation as of July 2, 1872, when by Executive order the Colville
Indian Reservation was established in Washington, as stated in Finding N2.

Defendant, with respect to the main issues in this proceeding,

contends that petitioners were not politically tribes, and that none

of the six groups had a government, or tribal organization. Defendant

urges that these divisions or groups "not having an entity, not having

M1

0 .

an organization, not bound together politically, but just treated
separately because of linguistic and other considerations, are not
oeyahle, legally or otherwise, of having an interest in.pro9erty of any

kind." (Tr. 196-19?). Defendant’s counsel argues that the ethnologists

agree that, with the exception of the Lakes, each petitioner comprised a
number of villages or hands and that the autonomous unit was the village
or band which.had its own leaders, and that for these reasons the Village
or band and not the petitioners herein, "is the only proper entity, if
any, entitled to recover compensation for the taking of any particular

lani in the elaimed area," (Def, Br.. pages 28~29),

Aboriginally, the political organization~of these groups of Indians,
was the village or the hand, with the excettion of the Lakes, who did

have a tribal organisation. (?et, Ex, 373). Bay, in writing o

Sanpoil, said: (Pet, Ex, 1178-,
The Sanpoil ptlitical unit was the village.
ization in the ordinary sesse was lacking entirely, is
inhabitants of a village were known by the name of that village
plus the prefix “s” or the suffix "X" or both, E0 term existed
or any larger political ageregation, but there res a name for
the more inclusive dialectic division, The members of each
village were subject to their own chief and to no others,
The chief of one village, no matter how small, answered in no
wise to the chief of any other village, “ 3 ° l

The Sanpoil realized that many of their neighbors, not far
distant, lived under an entirely different type of political
organization * * 3 knit into a single group which recognised
a single head, Informants used these tribes for contrast to
make it entirely clear that the only bonds between the Sanyoil
villages were of an utterly different nature, These bonds were
social, linguistic, common interests and customs m not political.

The Sanpoil (including the Nespelem), Ray found were, however, "one people”

who made use of common territory for hunting and berry picking, and con“
sidered th- area, which he states was fairly well houndei, as their

proper range for food,

Leslie Spier, in writing of the use of the term "tribe" for the
groups of Indians in eastern Washington, states: "Here too residence

with a particular group is no criterion that an individual ‘belongs’
to that tribal or national unit. Again dialectic and territorial
community are the cue to the larger groupings. At the same time, it
is not desirable to assume that dialectic and tribal groupings are one
and the same thing." (Pet. Ex. M92). Miss Walters who studied the
political organization of the Southern Okanogan and found it to be

composed of autonomous bands, observed: "The term ‘tribe’ is loosely

used in anthropological literature * * *."

Hay, in his "Native Villages and Groupings" (Pet. Ex. 1:82), had
this to say with regard to the use of the word “tribe”:

But one point is clear: the tribe in any literal sense
is absent from a great part of the Basin. In consequence
the term has been avoided throughout this paper as a designation for any group where definite indications of true
tribal organization are absent. If the concept of tribe is
to retain any significance whatsoever it must not be stripped
of its basic implication of political unity. Yet political
affiliation of any kind between one and another village of
many of the social and geographical units here treated was
entirely lacking. In other words, the political unit was the
village itself, any political entity of greater embrace being

wholly unknown. *_* *.

 

 

It is not argued here that village autonomy indicates the
absence of any significant unit of larger compass than the
village. The essential point is that under these circumstances
the larger unit was ethnic or social in nature. * * * Yet
nameless. these social groupings were far from unimportant.
Bonds of common habitat, common interest, like customs, like
values, one religion and one language are not to be passed over
lightly. The feeling of unity that exists among speakers of a
common dialect often is especially striking. ” * *

Further, intermarriage among members of friendly villages
not far separated was exceedingly common, resulting in relatives
being distributed over a number of villages. Then too. Common

h lc

hHntin§n berrying and root grounds were used by a nnmber of
villages. the grouping being determined by factors mentions
above together with geographical conditions. During these
activities village affiliation was more or less forgotten and
all mingled freely.

These observations made by ethnologists of the early aboriginal composition

of these Indians of northeastern Washington. are important, not to esta ~
lish the existence of an "ethnic tribe" but to show that among these

groups there were present elements characteristic of a tribe except the

political ties. There was needed only a purpose to supply the political

element in order to estatlish these groups as tribes and this was
developed through their Contact with the white man and their dealings

with the United States government.

For this reason, it is unnecessar“

to determine whether an “ethnic tribe" composed of autonomous villages
could be considered an entity capable of holding Indian title to lands.

u-n_¥
‘-1...The Government, early in its dealings with the Indians of the ncrthm
western part of the United States, established a policy of instructing
its officials and agents to attonpt to organize the detached bands and
groups of Indians for the purpose of more conveniently conducting negotim
ations with the Indians.

The bands and groups of Indians were urged to

select chiefs for their tribes. The chiefs frequently net in council
with agents of the defendant. The petitioner tribes, except the
Nespelem who were part of the Sanpoil Tribe. had Chiefs who represented

them in these councils. (Findings ?. 17, 22, 363.

In this respect, what

33‘

t e Commission said in the Noohsack case, 3 Ind. C1. Conn. hgh, is eonallv
applicable here and that case held: "In late aboriginal times, and from

the time of their first contact with the officials of

C‘?:3‘
(‘J
C‘)
5
4
CD
*2!
is
s
(0
£2!
<:?whose duty it was to deal with and report on said Indians, the Nocksatk

village groups were recognized, designated and dealt with as a separate

and distinct tribe by said Government officials." 80 also the Sanpoil,

Methow, Colville, Lake and Okanogan Tribes were recognized, designated

and dealt with by Government officials.

Having determined that at the time the Indian title to these lands
was extinguished the petitioner tribes existed, there remains the
necessity of determining the boundaries of the lands exclusively used

and occupied by these tribes. The findings of fact herein made are

detailed in their scope for each of the respective tribes with respect
to their general location and their subsistence pattern where it has

been studied by ethnologists. The villages of the respective tribes

were located along the waterways. and the ethnologists, for the respective

parties agree that the boundary lines between the tribes at points on the

(Tro 

rivers or streams could be indicated with reasonable accuracy.

and 263 p) .

LPetitioners' expert, Dr. Bay, was aware of the fact that the greater
the distance from population centers the more vague these boundary lines

became, and stated: (Pet. Ex. H82, page 117).
Thus. far back in hunting territory or far out in desert

root digging grounds, boundaries sometimes completely faded out.
An attempt has been made in preparing the accompanying maps to
indicate roughly the preciseness of the boundaries by the relative
space between adjacent segments of the broken lines of demarcation.
In a few instances lack of definiteness is the result of insufficient data. as indicated below. But during the gathering of this
material every group in the Basin was visited and the maps were
first drawn in the presence of informants as information was given.

bit by bit, including village location as well as boundary lines.
u a o

Ray's maps prepared for publication in his "Native Villages and Groupings"

(1936). (Pet. Ex. 582) depict the boundaries of the petitioner tribes as

1419

\
2

found by him in his early research and indicate thereon the preciseness of

the boundaries by spacing_of the adjacent segments of the broken lines.
The areas now claimed by the petitioner tribes are the lands within the.
boundaries determined by Bay in his early publications and which also ares
on petitioners‘ Exhibit 532.

Defendant contends, however, that the areas portrayed upon Exhibit
532 were not exclusively occupied by each separate group but were also
used by the other petitioners as well as groups not involved in this case.
(Def. Br., page 31). Petitioners’ expert, Ray, testified that any use of
territory within the tribal boundaries of each tribe by Indians from other

(Tr. 80). Defendant takes exception to

tribes was solely as visitors.
this view of use by others and asks: "Petitioners contend that each of
the ethnic groups designated on their Exhibit 532 claimed the lands assigned

to them upon that exhibit and that other tribes or groups came upon each

otherfs territory only by permission. Does this seem reasonable in view of

the admitted facts that such ethnic groups had no organization, no leaders,

no central authority? From whom did they get such permission? From whom

could they get such permission?" Bay, in his book, "The Sanpoil and
Nespelem” wrote that the area he found to be their territory "was considered by the Sanpoil as their proper range for food gathering but no
effort was made to keep outsiders from making use of it also. Neighboring
groups, however, were reasonably considerate and encroachment was slight.“
(Finding 16). That some use of another‘s territory was considered by the
Indians to be as visitors, is apparent, such as the Kettle Falls in

Colville territory, and defendant's ethnologist agrees with this observation. There is also substantial evidence of record that the

(Tr. 263).

1+ 195

Southern Okanogan made consistent use of the upper Methow river country
above Twisp, Washington, which is claimed by the Methow and the ethnologdst, Post, who made the study of the subsistence quest of the Southern
Okanogan, gives no indication that these Indians went into_that terri(Finding 35). Miss Walters who wrote of the tribal

tory as visitors.
structure of the Okanogan, states: "A very close relationship is felt
to the other Okanogan speaking groups in the area: the Nespelem, the
Sanpoil, the Colville and the Northern Okanogan. Berry and hunting
territories and fishing sites are shared in common by the Okanogan

linguistic group. In fact, most Salish-speaking people in the Plateau
are treated as friends."

It is clear from a study of the maps, village locations and ethnological reports that petitioner tribes found their main sources of subsistence in most instances within the areas now claimed by them. The

evidence justifies determining that use of fishing sites, near which
were located the permanent villages of the tribe, by other tribes was

in the capacity of visitors. In areas away from the waterways where the

definiteness of boundary lines is not as clear it is just as obvious that

exclusive use and occupancy must be shown with reasonable certainty. It
is also evident from the record that these tribes, even when village
autonomy prevailed, considered a definite territory their proper range

for subsistence purposes. (Finding 16).

and continued intercourse with Government officials their land consciousness increased and is apparent throughout the historical documents. The
Sanpoil even refused to accept presents in fear that it would give the

Government a claim to their land. (Finding l3).

With the advent of the white man

14 19K

-. -.- -- -.-_-—.,-—.--.---.-.-«-an-—pl-up.-...

The evidence does not justify holding that the separate territories
which are claimed for the separate petitioners were used by all without

any opposition. To the contrary, the evidence shows that these tribes

consistently used and occupied the lands within the boundaries as
described in the specific findings for each respective tribe to the

exclusion of any other of the tribes. On the other hand, the evidence

does not support the boundaries as determined by Dr. Ray and as delineated on petitioners"Exhibit 532 for all the tribes. The areas as

found and shown by Dr. Bay for the Sanpoil (and Eespelem), Colville and
Southern Okanogan territories are supported by substantial evidence.

The territory of the Methow Tribe must be limited to that portion of the
Mathew River drainage area from the mouth of the river to the town of
Twisp, since there is substantial evidence that the Southern Okanogan
Indians made consistent use also of the upper Methow River country above
Twisp. The southern lobe of Lake's territory is also found not to have
been within the exclusive use and occupancy of this tribe. The extension
of Lake Tribe territory by Ray to inchide the country southeast of

Kettle Falls to Addy, Washington, is admittedly based upon a single informant and the indefiniteness of this boundary line in this section is
indicated by Bay on his map in petitioners‘ Exhibit 382, at page 11”.
There is also evidence of the use of this territory by the Colville.
(Findings 18-21). The petitioner, Okanogan Tribe, claims all the land
portrayed on petitioners‘ Exhibit 532 as “Okanogan" and "Southern
Okanogan.“ The record supplies substantial evidence to support holding
that petitioner tribe has proven exclusive use and occupancy to the area

designated as "Southern Okanogan." With respect to the area delineated

as “Okanogan," however. the evidence does not support finding exclusive
‘use and occupancy to have been within petitioner tribe. The Okanogan,l
according to Cline and others who conducted the ethnographic studies of
these Indians, consisted of two tribes, the Southern Okanogan and the
Okanogan proper. The Southern Okanogan denied political affiliation with
the Okanogan proper who were located mostly in Canada. No Okanogan
villages for either tribe are located by these ethnologists within the
area denoted on petitioners‘ Exhibit 532 as “Okanogan." (Findings 33
and 33; Tr. 6h). Ray testified that the Northern Okanogan, or Okanogan
proper, and the Southern Okanogan were as much separate, politically
speaking, as were the other petitioner tribes. He further testified that
the Northern Okanogan, or Okanogan proper, had the same rights to
”0kanogan"_territory as did the American (Southern) Okanogan. The only
specific use of "Okanogan" territory mentioned in the record shows the
Southern Okanogan going yearly to Oroville for salmon fishing and Spier
mentions that the Northern Okanogan entered what is now the State of
Washington only along the lower Similkameen River and that section of the
Okanogan River from the Canadian boundary south to Tonasket.
The Commission conchides that the Sanpoil Tribe, of which the

Nespelem Indians were a part, has proved aboriginal Indian title to the
lands described in Finding 15 and as delineated on petitioners‘ Exhibit

532 for the Nespelem and Sanpoil. The Commission further concludes that

the Colville Tribe has proved aboriginal Indian title to the lands
described in Finding 23 and as they are delineated on Petitioners‘ map,
Exhibit 532. The Commission also concludes that the Lake Tribe has proved

aboriginal Indian title to the lands as described in Finding 26 and as set

forth on Exhibit 532 with the exception of the southeastern boundary line

1; 195

which is corrected and limited in Finding 26. The Commission further
concludes that the Okanogan Tribe has proved aboriginal Indian title
to only the area delineated as "Southern Okanogan" on Exhibit 532,

and as described in Finding 37. Finally, the Commission concludes
that the Methow Tribe has proved aboriginal Indian title to only so
much of the land as delineated in Exhibit 532 as is found within the
Methow River watershed between the mouth of the Methow River and Twisp,
Washington, and as described in Finding MO.

Concerning the Sanpoil~Eespelem territory, shown on petitioners‘
Exhibit 532, we find a slight conflict in that territory, as determined
above, with the area described in a claim of the Yakima Tribe (Docket
No. 161). Since the Yakima claim has not been tried, we do not know
Whether the Yakima will eventually make claim to this small overlap.

In any event, and on the basis of this record, we think it belonged to

the Sanpoil.

The proof of aboriginal use and occupancy by the petitioner tribes

of necessity covered the entire area claimed by each which in each case
included parts of the Colville Reservation which was established by the
Executive order of July 2, 18'{2 (I Kappler 916). This reservation
covered all lands lying west and north of the Columbia River, east of
the Okanagon River and as far north as the 59th parallel —— the British
possessions (Royce; Washington l, tract 535}, and thus set apart for
reservation purposes part of the land aborielnally used and occupied by
each of the respective petitioners. Therefore» as to each petitioner,

any part of the lands which lie Within the boundaries of the reservation

is excluded from the claim of the petitioner.

Accordingly. an interlocutory order will be entered herein adjudging the defendant liable for the value of the lands of each petitioner

as described in the_findings of fact.

Eclger E. Witt "

Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O‘Herr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt

Associate Commissioner

