1 Ind. C1. Comm. 182 . 182

339033 THE IEDIAH CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CHOCTA‘?! IIATI ON,

Petitioner,

vs. Docket Ho, 51

THE UEITED ssasss OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

'7"!

Grady Lewis. with whom was s. r. Semple
and H. L. Fitzgerald, Jr.. Attorneys for

Ralph A. Barney and John F. Curran, with
1-u1v\r\vn was ya» Acso"ic+g:';3_i_-. _A_‘If.1f_r_sj~p_:_=y Gnngrg]

tic-4\.o.—n. n o-. 9 ear. -. -- «nu -A. Devitt Vanech, Attorneys for Defendant.

MAR 2 1950
OPIHIOB OF THE COEMISSION

 

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:
The facts involved will appear from the opinion of the Commission.
This suit was institutes by virtue of the authority obtained
5

in act of Congress of August 13, 19¥., known as the Indian Claims

Commission Act.

The petition alleges in substance:s

Q

That what is known as the Atko- Agreement entered into by the

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 182

_ g petitioner with the United States on the 23rd day of April, 18979
which was ratified and confirmed by act of Congress approved

June 23, 1898 (30 Stat. 395), and the supplemental agreement entered
into-bf,’ the °petit.ioner with the United; States onthe 2lst/d._ay or

March, 1302, ani approved by an act of Congress of July 1, 1902

(32 Stat. EH1), rroviéei for the compilation of rolls of members

of the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes of Indians and for the distri«
bntion of the lanes. cormon proper y, aha funfs of the Choctaw and

Chickasaw tribes to the persons found to be members of said tribes
by the Dawes Commission, pursuant to the provisions of the two
aforesaié agreements and the acts of Congress ratifying the same;
that each rolls were complete when a list embracing the names of

all those lawfully entitled to enrollment had been submitted by

said Commission to and approves by the Secretary of the Interior;

~.'-viii

ulna--.

persons whose names were fo thereon alone constitatei the member»

Q

notrit

that, thstanéing the aforesaid agreements,

the Congress of the United States by the act of Congress of August 1,

1+?“

191” (38 Stat. 582} anosorized the Secretary of the Interior to enroll sone forty-one persons on the Choctaw rolls, contrsry to the
provisions of the aforesaid agreements, ani that such nersons were

-_

Pai5 3h1=000 in per capita.paynents over a neriod of years from 1915

—a

‘E 1 0 -n to l9e3; tnat saio.pa3ments were made without the assent or agreement
Of P9§i3i3n9r3 @383: 358 is entitled to recover the

refore, oetitioner

183

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 182 18f:

-3...

principal sum of $Hl,0OO. with interest thereon.

The defendant filed a motion to dismiss the petition on the
ground that the allegations contained therein were insufficient to
state a claim upon which relief could be granted.

Defendant contends:

(1 That the claim asserted is not in fact a tribal claim. but
that of individual claimants, which the Commission does not have
jurisdiction to entertain;

(2) That the act of Congress of August 1, 1913. adding fortyone names to the Choctaw rolls, was within the ponersvested in
Congress and no legal Ciaim in favor of the petitioner resulted
thereby.

The act of Congress approved June 28. 1898 (30 Stat. 1495)
ratifies and confirms and incorporates therein what is generally
referred to as the Atoka Agreement, entered into between what was
called the Eawes Commission and commissions representing the Choctaw
and Chickasaw tribes. Section 21 of the act provides in detail the
procedure to be followed by the Commission in making up the rolls
of citizens of the several tribes and provides that:

The rolls so made, when approved hy the Secretary

of the Interior, shall he final, and the persons whase

names are found thereon, with their descendants thereafter horn to t.en, with such persons as may intermarry

according to tribal laws. shall alone constitute the
several tribes which they represent.

Thereafter, by an act of Congress of July 1, 1902 (32 Stat. 631).

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 182 18?

_ h.a later agreement executed by the so-called Dawes Commission and
commissions representing the Choctaw ans Chickasaw tribes of India
ans on the 21st day of March. 1902 which is presumably the agreement to which petitioner refers as.beine ratified by it on Septenher
25, 1902) was ratified and confirmed. This act of 1902 contains no

legislation except the lanruaee of the agreement as ratified and

'3 .1

confirmed. and does nothing but ratify and confirm said agreement,

Section 73 of the act of Congress provisos that same

? O

* * * shall be binding upon the inited States,
AN

and upon the Choctaw ans eaickasaw nations, and all

A . s " * 2 . -4" " 3.. .. ,... . ..
* Chootans ani CR1C£aS8WS, when retilieo e; Congress
0'-\'r'\r"§ ‘ht? ow v"‘\('*-".Ir""|‘V'*: +17 n.-F‘  0-Jn Qf\"'!T'1-f‘(,'\‘II"|  'F'f‘3""C"\-fl fir-‘rue’
\‘.An.'--.\ «-5.. ¢ I--'41- hr-In I in

mud 1.1 latynd -J' in ‘-0- -HJ >_p-|- U -. I —-I-q..'1'-- - - - u u-uciur \!''\v 1! Q‘.x If
by the legal voters of the Choctaw and Chickasaw
tribes I; ¢ $0

Section 30 of said set provides for the enrolling of Choctaw and
Chickasaw citizens ani details as to the preparation of lists; and

that

Lists shall be made up and forsaréed when contests
of whatever character shall have been determines,
and when there shall have been sutmi tee to and

toe oecretarr of the Interior lists embracing names of all those lawfully entitled to en»

2 e s shall be deemed e mpletea

, inclusive, all deal with enrolling proceésres,

KJ1

Sections 28 to 3

50 person whose R338 ioe
rolls oreoarei as hereir ore
in any manner particiyet

C :3

‘'| _ _ 1;, __‘fi .‘_*1__ ', -u s an .:__ ‘I
tn- onson erooertg O; Lgv uQ nicaasng
t“5“ o o boll

4- - 1’.'"'O.'... 8 ea";

J.

o 0

~88. and those whose names oroear the

particinste in the manner set forth in t
ment * * 3.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 182 . 135 s
- 5 Of_the above-mentioned sections. sections 31 and 32 deal with
citizenship matters and section 33 creates a "Choctaw and Chickasaw
Citizenship Court,“ and section 32 provides "That paragraphs thirty;

one, thirty-two and thirty-three hereof shall go into effect immedi;

ately after the passcse of this Act 31 Congress.” (Underscoring supplied)

The final act of Congress dealing with enrollment procedures,
prior to the act of 1913 complained of, is that of April 26, 1906
and is entitled "An Act to provide for the final disposition of the
affairs of the Five Civilized Tribes in the Indian Tcrritorg,and
for other purposes." (Eh Stat. 137) ‘

The act of July 1. 1902 (32 Stat. 6&1) was amended by act of

March 3, 1905 (33 Stat. lOh8), making same provide for the enroll?

iment of "new—born" Indians who were born subsequent to September 25,

 

 

1902 and prior to harch U, l90§; and the time for enrollment of '
"new-horn" Indians was further extended'under the act of April,

1906 (3h état. 137) to children who were minors living on march E,

lggéj and this latter act further provided for an extension of time
within which the rolls should be completed, and extended such time
to harsh M, 1907.

It would unnecessarily lengthen this opinion to quote in full
the act of April 26.31906 (31; Stat. 137). but it is sufficient to
say that said act devotes many of its sections to the matter of enrollment of members of the Five Civilized Tribes (of course include

ing the Choctaws and Chickasaws). and to other matters affecting

l Ind. C1. Comm. 182

_ 5 a

said tribes and tribal properties. No provision of said act of

Congress refers to same as being enacted by reason of any agree;
nent with said Indian tribes; and no allegation is made by the

petitioner herein to the effect that any part of said legislation
was based on any agreement with said tribes; however, the lack of

consent, as will be seen later, would not have deprived the Congress

of the power to add names to the final rolls of the two tribes.

Section 28 of said act provides that the tribal existence and
present tribal governments of the Five Civilized Tribes shall be

continued in full force and effect

* * * Ergyided, That no act, ordinance, or resolution
(except resolutions of adjournment) of the tribal
council or legislature of any of said tribes or
nations shall be of any validity until annroved bx
the President of the United States: “ “

jun-0-6-—

(Ehderscoring supplied.)

 

     

The act of Congress of August 1, 191% (38 Stat. 582); adding
names to the Choctaw rolls, which is the basis of petitioner's

alleged cause of action, provides as follows:

The Secretary of the Interior is hereby authorized
to enroll on the proper respective rolls of the Five
Civilized Tribes, as indicated, the persons enumerated
in Senate Document Eunbered Four hundred and seventyeight, Sixty-third Congress, second session: ?rovided,
That when so enrolled there shall be pahi to each and
every such person out of the funds in the Treasury of
the United States to the credit of the respective tribe
with which such person is enrolled the following sums
in lieu of an allotment of land: To each such person
placed on the Creek rolls the sum of $500; to each such
person placed on the Choctaw, Chickasaw. Cherokee and
Seminole rolls, a sum equal to twice the appraised
value of the allotment of such tribe as fixed by the

18?

1 Ind. C1. CORN}.  . - 
.. 7'...

Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes for allotment purposes: Provided further, That in cases where
such enrolled members. or their heirs, are Indians

who by reason of their degree of Indian blood belong
“to the restricted class, the Secretary of the Interior
may. in his discretion, withhold such payments and use

the some for the benefit of such restricted Indians:
##1## ' It is the position of petitioner that under the provisions of

the so-called Atoka Agreement, and the supplemental agreements as
specifically set out.in the petition in this case, that "when the
rolls had been submitted by the_Commission to and approved by the
Secretary of the Interior, the persons whose names were found thereon alone constituted the membership of the tribe;" and that "any act

   

of the Congress that gave any part of the tribal property to persons
other than those that constituted the membership of the tribe as found

by the Secretary himself, is a confiscation of the tribal domain and

not a lawful exercise of the plenary and political power of the

Congress.” This Commission cannot agree pith this contention.

The extensive quotations from the several acts of Congress
dealing with the rolls which are to constitute the tribal membership
are made for the purpose of showing that Congress made many changes
in enrolling matters subsequent to the act of July 1, 1902 and at

all times asserted its right to decide, or_set up by its authority.

- commissions to decide, tribal membership. Additions to the rolls

and extensions of time for completing the same were made by each d?

the acts subsequent tothe act of July 1, 19C? (32 Stat. 6M1) relied

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 182 S ‘ 139

- 3 _

on by petitioner. While it is a fact that the agreements made
between commissions representing the Garernnent d'the United
States and.commissions representing the Indian tribes, provided
that they should become effective when ratified.by the Congress
of the United States and by the members of the Indian tribes,
nevertheless the acts of Congress. as shown in the acts referred
to. many times modified and changed the previously ratified agree?
ments. .And in 30 Stat. H95 it is specifically provided that Congress
did not intend to abdicate its plenary power as to certain tribal matt<
which indicates the recognition by Congress that it had this power
and could.only lose the same by an absolute and positive surrender
thereof; and in none of the so—called agreements relied.upon by petitioner is there an affirmative provision for the surrender or
abdication of the plenary power of Congress as to such matters.

We quote from the leading case on the power of Congress to
determine the citizenship of any Indian tribe, Stevens v. Cherokee

K _
Nation, 171+ U.s. 141:5:

 

 

We repeat that in view of the paramount any
thority of Congress over the I dian tribes, and of
the duties imposed on the government by their con«
dition of dependency, we cannot say that Congress
could not empower the Dawes Commission to determine,
in the manner provided, who were entitled to citizen'ship in each of the tribes and make out correct rolls
of such citizens. an essential preliminary to effective action in oromotion of the best interests of
the tribes. It may be remarked that the legislation
seems to recognize, especially the act of June 28,
1895 (30 Stat. U95). a distinction between admission
to citizenship merely and the distribution of property

190

to be subsequently made, as if there might be circumstances under which the right to a share in the latter
would not necessarily follow from the concession of the
former. But in any aspect, we are of opinion that the
constitutionality of these acts in respect of the determination of citizenship cannot be successfully assailed
on the around of the impairment gr_destruction‘g§ vested

_7._~_.£L____.._.___.
rights.

   

 

(Underscoring supplied)

In a later case, that of Tallace v. ggags. 20% U.S. hl5. the
contention was made that Congress did not have the power to amend
prior laws governing the enrollment of'members of the ?ive Civilized
Tribes. In that case one Hill had been enro1led.pursuant to a decree
by an Indian Territory court. as provided by law at the time. There—
after the act of Congress of July 1, 1902 created a Choctaw and
Chickasaw Citizenship Court and granted it the power to annul preé
vious enrollments. In upholding the power of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Citizenship Court to annul the enrollment of Hill, the Supreme

Court referred to the case of Stevens v. Cherokee hation. supra, and

 

said:

r This decision established that no such vested right
was created by the proceedings of the Danes Commission
or the judgments of the courts of the Indian Territory
on appeal from the findings of the Commission as prevented
subsequent investigation. The power of Congress over the
matter of citizenship in these Indian tribes was plenary.
and it could adopt any reasonable means to ascertain who
were entitled to its privileres. If the result of one
measure was not satisfactory it could try another. The
fact that the first provision was by an inquiry in a
‘territorial court did not exhaust the power of Congress
or preclude further investigation.

Petitioner contends that the only thing before the courts in

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 132 V191

- 10 a

these two cases was "whether or not applicants for enrollment on
the final rolls had a vested right in the procedure set up for the
making of such rolls.“

That is, in effect, the question involved in the case at bar
in that the contention of petitioner is that the enrollment made by
virtue of the Atoka Agreement, the act of Congress of June 28. 1898
(30 Stat. h95) ratifying the same, the supplemental agreement and
the statute confirming the same (32 Stat. 6H1). gave to the members
enrolled thereunder the sole rig-t of ownership of the tribal propere
ty-ein other words. that such members thereby acquired "a vested
right in the procedure (previously) set up for the making of such
rolls."

The authorized procedures in the acts of Congress providing

for enrollment were the creatures of Congress; and surely if Congress

as stated in Wallace v. Adams. §Oh'U. 3. M15, can "adopt any reason 

able means to ascertain who were entitled to its privileges" (referring to citizenship in the Indian tribes) and "if the result of
one measure was not satisfactory it could try another,“ then Congress
can do by direct legislative action what it had authority to create
administrative agencies to don

The case of Cherokee Nation v. Hitchcock, 157 U.s. 29h. quotes

 

with approval the opinion of the Stevens case and says that Congress:
by the act of June 28. 1898, supra. "practically assumed the full

control over the Cherokees as well as other nations constituting

1 Ind. C1. COHIM.  . ' 

- 11 the five civilized tribes, and took upon itself the determination of
membership in the tribes for the purpose of adjusting their rights

in the tribal property."

I"\

Petitioner contends that the case of Gritts v. Fisher, a2h U.S.

T-Z--:0-in

 

6h0, is not in point because that case was not prosecuted by the
tribe but by three individual members in opposition to the views
of the tribe. This fact rould not seem to divest the language d?
the court of relevancy to the case at bar. such language being as

follows:

* ‘ * the members of this tribe were wards of
the United States,_which was fully empowered, whenever it seemed wise to do so, to assume full control
over then and their affairs, to determine who were
such members, to allot and distribute the tribal lands
and funds among them, * * °

I

and with reference to the act of Congress of 1902, the opinion says

S

same

was but an exercise of the administrative control d?

the government over the tribal property of tribal

Indians, and was subject to change by Congress at any

time before it was carried into effect and while the

tribal relations continued.

Although the opinions in the Gritts case (22H U. S. 630) and in
the Cherokee intermarriage cases (203 U.S. 76), commenting on the act
of 1902 (32 Stat. 716), involved in said cases, state that'appellants
in those cases contend that said act is a contract “when. it is only

an act of Congress, and can have no greater effect," this is not a

holding that if same had been a contract that it would preclude

* 1 Ind. C1. Comm. 182 193d

.12..

Congress from changing enrollment procedures, or give tribal members
vested rights and create liability of the United States in the event
the United States Government should decide it was for the best_inter;
ests of the tribes to change the "rules and reguhations respecting
said tribes.“

Certainly tribal property and tribal relations existed in 191%
when, being dissatisfied with the action of agencies it had created
to determine the citizenship of the Choctaw tribe. Congress adopted
‘the procedure of placing names on the rolls by direct congressional
act. It is impossible to find that such additions constituted any
different invasion of the rights of the tribal membership, as previously constituted. than were the additions of "new-born" children
from tine‘to tine invasions of the rights_of previously enrolled
members.

.The act of Congress of August 1, 191M, authorising the addition
of forty—one members tothe tribal rolls did not, in the opinion of
this Commission. "take the property of the Indians without Just
conpeneationg" it was merely "an exercise of administrative control
” * * over the tribal property," political in its nature; and Whether
thought wise or unwise, beneficial or otherwise, the matter of its
exercise was within the province of the legislative branch of the
Government to determine; and gives the petitioner no legal claim to

the redress-sought herein.

1 Ind. C1. COITHTI. 182 ‘I ' ' ' i 
....  ..

In our View of the law governing the claim, as expressed above.
it would make no difference whether the claim here asserted was individual or tribal for in neither case wouhi the Gaernment be liable,
so it is unnecessary to decide the first contention of the defendant,
namely, that the claim is individual and not tribal.

The contention of defendant that the act of Congress in adding
forty-one names to the Choctaw rolls created no legal claim in favor
of the petitioner against the defendant must be sustained.

It is so ordered.

Commissioners 0‘Marr and Holt concur in the above opinion.

March 2nd. 1950.

