EE?OnE THE IEDZAE CLAEES COKEISSION

Plaintiff,
v, Docket No. ll-A

TBB UNIED STATES or MERICA,

'\-..."~._.w'\...a’\-../‘-.../'\-..«/'\_./\~../\-..,__/\.._,’

Defendant.

 Iom IBIBB or TE-E Iowa RESERVATION
IN Kansas III: IJEBRASFJL,  Ioae. IBIBB
0:»? THE Io:-:,—=. SEE-NATION IN oKIA.Bo2=IA,e~:
al. , oI:A.B.-A. TRIBE or NEBRASKA, at al.,
I:-{B SAC In-:B'BoX IBIBB or INDIANS or
OE{Lé.HO}E.&., BB S;-..c MED FOX TBIBB 03?
I-'EISSOUR.T., SIC I:-S3 FOX TRIBE 0:? TE-E-3
MISSISSZPPI IN Io:-2-—., et al,

Docket n0. l38

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\__/s_,J\,/\_,/\./N./\../\_/\.__/\_J\./\../\./Nu/\—a’\_,/\..?
I

Defendant.
Decided: July 31, 1957
Appearances:

Luther Bohanon with whom was {arvin J. Sonosky, Attorneys for
Plaintiff in Docket No. ll-A 2

Elroy 0. Jones, Attorney for the Iowa Tribe of the Iowa
Reservation in Kansas and Nebraska; Jicholas C. Englis", ttorney
for the Iowa Tribe of the Iowa Reservation in Oklahoma;
1.5. Heissbrodt, Attorney for the Omaha Tribe of Eebraska
George B. Pletsch, Attorney for the Sac and Fox.?ribe of d S
of Oklahoma; Stanford Clinton,attorne for the Sac and Fox Tribe
" ' lawrence C. Mills, Attorney for the Sec and Fox

I:
Tribe of the Kzsslsslool In Iowa. Attorneys for Petlttoners In
7

I
2
T

: H -. ' 1" 1-...‘ 1': '- I . .:..' .. " "1 ‘I. '
Halon a. sarne, (in £33333 no. ll-a), Curtls snears {In occaet

’\ . 11- co‘ 0-I 95-: ‘o F. . I ;- ' ‘ 1‘ ' C TI‘
no. 13;), wltn whom '¢S er. nsslstant ttorney General Ferrt J.

Morton, Attorneys for Defendant.

,-‘(H--;-..,-q

OPTVION 0? Th; CORm1:olON

3
-I-«Lt

 

Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

mitt,

This opinion aoplies to each of Dockets No. 11-3 and 138.

a

In Docket No. 138 the Iowa, the Sac and Fox and the Omaha Tribes seek
to recover for the value (less previous considerations received by them)

of their alleged respective interests in a tract of land located in what

is now western Iowa and northwestern Missouri, This tract is part of

a larger area known as Royce Cession No. 151, which is described in

Article 1 of the Treaty of July 15, 1830 (7 Stat. 328). The part of Cession
151 for which recovery is sought is that part south of the line described in
Article 2 of the Treaty of August 19, 1825 (7 Stat. 272), sometimes called
the Article 2 line (also called the Sac and Fox— ioux line, and the Yancton
line).

In Docket No. ll-A the Otoe and Hissouria Tribe seeks to recover for
the value of its alleged interest in the same tract of land.

The four claimant tribes joined with certain Sioux bands inesxecuting
the Treaty of July 15, 1830 by which they ceded to the United States, subject to certain conditions hereafter dis ussed,an area of land in western
Iowa extending north into Minnesota and south into what is now Hissouri
bounded on the west by the Missouri River and including small portions in

known as Royce Cession 151. The total of tne claims o
Dockets ho. ll—A and ho. 138 comprise that part of Cession 151 south of the
line known as the Sac and Fox-Sioux line described in article 2 of the

5‘ p-IQ:-‘:rrairie du Chien Treaty of Russet 19, 1825

C

"I I1 -1 - -o_ o . - ‘Lu _‘v_ 6 .0.‘ 9 * "V *1
All the cla_ma.ts m**-tain.tnat in one period 01 the

treaties they had oossession of and node use of different portions of the

(D

claimed area, aggregating the whole of same, and that the United State
recognized and acknowledged hv the l82S treaty or the l83O treaty, or
both, that they together possessed lndian title at the dates of said
treaties to the whole of the land involved herein. While the claimants
agree that they jointly had recognized Indian title to the entire area,
they disagree as to the extent of each tribe's interest in said land;

and  this disagreement among the claimants, and their inability

among themselves to agree upon boundaries of each, was a matter of dis— i
pute between then‘ ancestors more than a centurgr ago and is largely responsible for transactions with the United States which are involved in
this liuig*tion. .

The claimants contend that the 1.£':..'..dS involved had far greater value
than they received for the same and that they are therefore entitled
collectively’ to the difference in the real value of said land at the time
the United States acquired their title and the consideration they received
therefor.

As stated, they disagree, however, as to how they should partiClairaants also contend

cipate in this total excess value of said lands.

*1;

that if these treaties and conduct of the defendant does not constitute a

thereto by reason of aboriginal use and possession.

The defendant takes issue t:2.th clairants on all counts. It den‘-_e

Q 0

that any of  c_ainants or all of them together .ao. aboriginal title to

-3-‘ " ' .9
T

the ands or anv part or

U:
(A
U1
J2‘Pert of same was recognized by the United States. Defendant contends
that the treaties at most recognized huntingirights only, which the
defendant had a right to eyrtinguish at its pleasure without liabilityo

Needless to say the different parties take different Views of the
evidence and there are some conflicts in the evidence that may be the
subject of argument. These conflicts relate, however, in large part to
the use, possession and degree of control exercised by the different
tribes over different portions of the area at different times. These
conflicts, because of their nature and because more than a century has
elapsed since the events upon which based occurred, are very difficu...t
of determination at this tin".-. The problem is also greatly agjarav.:+.:=d
because there were "unsettled questions of fact at the time of the treaties
involved.

The claim of occupancy by the Iowa dates back to 1673 when Marquette
found them at the mouth of the Des 1"Eoines River. Marquette 2-_.3'i;a;fc;es .;. that
the records show that the I we were in the Lake 01«:oboii-Spirit Lake Reg’ on
which is in the southern part of 1'1innesota and the northern part of Iowa
for a period from 1660 to 3.669, and that they ranged between this region
and the Mississippi River. The Zowa contend that by reason of pressure of
the Sioux on the north and northeast by 1765' they had moved west to the
Missouri River--both sides of it , down to Counci Bluff area where they
established villages which they maintained unt£ appro3:i_r:~te_y lf/'65.

Thereafter they claim to 11 ve moved for trading purposes oack t the Des

‘I " DU _ la n q o 9 go "-"' o 0 II to ..
;‘;C3.I’:eS *'~l"'.’€-1'.‘ and that 'tI1€'f_«' n=_1n‘-:.ed in ''.:!';-3 lowa cc‘-.1r:t:'y bet‘:-reen ‘3:.:". 3';_‘..SS3_SS‘.2_";‘CZ.
4-» ‘K’ ‘ I 9 o 9 9 g on

and -:5soL::*i Rivers for years--that in the late l-?C=-Ts are early '.1...CO‘s

they had vl......ages on the C-ra__d and Cna&torr. RiVeI‘S in 101-78., 88.8"?» of
Cession lSl; that they later went to the southern part of Cession l5l
and hunted along ond across the Missouri River to the north and the east;

t‘.at in t

CZ!‘

e ear...y l800’s they more-or-less joined up with the Sec and Fox
in using and hunting the same territory.  Agent Dougherty‘s statement
in letter of July 5, 1830 he seems to think that the Iowas more extensively than any other of the plaintiff.‘ tribes used the land lying north
of the State of Missouri and east of the M’ souri River to the Nodoway
River arzi east to the Des Moims River. "t may be that they and the '
Missouri Sac and Fox had one or two settlements in the very southern most
portion of Cession 3.51 at the time. of the 1830 treaty and that they probably were the only claimant tribes who actually had ‘settlements in the
territory claimed. \
The Sac and Fox claim alone practically the entire east half of

Area lSl, or with the Iowa at least t*.-so-thirds Li’ not all of 151. They .
ad::Lit that they had not been long in possession and use of said territory,
but claim that under the provisions of the Treaty of l82S they were recognized by the United States as such o'v:-'ner.

e Sac  Fox agree that the  and Otoe at om time used and
occu_ ‘ed portions of Cession lSl but that the right of exclusive control
later bosom the property of the Sac and For by conquest. The Sac and Fox
also claim rights in Cession 151 by reason of recognition of onmrship by
the Treaty of 1825.

Agent Dougherty thinls the Ctoe and liissouria because of use .;.a'<:»'e the

better claim. to aonro:-:i*:;atel': the middle thtd of Cession 15...‘ the Iozcas
._ e 3

to the lower third; and the Omahas the northern third oi the cession.

The findings go into more detail as to the respective tribal claims
and evidence of use, t in view of our ultimate findings as to same,
and our reasons therefor, it is not deemed necessary to go into mare
detail here as to these respective claims, or as to evidence upon.which
based.

Ey'reason.of the conflicting claims of the different tribes and
the inability of the tribes themselves to determine their boundaries
between each other in this territory to the east of the Missouri River,
and because of the hostil'ties by reason of said conflicts between
tribal contenders east of the Missouri River and to the Hicsissippi River,
the Government undertook to terminate said disputes and to‘establish
boundaries between said tribes and for that purpose a treaty convention
was called in 1825. An Act of Congress providing for the negotiation of
this treaty, provided that same should be "for the purpose of establishing boundaries and promoting peace." These wars and disputes were not
only causing suffering betneen.the tribes but were injuring white settlers
and traders.

The convention.authorized, convened at Prairie du Chien in August,
l82S, and a treaty dated A~vust l9, 1825 was concluded. Treaty Conniesioner William Clark.told the Indians assembled that peace would be
achieved by defining the boundaries of the land of the various tribes.
He summarized the Government's objective in these'w1rds:

!!""'

we therefore propcs
C.»

e er and to “are
upon fixed boundari-s n

c

or yc=r ccu.try v“Iin which each
tribe should hunt & over V“lCh: others shall not pass
Iithout their consent."

- 4.

It was stated in the nreamo"e of the treaty that the objective was
to promote peace among the tribes and to establish boundaries anong them

"ad other tribes who lived in the vicinity and to remove a_l causes of

For most of the tribes at the treaty Qgunéil, definite boundaries
were determined by the treaty, and no controversy arose thereafter with.
respect thereto. In a few cases lines left unsettled.were fixed by subsequent treaties. This occurred with.respect to the Chippewa, Winnebago,

and the Menomonee Tribes. However, the controversy between the claimants

to the area east of the Missouri River, being that involved herein, wast
not se tled and there was failure of the Government thereafter to take
steps which under the terms of the treaty it had.obligated 'tself to do
to settle the same. It was provided by the treaty that the northeastv
tnundary knoen.as the Sac.and Fox—Sioux line should be assented to by
the Yancton B~nd which was not present at the time of the 1825 treaty.
This line was later approved.by the Yancton Band however. By érticle 3
of the treatv joint ownership of a portion of the territory was acknowledged

‘U
0-4'y'\f'1

as being in the Sec and ?oxes and Iowas, and it was agreed that the two

tribes should peaceably occupy sane "until some satisfactory arrangement
can be made between.then for a division of thei_ respective claims to

said country." There was never any fixing of boundaries to their respective

countries. Said treaty also recognised that the 0toes were interested in

a pcrtion.of the count.;, but their interest was never determined. It was
Provided oj'£iticle ll of’this treaty for the convening of “such of the

-1.3. _‘_"" 9 1 _:_q -9 0 c
trioes, either senaratelr or together, as are interested in the lines left

unsettled herein, nd to recommend to then an amicable and final adI“-|

t is undisputed that the 1830 treaty convention was called to
complete the work begun by the 1825 treaty--that is to settle the disputed issues as to boundaries and achieve the peace that the l82§

treaty had been expected to bring about but which had not resultedo

It is undisputed that the contirluiig controversies and hostilities
arising a_fte_. 1825 because of 7:’,-oundary disputes caused negotiations

for an‘ the zcecution of the trecty of July 15, 1.830. The findings of
fact made herein lave no dou‘ot as to such Gi_f_«.':'.cu3_ties and hostilities
and as to the purpose oi‘ the convening; of de;.-gates'to a convention intended to bring about the execution of a new treaty, settling such controversies, fixing sich boundaries as might be possible, and the securing
of the peace which the former treaty had not brought about. Cozrzmunic ations
calling for the sending of said delegates stated that the treaty desred
was for the purpose of completing the. vzork begun hyithe 1825 trea 32', and
the Indians were advised that the boundaries which were unsettled would
be fina'L1;sr settled.

However, shortly before the convening of said treaty convention,

T _

-n 1 - ‘n v 1 .1 V 1 9
a proposal was advanced oy _.nc::=_a.n Agent John Lougnerty tnat a cession

 
 

 

made by Mr. Dougherty in this respect and the favorable reaction of General
Clark and the War Department to this suggestion. Communications show in»
structions as to the tribes to be summoned, which indicated a reco-nition

of the tribes interested in the land of reason of possession, use and claim

thereto. The tribes summoned to said convention were the Sioux, Sac and Fox,

the I wa, the Omaha, and the Otoe and Missouria, and they were the ones and
the only'ones who participated in the treaty thereafter executed and dated
July 15, 1830,
In giving considerrtion to the effect of these treaties of 1825 and

1830, it is significant that the purpose of the United States in negotiating
the treaties and the conditions that brought about the same are very similar

‘Q

l which brought about the Treaty

U1

to the situation that existed later in 18

of Fbrt Laramie with the Sioux, et alt, executed on September 17, 1851.

m

The Fort Laramie Treaty and the circumstances that caused its negoti tion
were carefully analyzed.in_the opinion of Commissioner 0’Harr for this

Commission in the case of Crow Tribe of Indians v. United States, 3 Ind.

 

018» Comm. 111?.

V

This Commission, as had the Court of Claims previously, held th t

the Fort Laramie Treaty, which fixed the boundaries of various tribes,

constituted a recognition of the title of the tribes within such boundaries.

It is difficult to see how any treaty negotiated at a convention.called

PI

for the purpose Oi fixing boundaries could have *uy such effect except by
recognizing the title of the tribes involved to the lands within the

‘_ ’ 0 a. {TM ~-’__ ‘ V «I “ah :5 -u o 0 H -_ _:__u_ o _-_-5
boundaries fixed. $3238 wuhlC oe no may 0; oringing about a s tulerent or

an ciao 0

’ C . I 0 1 Q o ; 1| Q n 0
controversies as to boundaries or merely FECO?RiSl”3 the boundaries as cl:<"

nu...‘ q—v

S 360

of the respective contenders; such recognition would merely leave the
situation as it *as before. The only wa the conflicts could be settled

‘H

and the hostilities avoi‘ed by reason thereof would be to definitely find

ownership in keeping with the boundaries fixed.

 

Regardless of whether the purpose of flxing boundaries is considered
sufficient to make the treaty one recognizing ownership, certainly the
parallel becween.the l82S treaty of Prairie du Chien and that of the
Fort Laramie Treaty of l8§l, makes the interpretation of the l8Sl treaty
recognizing titles have great weight in determining the effect of the

 treatyo

-_ ___-  av ’ 0.‘ 0 ° " _:_1 ‘u
The 1335 treaty and the lopi treaty were ootn promoted by ene same

situation—-intertribal warfare; both had the same objective;-to end the
‘warfare by fixing boundaries; both treaties had the same basic provisions—the description of the outside boundaries of the territories of the different tribes. The 1825 tree-.ty.rea.lly went a little farther than the 1851
in that by the ld2S treaty the United States expressly agreed to recogJ
nize the boundaries therein set up and agreed to therecfter fix the intertribal unfixed boundaries. General Cl-rkreven advised the Indians that

‘D1730  ‘ ‘ 9 ‘I

-resident inten s to be always on the dizferent lines which separcte

your different countries,“ which could only mean that the Government would

protect the boundaries. General Clark said to the l82S Indian delegations:

.e therefore propose to make oeace together and to agree upon fixed
boundaries for your country within which each tribe should hunt & over

-.7 _: ‘ 3-9 0 .‘:_ _:_ c “Q ,‘ J. . .
wnlcn, ocners snall not pass wi.houe tne_r consent." -he Tree " Commissioners

-L “ 91-! 1:: ti’).

"3  "f"'3"V'§  ;|"'-'4‘
'1'" '''''‘'-'/--~- a'vL.:. C .;..;2 DJ. '...'.Ca DUE’-=ii%v£:Lz;»"

"It is important, if Dracticable, to establish for each
tribe some fixed boundaries, within which they should stipulate generally to reside; and each should agree not to

intrude within the “imits assigned to another tribe without
.-L   '5 ‘L ‘ -: 1-1! ‘ ‘: . P‘! ' 0': /
its consent. (Quoted in the Crow decision at page lol.)

'Wh;le the l82S Treaty mentions only the Sioux, Sac and Fox, and

the Iowa Hribes as definite possessors of the land descrihed as the East
of and immediately joining the Hissouri.River, it mentions the Otoe and
Hissouria as being thought to have an interest there; and in the sub5€Quent treaty of July l5, l83O an interest of the Otoe and Iissouria is
acknowledged, and likewise an interest in the Omaha. Considered together
the two treaties show the recognised owners of the land involved in two

1 w suits (Dockets 138 and 11.4.) to be the See and For, the Is-re, the
Cmoha and the Otoe and hissouria. Unless the partioipation of the Ctoe
and Omaha in the 1830 treaty, and their interest in the land otherwise
recognized by the Government offici"ls, makes them recognized owners

by the 1825 treaty, it would follow that the 1825 treaty vested the
title to the entire acreage in the Sac and.Fox and Iowa, and we do not
thinl this conclusion is tenable or reasonable. 'Ve think the reasonable

:5

const uction.of the treaties and the conduct o- officials all taken together is that the lands involved in the l82S t-e~ty were recognized as

9 9 Q

belonging to the Indians cccupyinc the same, and that tne Indians in'wnom

""""'3
his acknowledgment of title to the land he-ein involved vested were
shown hy_subsequent facts and conduct of "71 parties to be the four tribes
as stated.
Failure to determine the lines between the several tribes does not

V3-‘I-v-gnu-. ---ur--p

. ‘. gq.-L ‘Cart no a r‘ . . ‘
indicate a cizzerent conclusion; the Uo"=rn“ent’s f=*7ure to tar svcn

5 362

This COmAiSSiOn in the case of Miami Tribe. et al., vs. United States,

 

2 Ind. Cls. Con. 61?, held that certain tribes were the "joint owners”

of certain territory, that the title of all tocether had been recogC

nized by the United States.

In Beecher vs.'Wetherby, 95 U.S..Sl?, 2h L. ed. hho, discussing the
question of ownership of lands which were WibhiH the area.of the approximate boundaries fixed for the Menominee Tribe by the 1825 treaty, the
'United States Supreme Court declared:

"In l82S, the United States undertook to settle by treaty the
_boundaries of lands claimed by different Tribes of Indians,

as between themselves, and agreed.to recognize the boundaries
thus established, the tribe acknowledging the general control. u--In

- ~ * * .:. ,......,: .:..: ....  , ' '
ling power of tne United Reates, and discialmlne all dependence

upon and.connection with any other power.‘ The land thus recognized as belonging to the denomonee Tribe embraced the section
in controversy in this case. Subsequently,-in 1831, the same
boundaries were again recoenized. . . ." l

chit

This Commission in a recent opinion in.Miani Tribe, et al. v. United
States, Docket 25', held.Indian title was'recognized by the United States
though definite boundaries had not been-fixed.

Defendant contends that the petitioners at most were possessed of

5

only permissive hnntina rights in the territory involved, which ria.ts

1--— H'were not compensable but subject to termination by the defendant at any

time without liability to the petitioners.

Q

The Sioux case referred to ny the defendant deals with.rights nnder
an executive order and therefore we think not applicable.

The Blackfeet case {El C. C. l_5, 11?}, to which defendant refers,

R(D
(J
(D
L!
(1.
(U
LL
5
*0
C)
13
5,"
(D
W
P!‘
Q:
["1
l-j
C}
“I
t
|.Ja
(fl
‘Jo
5}
to
If;
0
‘I
I
B.
‘J
U‘)
Ci‘
:3
I
(‘I
O
(D

~*""'-'i.~1 't_e'.~'-7*-'~'t, _'.--r ""'*'~-='»":'*o':.'.'*.
J. ‘KC-q.-4-5 4 an ; C... J Ll-ha-‘I--A. ‘arc-I-nu--m

described "shall be a ommcn hunting ground ? r ;~ years, where all the

nations, tribes, nd hands of Indians, nerties to this treatg, may enjoy

&

equal and uninterrunted nrivileges of hunting and fishing, and gathering

F!

‘V-1 . 4-» «Hrs. H-5’ 4-: “BR . 1 r.-I " 1 ':'*|"'
, gr, arcing aniar ls, cuilng meat, and dlessing rooes. Lheg. lQ:b.;er

w*i'T'1 n

-uni-.1

agree that they

1855; 1

not establish villages, etc. (Treaty of Oct. l7,

Stat. 657). The claim asserted by the Indians by reason of
Said quoted nrovisions was for compensation in the amount of $hL,l60,000
as damages for the failure of the Government to protect the Indians in
said hunting rights. In discussing the liability of the Government, by
reason of said provisions, the court determined that the grant involved
was not Indian territory and that.the language granting was of the limited
privilege and license to exploit the terri.ory for game and wild anina .
The decision_further called attention to the fact that the acreage of
land was “enormous” and that another article of the treaty "delimited a
reservation.to the tribe out of the lands embraced within the designated

hunting grounds.“ For these and.ocher reasons the couit held that the

T‘

pet‘tioners eere not entitled to recover. nis Commission does not think

the Blackfeet case is determinative of the question involved in.the instant
cases, as to whether the title involved is the usual Indian title or mere

hunting rights, as was held to he the basis of rights in sai' Blackfeet

case. The Indians themselves in the Blackfeet case construed the language
of the treaty to grant th.m onl; hunting rights. ‘While it is true that

in the instant cases the use and occupancy made by the tribes of

in Cession 151 were primarily for hunting

1purposes, the Indians claimed

‘. .“. 9 1 Q on I ;- O" In ian titl- to ‘he land, and there was no restriction provided or

U1

\n)

\_tl

5 364

desired to make of the lands at times over the years each and all of the

oes did have settlements scmewhere in the territory involved.

11

A significant reference to occupancy by the Iowa Tribe is made by
'Wi lion Clark (one of the negotiators of the l82S treaty) in letter dated

January 5 1837 (to whom written not clear) in which he says:

-/3

"I state for your information that upon my arrival in Upper
Louisiana 3h years ago, I found the Ioways in possession
of an immense tract of country between the Mississippi and
dissouri Rivers, their claim to which so far as my kn w»
ledge extends, was undoubted and unquestioned, and which
they have never abandoned, living on it from that time to
the present." '

In all the discussions aith reference to the rights of the -ndiar

-L 7,. ‘ ' 3-. ‘ -‘gas;-I Jlluii r’ .‘
that 9005 place at tne convent1onsz*esu1tina we the Treat_c- of 132; and

1530, the land ih*olved in Cession lSl was alnavs referred to by th

Indians as “my country,“ “my Ian ,” and."ny boundaries.“ Such was the

understanding not only of the Indians but of the United States Government
itself as is evidenced by the Government officials using similar language
in dis ussing the claims of the Indians, and in the viewpoint of the
Government later that additior*1 cessions following that of l83O from

the Indians were needed in.order to “ettinvnish” the “title” recognized

C}

by the defendant as being still oossessed by the Indians subsequent to

   

F5 o 0 u
I

-‘ fl‘ 0 n o I I to I 2 1 In '(1;O u. C15. T82) is ccnfvrnatorv o: our vierooint that tne r_&”.s hei:

no-I-—..c-nu “

“r to I .0
gv'.('I"'! 4"“!-N "'I"-""

"*':"-7r'~r~-°--:- “"'W‘:‘r"""' {H C -'- -74--1 WF1 ‘-1-. in-":'r':"'.' 4"’. " _L
v.:.....;...'..11.5'._ K... .‘...)':C.‘: ....‘.; e:‘a3.'..‘.*;.. _ .... r.....-.Cu..nu~.\.-. ‘."..J .-...--.....c:..:. v..'-L-r..:..eo T1

xr
"‘t
(I
,1
(D
‘U
(D
(!
‘J

the Delaware Tribe case the issue was the title acquired in a grant to

I4

the

ndians of that was called an "outlet" for the use of said Indians

an-I jun-.La"\A

in reaching hunting lands some distance from their residence lardso

This Commission had held.that such outlet *as in the nature of an ease‘O

ment and.that the Indians had not acquired Indian title by virtue of

the grant to hem of said outlet. The Court of Claims in holding to~t

the Indians had acquired Indian title to said land used this language:

“It is agreed, then, that the Delaeares could not only'pass
through their ‘outlet: but could hunt on it. ‘We suppose,
then, that they could also fish on it, gather berries and
edible plants on it, take wood from it, camp on it, and
pasture their livestock on.it. But those were the only
thincs that Indians ever wanted.to do on the land.they did
not live on, and are the only things they have done on lands
for which they have obtained comnensation in numerous caseso

Q

It is really drawing the line pretty tine to say that the

A-hQa\_n

iw- . - - ‘4 I ~ & l~- . oelaaares had the right LO do all these oninas on their lane.

which they did not live on, but still had a title inferior
to that of all the other Indians who did only these same things
‘on their lands thev did not live on.“

Following such reasonina the Court of Claims held that the Indians ”un-'

questionably" had "Indian ownership" of the outlet acreage.

Havinc determined that the land involved belonged (Indian title)

to the petitioners, in.both dockets, the nroblem of determining their

respective interests therein is the next ouestion. In View of the conflicting claims asserted by the resoect‘ve oetitioners'ei h respect to

the portions of the territory being used by them at the time of the

allure oi tie defendant, notxithstandina its promises so to do, to fix
_ &

IJ" ' 6 Q I 90'-0 to at Iv O I5 c 9
one respectlye boundaries of petitioners, this Commission st this late

J
(0

..LC.«1 . .
I-a‘1" '5 ‘L -1. a 0‘ 1 to -n -3 P:-c . .—_ -Ceee is 01 the opinion toot t olooie: Cl lizin: boundaries ls even

KL}

‘J1

5 366

more difficult now than it would have been at the time of the Treaties of

1825 or 18 o.

\_,;.J

Several plans for dividing the involved area are suggested in the
briefs. The toe-Eissouria plan.would divide the tract equally between
the four'trioal groups, while the plan suggested by Sac and Fox.would
give the Omaha and Otoe~Missouria a 25% interest in the lands between
the Nodewa-Nishnabotony‘watershed.and the ndrtherly or Article 2 line,
and the remainder to Sac and Fox. 3s to the lands southerly of said
watershed, the Sac and Fox would share that area equally with the Iowa.

The difficult problem of determining tribal interests in the area
has been referred to above. As ee'viee'the evidence we believe it
supports the division we have made in Finding 50..

we of course recognize the difficulty of valui.g the northerly part
of the area because of the dates of the cessions by the tribes interested
therein, which range in time from l838, in the case of the Sac and Fax,
t0 185b, in the case of the maha.and 0toe4Eissouria but the problem

seems unavoidable under the circumstances. Perhaps the claimants and

the defendant c*n agree upon a mean date for the purpose of proving value.

Q_-Q Q .?o 0 L
adder E. I"«‘l'Eu
Lief ‘omnissioner

   

Concurring:

Louis J. C'§arr
Associate Commissioner

 

