BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE YAKIMA TRIBE, )
)

Plaintiff, )

)

V. ) Docket No. 162

' )
TEE‘. UNITED S*I‘A'1‘ES. )
)

Defendant. )

Decided: June 5, l956
Appearances:

Paul M. Niebell
Attorney for Plaintiff

Leland L. Yost and N. A.
Rochow. with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE CORNISSION

--o-1-ua-I---v- -n.-not-an

 

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The issue in this case now before the Commission is only that of

"whether or not the defendant adequately compensated the plaintiff Indians

for the lands ceded to it by the Treaty of January 8. 1894. The location

and amount of said acreage has been agreed upon by the parties and the
question of title is not involved, nor is the capacity of the plaintiff
tribe of Indians to prosecute the claim. Therefore, the sole question

now before this Commission is the determination of the fair market value

of the lands. when they were ceded to the defendant and whether the amount

paid by the defendant to the Indians was an unconscionable consideration for said lands.

The language of this Commission as to market value as used in
the decision of Docket No. 239 is:

“Ordinarily. market value is what a willing buyer

would pay to a willing seller in the open market

at the date of the transaction involved. However.
peculiar circumstances may make it impossible to
determine a ‘market value’ (in its strictest sense).
There may have been. for example. so few sales of
similar property that it cannot be predicted with

any assurance that same are determinative of the

value of the property considered. It is then con—
ceded that there is no ‘market value’ (in its strictn
est sense) for the property in question. But that

does not put out of consideration the bearing which
scattered sales may have on what an ordinary purchaser
would have paid for claimant‘s property at the time

in question. * * 9 but it does require that the apm
praiser be wary as to the weight to be accorded the

few sales contemporary with that of the transaction
involved and the sales of the same or similar property
at prior or subsequent times. The appraiser must take
into consideration the special circurstances surround“
ing other sales which would not have affected the hypo»
thetical buyer whose hypothetic price must be considered
as the value of the property involved at the date of the
transaction involved. Under these circumstances addiu
tional evidence must also be considered in determining
what a prospective purchaser would have paid.“

Mr. Justice Holmes expressed himself in the following language
in New York vs. Sage. 239 U. S. 57. at page 613

"What the owner is entitled to is the value of the
property taken. and that means what it fairly may
be believed a purchaser in fair market conditions
would have given for it.“

And later Mr. Justice Clark in 338 U. S. 396. at page 402 said;
“Perhaps no warning has been more repeated than that the

determination of value cannot be reduced to inexorable
rules. Suffice to say that the balance between the

5+.‘

29

public’e need and the claimant°s loss has been struck,
in most cases, by awarding the claimant the monetary
‘market value‘ of the property taken. * * * ‘ * At
times» however, the peculiar circumstances may make it
impossible to determine market value.“

The Court of Claims in its recent decision in the Otoe and Miesouria
Tribe of Indians vs. the United States with reference to the determination

of value says that:

“In the absence of a market at the time in question.
and therefore the absence of evidence of imarket
value‘ in the conventional sense. this court and
the Commission (Indian Claims Commission) have taken
into consideration numerous other factors in determining the value of lands ceded by the Indians.“

Reference is made to the findings of this Commission in its recent
decision in the Osage case and also the decisions of the Court of Claims

in the Alcoa and Rogue River cases. The court then in reference to the

principles and the factors taken into consideration in the cases to which

reference is made and which valuation methods are approved says:

“This method of valuation takes into consideration
whatever sales of neighboring lands are of record.

It considers the natural resources of the land ceded.
including its climate. vegetation, including timber.
game and wild life, mineral resourcesg and whether

they are of economic value at the time of the ceesion
or merely of Eotential val3g3 water powers its then

or Eotential use; markets and transportatione-considering the ready markets at that time and the Qotential
marketa" (Underscoring ourso)

   

Rather than be concerned over the terms to be used in a valuation.
it seems to us that the important thing is to have a clear statement of
the factors that may be properly and fairly considered and the determination of value based thereon can well be considered “fair market value.”

H 296

The lands involved in this case almost entirely are what are
called timber lands; i.e.. the real value of the land was because of

its timber. Therefore, under what is called the Timber and Stone Act

of Congress, enacted in 1878. these lands, as public lands, were legally

marketable at not less than $2.50 per acre. A portion of the lands were

agricultural and were probably subject to being homesteaded at a less
price per acre. This Timber and Stone Act fixed the minimum value of
public timber lands. The record in this case shows that the lands in?
volved were covered with unusually heavy timber, and, therefore, we
think, entitled to be given a higher valuation than the minimum Valuer
tion fixed by law.

The plaintiff relies primarily on the valuation given by its
witness. Carla D. Hesse, and the defendant on the valuation of its
witness. Norman D. Plummer.

The appraiser. Renee, was an experienced forester»-his entire
education and training for years had been in forestry and in timber

&FPraisal. He had been used by the outstanding lumber firms of the

country for years. He based his appraisal of the value of the timber

on the land on cruises made of the same, acre by acre. in 191s. by the
owner of the land at the time. the accuracy of which cruises had been
confirmed. by the hater cutting of more timber off the land, than the

cruises had found. in valuing the timber on the land as sheen by said

cruises an the later examination of the lend itself by the appraiser.
he used standard methods used in valuing timber. He applied the values

of the timber as found by the recognised works of Mason and Steer. which

a 29?

were the basic available sources of information as to timber values
during the period in question. The value of the timber on the land
in 189s amounted to $6.00 per acre, as calculated by Renee.

Defendant's appraiser, Plummer, in reaching his estimate of
the value of the land at the time, disregarded entirely the cruises
made by the owners who cut the timber or any estimate of the quantity
of timber on the land. He relied solely on sales made by the Northern
Pacific Railroad Company and probably other small sales as shown in
his testimony; and upon general information as to timber and economical
development. Many of the small sales relied on by him were not in the
vicinity of the land in question and many were made before the railroad
was constructed near the involved tract and, as he admitted, before

economic conditions had changed by reason of the construction of the

railroad and other developments. Moreover, the witness admitted that

his appraisal experience had been chiefly in appraising lands in the
State of Oregonr-and that he had had no particular education or train»
138. or experience in valuing timber lands. Be admits much confusion
in evaluating the factors he considered.
The only sale of consequence of lands in the tract was that made
by the Northern Pacific Railroad in 1902 of 10,000 acres to the LambDavies Lumber Company for $2.00 per acre. These were of lands given
the railroad by the Government. While this price per acre was largely
in excess of the amount paid by the Government to the Indians for the
land, it should in our judgment be given little weight in determining

the actual value of the timber on the land. The lands were certainly

1+ 298

given to the railroad company in order that they might be used by it
in financing the construction of its railroad and not for the business
of engaging in lumbering: and the financial situation of the railroad
at the time is not disclosed. The sale at this price might well have
been because of its doubtful validity in view of the Act of Congress
of May 31, 1870 (16 Stat. 378.. 379), which provided that lands of the
Northern Pacific Railroad Company should be sold to settlers only.

In addition to the value of the land for its timber, it had some
value as cutwover land and added value for the fish in its lake and
streams.

Mr. Plummer makes his appraisal in a lump sum without a single
word of explanation as to how he arrived at such an amount, other than
that it is based on the information which he has assembled and which
is in evidence. It is significant that he placed the total value of
the tract at $20,350.00, which is just $350 more than the Government
paid the Indians for the land. The Commission thinks that this ape
praisal is made the more significant by reason of a similar appraisal
made by the same appraiser in.Docket No. 239, in which he appraised
in a lump sum l9lo798.80 acres with a difference of only one—tenth of
a cent per acre between said appraisal and the consideration paid by
the Government for the land involved.

Taking into consideration all the factors mentioned by the Court
of Claims in its holdings as to the elements to be considered in determ

mining value and all the evidence in the record in this caseg it seems

to us that the land had a value in 189% of at least $3900 per acre: and

1+ 299

thinking that it had the value of $3,0o per acre in 189b, the cons
sidoration of approximately 87¢ per acre paid by the defendant for
said land was an unconscionable consideration. Therefore. plaintiffs
are entitled to an award of $3.00 per acre for 23,000 acres less the
amount heretofore paid them therefor, and less such other offsets or

counter claims as defendant may show it is entitled to.

Edge; En Witt

J
.-._-u— --o---...-.---——-.----——-:.—-:

Chiof Commissioner

   

Concurring:

Louis J. 01Marr
Associate Commissioner

   

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

   

