7 Ind. Cl. Com, 292 292
BE7‘O?_E Tl’-IE "E~EDI.5;I~§ CI.-U3-I3 C I-}§ISSIOI\3

THE SKAGIT TRIBE OF IEDIAES, also
known as THE ICXER SKAGIT TRIBE OF

INDIANS, also known as UEIDBEY ISLND SKACITS,

Petitioner,

vs. Docket No. 29A

THE UNITED STATES OF AKERICA,

\._/\.__./\_/\...z~.../-../\../~...2\_./-.../*~_/‘N~——’

Defendant.

Decided:i Mar. 20, 1959
FINDINGS OF FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. The lower Skagit Tribe of Indians, Petitioner, herein, is an
identifiable group of inerican Indians within the meaning of the Indian
Claims Commission Act of August 13, l9L6 (60 Stat. IOA9; 25 U.3. Code

Sec. 70(a)), and as such is entitled to maintain t?is cause of action.

-3

(See supporting evidence under Finding No. 10)
0 2. Petitioner alleges that it had exclusive aboriginal use and
occupancy of the following described territory within the area ceded to
the United States in the Point Elliott Treaty of January 22, l855,(l2

Stat, 927, II Kapp. 569):

Beginning at the northwest tip of Xhidbey Island, known
as North beach, in Tcwnship 3; North tange l b;H.K.; thence
in a Northeasterly direction through Deception Pass to the _
Northeastern tip of Nhidbey Island, known as Hoypus Point in
Township 3; Eorth, Range 2 E;W.K.; thence in a 5outheasterly

direction to the Southwesterly tip of Goat Island in Township

-#

\-0
"U

7 End. Cl. Con. 292

33 North, Range 2 E;N;N.; thence around the South side of
Goat Island to its Southeastern tip; thence in a northeasterly direction in a straight line to the center point of
Section 35, Township 3h North, Range A E.N.H.; thence in a
Southwesterly direction in a straight line to the Northeast
corner of Section lh, Township 33 North, Range 3 E;W;K.;thence
West along said section line to the Northwest corner of Section l7, Township 33 North, Range 3 E.W.H.; thence in a Southwesterly direction to Point Demock on the Northwest tip of
Camano Island in Township 32 North Range 2 E.'W. H.; thence
South to the entrance to Holmes Harbor in Township 30 North,
Range 2 E.N;}L; thence West to the intersection of the EastWest center line of Section 7, Township 30 North, Range 2
E;W.M. with the meander line of Admiralty Inlet (which intersection point is about three miles North of lagoon Point);
thence in a Northwesterly direction in a straight line to
Point Partridge on'WhLdbey Island in Township 32 North, Range
1 E{W}M.; thence in a Northeasterly direction in a straight
line to point of beginning. (Petition, Par. IV)

3. Clainant‘s original petition was filed in this cause

August l0, l95l, to which defendant filed an answer September 11,
1951.

. By order dated Octoberj££l95S,this Commission permitted defendant to amend its answer and delete paragraphs 20 and 21 and toimake
paragraphs 8 and 22 read as follows:

8. Defendant admits that the so-called Skagit Tribe and
other so-called tribes and bands entered into a treaty
with the United States at Point Elliott on January 22,
1855 CE2Stat. 927, II Kapp. 669), by the terms of which
said tribes and bands did "cede, relinquish and convey
to the United States all their right, title, and interest
in and to the lands and country occupied by them." Defendant denies that any so-called lower Skagit Tribe or
'Hhidbey Island Skagits, as such,entered into the above
mentioned treaty.

22. Defendant alleges that the lands described in paragraph IV of the petition herein were included in the
cession to the United tates made by various Indians
by said Treaty of January 22, 1855, (12 Stat. 927,
2 Kapp. 669)

29,

'7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 292

L. In 1853, Governor Stevens urged upon the Government the
necessitygof making treaties wit“ the Indian Tribes west of the
Cascade Mountains. These tribes, he estimated, as some forty in
number and stated that they lived on the different water courses or
bays and inlets of the Sound. He further reported: "They have all...
a few...which... are not only permanent places of residence, but are
hereditary. Near them are the graves of their relatives and friends
....These are their homes, and from them.they roam about the Sound
in every direction, going where the fish, roots, and berries abound
most at the different seasons of the year.” Stevens recommended that
thorough consideration should be given to establishing reservations
for the different tribes in their own.territory and joining aszmany

of the tribes as possible under one head. Gov

(D
i

rnor Stevens, in

March of l85L, informed Agent Simmons of his appointment as special
Indian Agent for the District of Puget Sound. The Governor instructed Simmons to visit the various tribes in his district to prepare
them for future negotiations. Simmons was told to organize "the
small.bands, not at present *.ited, by gathering them into tribes and

procuring the selection of head chiefs and of assistant or lesser types."

A

(Pet. Reg. Fdg. 3; our Fdg. 5 in Snohomish, ma-.. 125, 1. Ind. 01. Corn. 552,},

5. Congress by Act of June 5, 1850 (9 Stat. #37) had authorized the

negotiation of treaties with the Indian tribes in the Territory of £L=«“nv

(of which Eashington ferriotry was a part) for the extinguishment of their

-1 ,_  _,l..,

-9

I‘

claims to lands lying west 01 the Cascade Kountains. On August 30, 185A,

the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs instructed Governor Stevens

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 292

whc was also Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Washington Territory, that funds had been appropriated by Congress for the expenses of

negotiating treaties with Indian tribes in that territory. Stevens

was directed to attempt to unite the numerous bands, and fragments of
tribes into tribes and to provide for the concentration of one or more

of such tribes upon the reservations which might be set apart for their

future homes. Governor Stevens commenced negotiating treaties within

the territory. In December, 185A, he reported to the Commissioner of
Indian.affairs that the nexttreaty he intended to hold would be at the

mouth of the Snoho-mish river where he would bring together the Indians

Of the Islands and the eastern shore of Puget Sound. “These tribes,"

Stevens said, "have a population of 2,223, own A25 canoes and raise
6,&OO bushels of potatoes." Stevens said he would attempt to establish
these Indians on a single reservation near the mouth of the Snohomish
River. (Pet. Reg. Fdg. L; our Fdg. 6 in Snohomish, Dkt. 125, A Ind.
Cl. Com. S53)

6. On January 22, l855, Governor Stevens entered into a treaty
with the chiefs, headmen and delegates of the Duwamish, Suquamish,
Sk—tahl-mish, Sam-ahmish, Smalk-kanish, Skope-ahmish, St-Kan—nish, Snoquahlmoo, Skai-wha—nish, N'Quentlama-nish, sk-tah—le~jum, Stoluck—wha—
mish, Sno—ho-mish, Skagit, Kik-i-ailus, SwinaI:1ish,sQ_uin-sh-rcish, Sahku-mehu, Noo—wha—ha, Nook-we-clahemish, Kee—see~qua—quilch, Cho-bahah-bish, and other allied and subordinate tribes and_bands of Indians.
By Article I of the treaty, these Indians ceded certain described lands
*within.the territory of Hashington within which larger area were contained the lands now claimed to have been within the exclusive use and

295

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

occupancy of petitioner. By Article 6 of said treaty, the United
States agreed in consideration of the cession to pay to the tribes

and bands the sum of $l50,000 which s"? was to be expended over a
twenty year period under the direction of the President of the_

United States who was given.the discretion to determine for what beneficial objects to expend the same. The United States further agreed

to spend $15,000 for the removal and settlement of the Indians upon

the reservations, (Article 13) and to establish and support for 20
years an agricultural and industrial school, to provide instructors and
to furnish other aid, such as physician, carpenter, farmer and blacksmith (Article IA). gThe treaty, according to article l5, Jas to be
obligatory on the contracting parties "as soon as the same shall be ratified by the President and 3enate of the United states.“ The treaty
was ratified Karch 8, l8S9 and proclaimed on April ll, 1859 (12 Stat.
927, II Kapp. 669) The treaty is commonly known as the Point Elliott
Treaty. The area ceded by said tribes and bands is shown as Tract 347
and the:reserved areas as Tract Nos. 3A8, 3A9, 350 and 351 on Royce‘s
Nap of the State of Uashington (Pet. Req. Fdg. 5; our Fdg. 7, in Snohomish Dkt. 125, 4 Ind. Cl. Com. 549, 554).

7. In the Point Elliott Treaty of January 22,l85S CEZStat. $2?)

the Skagits are referred to as a tribe in the preamble and some Te“~
G a
teen or siXteen.signatures of chiefs and subchiefs of the Skagit Tggbv

are identified on same. In the Suiattle—Sauk claim, Docket No. ,,

(2 Ind. Cl. Com. 332} this Commission noted in its opinion rendered in

that case that Dr. Ccorge vibbs in his “Contribution to North .rerican

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

Ethnology", Vol. l, l877, stated that the 8ah—ku~meh~hu Indians were inhabitants of the Epper Skagit River and resided on the southlaank of said
river. However, we do not now, and did not in the Suiattle-Sauk opinion,
specifically identify Sah—ku~meh-hu as part of that group or entity of
Skagit Indians living on Whidbey Island in aboriginal times, which group
also has become known as “lower Skagit Indians". The "south bank” of the
Upper Skagit River referred to in said opinion, is quite different from
what we think is a misquotation, "South Fork", set out in petitioner's
brief at page 14. The South Fork is on the lower portion of the Skagit
River while the south bank referred to is further upriver and north of
"South Fork".

8. The Chairman of the tribe testified that today there are approxor the Skagit Tribe (1 Tr. p. 22}.

9. This Commission has previously found that throughout the whole
of the Puget Sound area, including the area claimed herein, the economy
of the aboriginal occupants was centered on the bays and rivers; that
such use as was made of the area away from the immediate vicinity of
the village was seasonal and the seasonal uses were confined as far
as possible to the closest area; that hunting excursions were infrequent;
that there was customary non-exclusive use pattern of lands away from.the
villages and streams adjacent thereto; that the Indians of the Sound area
had no conception of land boundaries in terms of land surveys but did
have a well—defined sense of "use area” with reference to the fishing and

berrying places and the area in the immediate vicinity of their villages

and that thi fe

A

(D

ling of exclusive "use area” did not extend greatly be0}

the villase ll", that non~village

Q

yond the innediate area of

on
{J
L)
F *2
I, J
‘:5
0:

297

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

areas were generally open to all who cared to use them. C The Huckleshoot Tribe of Indians V.

663~666, Fdgs. l2—2l, inclusive, and Snohomish V. United States, Docket

The United States, 3 Ind. Cl . Com. 658,

 

 

No. 125, h Ind. Cls. Com. 5&9, 551-553, 556,557, Fdgs 5 and 9)
l0. The Commission finds that petitioner is successor in interest of the American Indians who used and occupied in aboriginal times

the area of the central portion of Whidbey Island, frog Holmes Harbor

to Dugula Bay, and on the.meinland along the “North Fork" of the

Skagit River. They were originally known as the Skagit Tribe and since

treaty times became known as the lower Skagits or Whidbey Island Skagits.

EVIDENTIARY FQCTS SUPPORT US FIEDIEG KO. l0

 

(a) Governor Isaac Stevens in a message to the President of the

United States and conveyed to the two Houses of Congress, December A,
l85h, Part I, at page ABA stated:

The next tribe proceeding northward are the Skagits,
‘who live on the main around the mouth of Skagit River and
own the central parts of Whitbey‘s island their principal
ground being the neighborhood around Penn's Cove, They
have lately diminished in numbers and lost much of their
influence since the death, a year or two since, of their
chief S'Neat—lnm, or, as he was commonly called, Sna-ke-lumV

Referring to the area indicated in the above quote, petitioner’s
expert ethnologist, Sally Snyder, (III Tr. p. 65) stated:

This is somewhat a definitive area, although no
boundaries are given.and it is not complete for the
wer Skagit.

'7
-5

(b)

Petitioner’s expert witness Snyder referred to Gibbs’ early

language classification of 3kavit—speaking lndians, as follows:

0

298

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

Gibbs, I am quoting from leslie Spier‘s “Tribal Distribution in washington“, General Series in Anthropology Number 3,
1936. He wrote collectively of the Skagits including the (reading)
"Kikwi-allus, Koo-wha-ha, Nook-we-sabsh, Sem—ah-anoo, Sa—que—dosh,
ski-oosh, Eee—see-qua-quitch, Swinonish as occupying the main country between the Snohomish and Bellingham Bay, with the northern
part of Whidby Island, Fidalgo Islands.

So Gibbs’specification of "Skagit” includes Upper Skagit,Swin—
omish, and lower Skagit, as well.

Petitioner‘s ethnologist further elaborated on the relations of
petitioner tribe with Swinomish, Snohomish and Upper Skagit and as all
being of the same dialectic group and hence they were placed all in one

large group by government men for administrative convenience (Sally
J54
Snyder, III Tr. p. 66).

General Kautz, in 1853 noted Skagit Indians around Swinomish Slough,

but he estimate of their numbers and it is not clear what be

1
;;-.c'.lC1€ I1“

xneant by the term Skagit. tevens, in his account of the Indians for the

year l8Sh, divided the "Whidbey‘s Island and surrounding area” Indians

into several groups:

Squi—na-nish
Swowda-mish
SiD‘aF&h"miSh

He gave the total population of his three groups as about 300.

(C)

The Indians living on Nhidbey Island were contacted early

in the exploration and settlement period of nashington. Mr. Whidbey,

one of Vancouver's officers, explored Saratoga Passage between Whidbey

and Camano Islands in l?92, and noted laroe numbers of Endians on both

CD

sides of the passage. At Penn‘s Cove he saw a deserted villa

point of the Harbor, and in one of these:

299

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

.....were found several sepulchers formed exactly like a
sentry box. Some of them were open, and contained skeletons of many young children tied‘ up in blankets; the
smaller bones of adults were likewise noticed, but no one

of the limb bones could here be found, which gave rise to

an opinion that these, by the living inhabitants of the
neighborhood, were appropriated to useful purposes, such

as pointing their arrows, spears, or other weapons. The
surrounding country, for several miles in most points of
view, presented a deligftful Prospect, consisting chiefly

of spacious meadows elegantly adorned with clumps of trees
....The country in this vicinity of this branch of the sea
is, according to Mr. Whidbey's representation, the finest

we had yet met with, notwithstanding the very pleasing appearance of many others; its natural productions were luxuré
iant in the highest degree, and it was, by no means, ill
supplied with streams of fresh water. The number of its inr
habitants he estimated at about six hundred, which I should

suppose would exceed the total of all the natives we had before seen.

(d) The Whidbey lsland Indians received considerable attention from.Europeans in the early decades of the 19th century. In
1840 the Catholic ¥‘ssionary,iBLanchet, visited these Indians.
Writing of his journey, Blanchet remarks:

Desiring to visit the Island, Iciirected my steps toward the north, nassed through beautiful pra;ries:, forests
of large trees, fields of potatoes, made with no other instrument than a curved stick, and arrived at the house of Netlum,
situate on the eastern point of/the Island. It was a house
made of logs, 30 X 20, ceiled, and furnished inside with a
tapestry of mats, with an opening in the center to let the
smoke out. After prayer and chant of canticles, I went to
the shore and found 15 lodges of Indians, who had never seen
the blackaown ....

 

On Sunday, Kay 3l, hetlum arrived early with his band
of Skachates, their women and children. Next appeared at
the head of his band, the Snohonish ..........Hitskalatche,
surnamed Ie Francais, clad in full French costuze ..Talala:cu
came ale; with his band of Sockwamish; all placed themselves
accordin: to rang, to the number of 400. '

Blanchet, found the Indians very cooperative, the Indiaq Netlum

being especially helpful. Lissionary'Blanchet noted i his diary:

300

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 292

Having given my great Catholic Ladder to Netlum, he offered
to carry me to Eesqualy in his grezt wooden canoe, which with l3
men was still light ...In coasting along the island I saw forts

18 Or 20 feet high, raised by the Indians to protect themselves
against the Yugoltah of Frazier river.

 

(e) The year after Blanchet's visit, the region was explored by

the American naval commander, Wilkes. According to one of Wilkes‘ exploring parties, Hhidbey Island had:

.....many small villages, and appears to be more thickly
peopled than other parts of the Sound. It is in possession
of the Sachet tribe, who have here a permanent settlement,
_sisting of large and welllauilt lodges of timber and planks,

similar to those already described on the Columbia and elsewhere.

To protect against their enemies, the natives at one
point cm the island (probably Penn's cove) had large fortified enclosures, ACO feet or more in length made of pickets,
30 feet high. Enough space was left between the pickets,
which were planted in the ground, to accommodate the barrel
of a musket. The interior of these fortifications was divided
into lodges. (Hilkes' Karrative, p. 286).

(f) Farnham, in his Travels published in l8h3, mentions Shatchet

Indians on Penn's Cove, Whidbey Island, and on the mainland. A letter

of Missionary J. Bolduc, in the same year, described his reception at

Whidbey Island. He was given a friendly reception, as the area had already been apostolized by Blanchet. Bolduc writes of the Indians:

A great number of savage Klalans and Skadjats came to
meet us; I knew by reputation (from Blanchet) the chief of the
Skadjats, and asked to see him. They replied that he had left
two days previously to meet at Vancouver‘s island. His two
sons presented themselves; one of then, pressing my'hand, said,
"my'father, hetlun, is not here, he is gone to rcmoon (this is
the name of the southern point of Vancouver‘s island); when he
learns thou are here he will soon return...

I pitched my tent near the cross planted by Mr. Blanchet
when he first landed in the island in 1840. The next morning
all the camp of Skadjats surrounded me to hear the word of God.
You may form some idea of the population of this tribe when I

In

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

tell you, that I gave my hand to a file of 650 persons, besides

150 others-who had passed the night near my tent not included

in this number; and nearly all the old men and women, besides

the children, had remained in their huts.

It is quite possible that this was an encampment of Indians from
a wide area, perhaps from both the mainland to the east and the Olympic
peninsula to the west gathered to hear Bolduc.

Cs)

"tribes" of the area and gave their home as the territory around

Nicolay, in l8&O, called the Sachet one of the most important
Possession Sound. The artist traveler, Kane, who visited the Puget
Sound the next year, remarked that there were fortifications, apparently on Whidbey lslard,"two stout bastions of logs, well calculated
for defense in Indian warfare, and built with considerable skill.”
(h) Indian Agent lane, in ISL9; gave a more general account of
the Skagits.

According to Lane:

The Skagats live or the Skagit river down to the ocean,

toward the north end of nnidbey’s island; total number about
500; friendly and well disposed; live by farming and fishing.

Probably'Iane is referrring to the whole Skagit River area.
Ki}
and Whidbey Island varied considerably. The Schoolcraft population
tables gave for the north end of Hhidbey Island, 300.

(3')

as along the Skagit River, apparently were represented at the IIKTZ

Indians from.a number of villages on Khidbey Island, as well

of Point Elliott. Goliah, who lived on Whidbey Island, was one ef Jhe

*3

main signers of the treaty.
(K)

Signing included a visit to the Skagits, at Point Pallut. The next

yearly report by this same agent, subsequent to the treaty signing

tells of a.visit to the Skazits at Penn‘s Cove, which had been set

Early estimates of the Indian population on the Skagit River,

302

The inspection tour of Ajent Simmons in the year of the treaty~

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

up as a gathering point for the Indians living in the surroundingaarea.

Simmons reports:

On the morning of the 7th I left the Reservation and
proceeded down the Sound and arrived at Penn‘s Cove. Hidbey‘s
Island on the 10th. The next day the llth, I distributed a
portion of the goods intended for distribution by me to the
helpless and destitute of the Skaget Tribe. The Kikialis, a
band of the Skagets, belonging to this Reservation, not being
present, and the weather too stormy to permit them to crop the
hay, I left the remaining goods, together with the package
destined for this place, to be distributed by R. C. Fay the
local Agent in charge; Goliah,Squi-qni, George Sneetlum and
Charley Goliah, were present at the distribution and at the

council xhich I held with them.

/3) Agent Fay, mentioned above by Simmons, made his first report

fro: Penn's Cove in 1856. Fay wrote:

I received my letter of appointment to take charge
of the Skaqit Indians the 1st November, l?§§, with instructions to collect them at Penn's Cove. I immediately
coxplied with the instructions. I visited the different
bands composing the tribe, directing them_to come to a
certain point on Penn's Cove. They expressed themselves
‘willing to do so, and did leave their camps for that purpose, and, owing to the inclenency of the weather, they
did not arrive until the last of the month ....

I informed than that they would be furnished with
a portion of flour andzmolasses to assist then to live, as.
they were taken from their different grounds and had not
the same facilities for procuring food that they otherwise
vould have had. They appeared perfectly satisfied. They
nuzbered at this time about l,200. Some were so far up the
river they could not come down on account oi'the ice, and
did not arrive till.last March; then I had under my charge
about l,ACO Indians, including men, women and children ....
_ the month of April and part of Kay, the Indiais
‘were allowed to go up the rivers to plant their potatoes
...They then returned to the Reservation, and since then
have numbered fron.l, CO to l,200. The up—river Indians
have been allowed to go home, as they were far removed

from the war ground.

Here we see: to have not only the Uhidbey’s Island Indiais but

C5
cl"
f‘\"
'(D

also the Skagit River natives and perhaps others included i

303

7 Ind. Cl. 292 30a

term.of "Skagit Indians."
(m) The following year (l857) Fay reported:

They (the Skagits) have left the location, generally
either to hunt, fish, procure clams, dig their potatoes,

plant potatoes or cultivate then...

The amount of potatoes raised by Indians under my’ supervision will probably be about three thousand bushels;
should they be successful in procuring salmon this fall,
they will require no food to be given.then the coming winter.
The Indians of the Skagit tribes have been in rather an excited state for some tire, on account of the death of the head
chief, Goliah, and Charlie, his brother together with the failure of government to confirm the treaty with them....

Squy Quy, who is now head chief, and bearer of these returns and report, is a good friend to the whites, and I think,
will exert a good influence with his people.

(n) It should be noted that the "Skagit" referred to in
these reports includes people from the river as well as the islanders.

later reports on the Skagits include thetribal listings of
Mallet. In 1877, Mallet mentions a Skadjat tribe which “with its
subordinate tribes, viz., Sha—lush, Ki-kia-loos,Do-qua-chabsh, Soadabsh, Bes-he-kwe-guelts, Dugh-wa-ha, Cho-ba-abish, and Sac-me-ugh
‘were assigned to the Swinonish reservations Gibbs, in an ethnographical report of the same year lists Indians living at various places
in this area both on Whidbey’s Island and along the river as Skaaits.
According to Gibbs:

The Skagits, including the Kikiallu., hukwat-sanisb
Tow-ah-ha, Smali-hu, Sakumehu, Miskaiwhy, Eiseekwigeelia_
Swinamish, and Skwonanish, occupy the remaining country‘
between the Snohomish and Bellingham.Bay, with the northern part of Hhidbey island and Perry Island. With them.a
different dialect prevails, though not se distinct but what
they can be understood by those al eady mentioned. Ting"
altogether amount to l,b75, and have been assigned Go§§

as head chief. This division have no horses, but are alto
gether canoe Indian. with the exception of the islands ~uu

——_._.- ..—. u.— -.—.._..._.._.

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 292

the immediate shore of the main, their country is altogether
unexplored.

They formerly had some communication.witn the
Indians bevond the mountains; but it is supposed to have been
discontinued in consequence of obstructions to their trails.

The Skagit reservation, as agreed upon in the treaty, gas the

peninsula forming the southeastern exsremity of Perry island.
(0) Bells‘ statement on the Skagit, in l887, follows closely that

of Gibbs. The area of northern whidbeyxs Island, however, he calls

"Swinomish".

In the Handbook of American Indians a considerable sectiai is devoted to the Skagits, including a list of villages:

SKAGIT, a body of Salish on a river of the same name in
Washington, particularly about its mouth, and on the
middle portion of Ehidbey’s id., especially at Penn's
cove. According to Gibbs the population of the Skagit
proper in I853 was about 300. They are now on the
Swinonish res., Xash. Gibbs makes this division include the Kikiallu, Kukwatsanish, Towahha, Smalihu,
Sakumehu, Eiskaiwhu, Kissekwigweelis, Swinamish,

and Skwomamish; but probably nothing more is meant
by this classification than that the dialects of the
several divisions were nearly related and the geographical position close. nothing like political
union appears to have existed among them.

(p) Curtis, in his "North American Indians," published in l9l3,
listed Skagits on the northern part of Camano Island; the upper eastern coast of Hhidbey Island; and the eastern portion of Swinomish

Island, as well as on the river. Curtis, in accord with the Handbook,

notes that this area was not one of political cohesion. “Th

Skagit includes a considerable number of bands not politically connected." One of the more important villages was Chabaalshid,

present town of Coupeville, on Hhidbey Island.

7 Ind. Cl. Comm, 292

(q) The I-Iaeberlin and Guntter map, accompanying their general
ethnology of the Puget Sound, gave the lower Skagts nomhern 'w'hidbey
Island. The'Whidbey Island natives, they indicate, had two main
settlements; one atINiccolum Point, and the other at Ba—asats.

(r) Spier assigns the "Skagit proper, "the bulk of Nhidbey Island,
excepting only the northern and southern areas. Drawing from several
early sources, Spier names and locates Indians designated as:

Skaait Prooer -. About the mouth of the Skagit River and
centra ‘~.-Ihidbey Island.

It should be pointed out that Spier doubts “if a single one
of the ‘:.‘ash_ington tribes thought in terms of boundaries."

He believed that the villages in the area were largely autonomous.

The map of “Tribal Distribution in Washington" by Leslie
Spier shows "Skagit" on E-I’nid‘oey Island north of Holmes Harbor

(Petr‘s Ex. No, 5, p, 3).

Leslie Spier noted that Gibbs as early as 18514» ‘differentiated

between Upper and lower Skagits:

The Skagits who live on the main around the mouth
of the Skagit river, and own central parts of ifnidbys
Island, their principal ground being the neighborhood
of Penn's Cove . . . and there are other bands upon the

headwaters of their river. (Ptr’s Ex. 5, hp. 36)‘

(S) The land cession described in Treaty of Point Elliott
includes the whole of Whidbey Island (.-fart. l,:__TI'eaty with ::;i
Suquamish, etc. 1855, 12 Stat. 927, II }§app.E:?'6‘59; Royce Tract 

397. Map. No. 60), - o I

306

7 Ini. Cl. Comm, 292

The tribal grouping of Dr. Marion Smith lists a number of
villages under the term Skagit. Smith's criteria for "Tribe" does
not include over-all political unity, as will be pointed out in Section III. (Dft‘s Ex. 1) She considers the village the politically
autonomous unit. She includes under Skagit, the upper Stillaguamish
River Indians, while the natives of"whidbey Island, on the other hand,
are considered to be part of the Swinomish. Smith cites both extended
villages and individual sites within these larger areas. The dates at
which these were occupied are not clear.

For the Indians of'Whidbey Island (whom Smith considers a "subtribe? of the Swinomish), sites from Oak Harbor south of Snaklem.Point
are given. Dr. Marion Smith located Whidbey Island Skagits as follows:

I. (Name not recorded) at Oak Harbor.

 

2. nobaks - on the upper end of Penn's Cove, not far from
San de Fuca.

3. ba'asats - between Coupeville and Snaklem Point, west
of Long Point.

4. tcubaaltcBd - on the north side of Snaklem Point and
about four miles from Coupeville.

iFor this area, informants of the writer listed the villages
SubItsa‘dsali (where the snake goes in), at Cpupeville, and hobu‘x,
elsewhere on Pennfs Cove. Another informant reported.Whidbey Island
sites at Coupeville, west of San de Fuca, and near Naylor Point in
Oak Harbor: the latter village was said to have originally had the
name WSkagit." The first two of these were almost certainly the

sites named.atove. Between'Hhidbey Island and Fidalgo Island'were

307

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292

the Indians sometimes called Sqdabish, with a village, Sqwi'qwiqab, at
the south side of North Fork, where Skagit River joins Skagit Ba‘.
There were important fishing grounds along the east coast of
'Whidbey Island. Clams were gathered in a number of places and.the
Indians traveled to the Skagit River delta, Whidbey and Camano Islands,
and as far north as Samish Island on clamming expeditions. (See Ptr‘s

Req. Fdg. 6, which Dft. agreed with, Brief, p. 2; Dft. Ex. No. l, Ch. II,
pp. 2-11.

(t) Judge Boothe in his opinion, speaking for the Court of
Claims in the Duwamish case (79 C. Cls. 530):

There is a controversy in the record as to the correct
number of plaintiffs. The defendant insists that the‘Whidby
Island Skagits and the Upper Skagits constituted one band,
the Skagit, * * * *. The controversy is not of easy solution.
we think in view of the jurisdictional act the correct way to
determine the fact is to resort to the treaty, l2 Stat. 927.
(Treaty of Point nlliott). 'rhe preamble of the treaty enumerates
twentyatwo bands or tribes, while the parties indicate a participation of twenty-three, (79 3. Cls. 581)

The Court in Finding IV, made the following finding of fact:

The following plaintiffs were parties to the treaty’
of Point Elliott, viz: The Duwamish, Lunmi,‘Nhidbv Island.
Skagits, Upper Skagit, Swinomish, Kikiallus, Snohomish,
Snoqualmie, Stillaguamish, Suquamish, and the Samish Tribes.

Both the Hhidbey Island Skagit and the United States asked for
and were given relief under the Act there sued under and the Court of
Claims had jurisdiction of the parties and subject matter of the action.

11. Skagit areas and their uses were described by Sally'Sn§dr+
ethnologist, as follows:

Hovnus Point to Ben Ure Village was temporary village
site and fishing grounds.

Off Hone Island was best salmon of the area.

Dugula Bav. Dugula was a permanent plant village where
deer was taken in the surrounding wooded areas. At the
south end of Dugula Bay in.Clover Vallev Indian carrot,
sometimes called "Indian potatoes" (Za‘bid} were gathered
and also some small oysters. South of Clover Valley is

34-‘

Strawberry Point, formerly ublck Point was a campsite,

7 I

DO. Cl. Comm. 292

 

Crescent Harbor had one small permanent village and was a
duck hunting area.

Oak Harbor was a large and very old Skagit village and
was a deer and Za'bid root area.

 

Penn Cove, and also Oak Harbor, was a sole and flounder
main fishing ground, these were called "bottom fish,"
This area was intensively populated and was the principal horse clams location on Ehidbey Island.

 

Past Navlor Point were smelt and herring spawning grounds.

Near Monroe's Landing is an old Indian cemetery and permanent village site.

 

San de Fuca was a village site and mussels gathering area.

 

Snakelum Point, situated at the southeast point of Penn
Cove was a prairie-like area used for deer-hunting, gathering blackberries, wild currents, bulbs, for spiritual purposes, strauberries, and flax for medicinal purposes.

 

From Couneville south to Fort Casev, across Lake Crockett
was a deer hunting area. Coupeville was the Skagit's
largest village and was a gathering place for flounder,
sole and cookies.

Long Point is marked by an old Indian cemetery.

 

Smith‘s Prairie, south of Snakelum Point, was site where
syringia, a hard or ironaood, was gathered for implements
and cooking.

 

Harrington's Lagoon and Race Lagoon were clam gathering
areas; also deer and cockles were found at Race Lagoon.

 

Thence down the west coast between Race Lagoon and to a
point some south of North Bluff there are no temporary
or permanent villages, t across from North Bluff on
the west coast is a fishing campsite.

At Kvak Point, above Greenbanks were clam beds, deer, flounder,

 

crab and sole.

'3

Greenbanks, by legend was the oldest Skagit village.

 

Bald.Island, nearly subnerged in high tide, where three
types of flounder were taken.

 

309

7 Ind. Cl, Comm, 292 3lC

Obbosite Bald Island on mainland was a permanent Skagit
village. at sharbest bend of the North Fork (NE cor. Sec.
16 No Rn. 3, Twp, 33) was a Skagit village.

At confluence of North and South Forks of Skagit River
was a Skagit village. ZClaimant‘s Ex. 4; II Tr. pp. 20-41}

Indian witnesses confirm in their testimomy'that lands occupied
by "the Lower Skagits" in aboriginal times, as described to them.by
their forebears, and the testimony is reasonably consistent with the
documentary evidence, although somewhat more expansive in area. A sixty;
year old resident and a tribal delegate asserted in his testimony that
Skagit Indians in pre-treaty times, according to his grandparents,
used and occupied that area of‘¥nidbey Island.between "Kekwatsun.to
Chutes" (Greenbanks to Deception Pass) (Andree Joe, I Tr., p. 9)

The Chairman of the Skagit Tribe stated that his grandmother
who was born about I838 reported that Skagits occupied the territory
roughly'one—half the way down‘Jhidbey Island and up “the Skagit River

on the mainland to Mt, Vernon and that no Unoer Skagits were south

 

Of Mount. Vernon," (I Tr., p, 25)

A third Indian witness, fifty-three year old Joseph Billy, testified he lived at Oak Harbor as a boy; that his father, Chief Squalakab,
was a treaty signer. He also adopted the testimony of Andrew Joe and
  ‘D T, - ____«: _;_ _-1 . 1 _ ,,_.._,t. ,.K

- - u., prior mlcnesses, as :;3O representing the general resets”
ticn of aboriginal land areas of Skagits among Indians in the Puget
Sound area as understood by higo (I ?r., p. 50) '

12- The Lower Skagit Tribe of Indians, also known as‘§hidbey

Island Skagits, exclusively used and occupied.tao areas of land

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 292

separated by Skagit Bay in aboriginal times; one, on the central
portions of'Nhidbey Island, and the other along the North Fork of
the Skagit River on the mainland. Said areas are more particularly

described as follows:

First Tract: Wnidbejz Island)

Commencing at a point on the northeast coast of Whidbey
Island, situated on the south shore of Dugula Bay where said
Bay joins Skagit Bay; thence, generally'westward along said
south shoreline of Dugula Bay to the most inland point (Shown
in blue on the topographical map, Clainant‘s Exhibit No. 4);
Thence, southwestwardly in a straight line to the benchmark
on the west shoreline of'whidbey Island opposite the small
lake near the present townsite of Swanton; thence generally
southward along said_west shoreline to the point immediately
‘west of Greenbank; thence eastward in a straight line to
Greenbank; thence northward along the east shoreline of
Whidbey Island to the place of beginning.

Second.Tract: (Along horth Fork)

Beginning at a point on the shoreline of the mainland
nearest to and immediately east of the northernmost tip of
Ika Island, said point being on the north shore of the Rorth
Fork of the Skagit River as same is shown on the map marked as
Claimant‘s Exhibit kg thence in a straight line northeastward
to the point of confluence, or apex of the land so formed by
the North and South Forks of the Skagit River; thence in a
straight line to the mouth of Browns Slough; thence northwestward

along the shoreline to the point of beginning and including all

of the marsh land and islets adjacent to said segment of shoreline between said mouth of Brown's Slough and the point of beginning. (Findings No. 11 and ll) °

13. The lands described in Finding l2 were part of the lands
ceded to the United States by the terms of the Treaty of Point
Elliott by the Skagit Indians, and others. The date of signing

of said treaty was January 22, l855. This treaty was not ratified

by the United States Senate, however, until some four years later

3ll

7 Ind. Cls. Comm. 292

on March 8, 1859, and the date of such ratification constitutes the
date of taking. (12 Stat. 927; II Kapp. 669)

14. Any rights which petitioner or its ancestors and predecessors in interest may have retained or acquired to any lands within
the boundaries as set forth in Finding 12 may be made the subject
of inquiry at the further hearing of this claim respecting credits
and offsets of defendant and consideration paid to petitioner or its
ancestors and predecessors in interest and as to the value of said
lands at the effective date of the treaty, March 8, 1859.

s/ Edstar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

s/ Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

s / ‘rim. '1. I-Iolt
Associate Commissioner

312

