 

7 End. Cl. Corn. 519   621.2

BEFORE THE IRDIAN CIAIE3 CcHKISSION

PUEElO de ISZETA,
Petitioner,

vs. Docket No.2ll

CTHE UNITED srgras or AHERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: June 5, 1959

Appearances:
Mr. Dudley Cornell, with whom

was Mr. H. J. Claybaugh
ttorneys for Petitioner.

Mr. halter A. Rochow, with whom
‘was Kr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry 1*! . I-iort on ,
ttorneys for Defendant.
OPINIOR or :s connlsslom
0‘MARR, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
The petitioner in Docket 2ll is Pueblo de Isleta, which. by‘
admission of the defendant, is a tribe of Pueblo Indians recognized
by the Secretary of the Interior. It is also authorized under the
laws of New Eexico to sue and be sued as a corporation.
The pueblo of the Isleta is located about 12 miles south of
Albuquerque on the west bank of the Rio Grande River (see man, Def.‘
Ex 26 near southeast corner). The parties hereto propose no findings

as to the early history of the Isleta, but the Petition alleges that

7 Ind. Cl. Can. 619 6&3

I

the village has been maintained at its present site for more than
300 years. Herbert G. Brayer, in Def. Ex. l7 (pp. 55-59), gives
this background. In the days of the conquistadores the pueblo .i~s~~*’
supposed to have been situated on an island in the Rio Grande then
known as the Rio del Norte. With the changing of the river‘ bed,

Isletamihad ceased to be the “little island", as its Spanish name

i indicates. Soon after the advent of the Spaniards a Catholic chapel

was established at Isleta. The Pueblo revolt, which began in 1680,
caused the pueblo to be abandoned, some of the refugees founding a

new pueblo, Isleta del Sur, ten miles to the south. Sometime between
1709 and 1718 Fray Juan de la Pena re-founded the pueblo and reestablished the mission. Brayer gives the ulsuleta populationias 301;.
in 1760, 4,87 in l809, over 730 in 1850 and 1,000 in l880.

The Isleta Pueblo Grant, shown on Def. Ex. 26 with the pueblo

at about its center, contains about l30,000 acres. Def. Ex. ‘23 shows
it to lie in Valencia and1E3ez-nalillo Counties. A patent (Def. Ex. 10
was issued to the Isleta Iiotrembervl, 1864 for a tract. containing
J_'L0,0i80.3l acres based upon the claim of thelsleta as  by  i
the 3uI'Veyi5r General of New Mexico. On October 7, i933 a isupplenental
Patent (Déf. Ex. ll) to 20,l=,O5 acres was given the Isleta because such
lands were erroneously omitted in theformer survey andfpatent. This
Isleta Pueblo Grant is not directly involved in the present claims; it

is mentioned because of its relationship to the lands here;T;involved in

that the latter lands adjoin the Pueblo on the south.

7 Ind. Cl. Cor-.1. 6.19 9 _, . 61.1."

The Petition herein sets forth two causes of action. The first

asks fair and just compensation for the loss of lh,780.7A§ acres

known as the Peralta Tract (Ex. B of Petition), situated in the
southwest corner of the lo de Padilla Grant containing 5l,9AO.82 acres
(Pl. Ex. 5, Pet Ex. A: hef. ha. 265. ‘The Isleta assertahoriginl
title thereto, and further allege that "in protection of its aboriginal
title and to terminate the claims of non-Indian settlers, Petitioner

purchased the said In de Padilla Grant on February 4, 1750, from.the

legal heirs of Diego de Padilla“. Thnradmit that Congress,'by Act

of May 31, 1933 (48 Stat. 108), appropriated $2.00 per acre to compensate them.for the loss of said Peralta Tract.

The Second cause of action seebs f ‘r

.5 .1 (I; ;5.pIuvI—-u-Iuoiniv-so-salad‘-= an-sq.-5 1‘.----u
ga.-I \—I-—A - 1 .
an - dun-.-H \.l'\Ja.n.s:w\rA3-3C.'bU'-H-V-I-I--L '-I-H-I3.

,the loss of 2,582.78 acres constituting the Bosque de los Pinos Tract,

located in the extreme eastern part of the Antonio Gutierrez and Joaquin
Sedillo Grant (Pl. hx. 6, Pet. Ex. D; Def. Ex. 26). This claim is also
based both on aboriginal title and purchase of the title of the heirs of
the original grant sometime prior to Kay 3, l808. tlhe Isleta have received no compensation for this land.

While the Petition does not specify the section of the Indian_Claims '

Commission Act under'which these claims are made, the Petitioner's Brief
(p. 1) says that the claims are asserted under Section 2, Clause (5) of
the act, the case arising by virtue of the loss by Petitioner of its
aboriginal and purchased lands as a result of the unfair and dishonorable

dealings on the part of the defendant.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 619 6&5

Each of the two causes of action presents a different fact
situation and requires a separate decision by the Commission. The
parties have briefed two general propositions which apply to both

claims and these will be treated first.
L _AsoR:GI1~;;iL TITLE

The first question pertinent to both claims is raised by the
defendant's contention.that neither Spain nor Mexico recognized
aboriginal use of land by the Indians as creating any vested legal
rights of ownership in the Indians (Def. Brief pp. 63-77) and that

the policy of the United States as to “Indian title" based upon

.aboriginal occupancy applhxionly to lands which became a part of the

' public dornain of the United States anduneither of the tracts herein

i claimed by petitioner by virtue of aboriginal ownership ever became a

part of the public domain under the cession.from.Eexico to the United
States in l8h8 since both tracts were'wi hin the exterior boundaries

of valid Spanish land grants to nonrlndians (Def. Br. pp. 57-63). The

« rpetitioner (Reply Brief pp. 23-27) argues that on the contrary, the

laws of Spain prohibited the divesture of Indian title even when the
same land occupied by the Indians had been given.to nonrlndians by
official grant.

The question of the rights of Pueblo Indians to Spanish or
Mexican lands based upon aboriginal use and occupancy has been
discussed in our opinion in the case, Pueblo de Cochiti v. United I

States, Dkt. l36, 7 Ind. Cl. Com. A22, decided last March. It is

nOi n8C€SSary to repeat here what we said there in holding that Indian
title did not attach to lands which never became a part of the public

.8.

domain, that is, lands which had passed to private ownership by Virtue

.of Spanish or Mexican grants made prior to the treaty of Guadalupe

Hidalgo. (See last paragraph of 2d section of the Protocol of said
Treaty).

S Since it is apparent and undisputed that the lands in_both causes
Of action, namely, the Peralta tract and the Bosque de los Pings tract,
respectively, had passed long prior to our acquisition of lands under
the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo by Spanish grants to non-Indians, the

petitioner here never acquired Vlndian title" to said lands.

cum in§—*.-»naD aE1.n?Io1~;sa:P

"The second general question involving both causes of action concerns
the relationship between the Isleta and the United States since l8h8 and
the resulting standards of conduct required of the United States.‘ This
is material'khen.the Commission is asked to decide whether certainactions
of the United States nest the test of fair and honorable dealings.

The petitioner briefs this issue (Pet. Brief pp. 22-Zn) because of
the defendant's denials in its Answer (par. 6 and 20). An examination
of these paragraphs shuns that the defendant “specifically denies that
an ordinary guardian and ward relationship exists between the defendant
and petitioner".

The petitioner calls attention to the June 7, l9éh Act of Congress

(#3 Stat. 636), commonly known as "the Pueblo lands Act", whichtrefers

to the United States “in its sovereign capacity as guardian of said

*4’)

'7 Ind. Cl. Con. 61 61+?
Pueblo Indians " (Pet. Brief p. 22), United States ‘J, Sandoipl (231
U.S. 28) is cited as directly deciding that the Pueblo Indians were
wards of the Government (Pet. Brief p. 23). In this l9l3 decision,
the Supreme Court held that Congress ,____in the exercise of its ‘control
over Imlian tribes, could prohibit by 1 '=.~: the introduction of.’ intoxicating liquors into the Indian pueblos in the State of New iéexico.

The court goes into the history of the pueblos, describing the Indians
as "essentially a simple, uninformed, and inferior people". During
the Spanish dominion the Indians were treated as. wa.rds requiring
special protection. They were elevated to citizenship after the

Mexican succession. As to the United States, the court concluded that

“by an uniform course of action bejg_nning as early as 1854 and continued

a_.
..' I

to the present time, the legislative. and erecutive branches of the °..-;
-Government have regarded and treatedthe Pueblos of E 2»: Mexico as de- ‘

pendent communities entitled to its aid protection, like other

Indian tribes " .

i:The, petitioner does not attempt to distinguish bettreen the Pueblo,
    t ribes in this regard, stating that i the Con.- i
mission has "disposed of the question“ in lPota=.-zlatonie consolidated
dockets 15-B and 11, quoting the Court of Claims in C‘1':ig‘1-Caesar»; 1, 11r=,;‘teg,i

States, 91+ 0. C1. 215, 234, describing the relationship as “similar to

th:§t Of guardian and ward" (Pet. Brief p. 21+). The petitioner also

 

cites United 3tates V. Payne, 261; U.S. _i_.gi;.6, Z-.48, which says ”the
United Dtates occupies the position and assumes the responsibilities

Of Virtual guardianship", and Seminole Ration V. United States, 316 U.S.

. ,,

7 Ind. C1. Css.s 619 see.

286, which requires the Governnent’s conduct in dealings with the Indians
4- g 1*!’ .-. ‘_.. 4. .. 4.: * ' 4.... n
to bw Judged o; the EDSu exacting fiduciary standards .

The defendant iyes its position in its objection to Petitioner’s

Proposed Finding A (Def. Brief pp. hhehé), citing the Court of Claims

l956 Sioux.case and the Commission‘s Opinion in the l957 Omaha case(6 Ind.
Cl. Com. 73,74). Defendant contends that "there is no treaty,.agreement

or statute spelling out a guardian and ward or any other fiduciary relationship between this petitioner and defendant”.

The petitioner (Reply Brief pp. 36-39) replies that the Treaty of
Quadalupe Hidalgo and the Pueblo Lands Board Act both established this
relationship. B

Viewing the whole argument, it appears that the petitioner would be

satisfied with the Commission's description of the relationship as similar

to that of guardian and ward.

2 The frequently'cited Sandoval case, in the

quotation set out above, says the Pueblos are dependent communities ens

titled to the Government's aid and protection, "like other Indian tribes".i
FIRST cause or ACTION

The so-called Peralta Tract,'whieh has already been identified, is
said by petitioner to contain lh,780.7h5 acres (Petition pp. A*5; Pet.
Findings 5-7). This figure istaken from.the survey plat (Ex. B attached
to Petition}. The defendant gives the acreage as 14,710.85 acres (Def.
Brief p. 47}, as set forth in the Exchange Quitclain.Beed.(Ex. 0 attached
to Petition). This deed will be discussed subsequentl . Our Vi9W'0f
this clain.nakes it unnecessary to determine the correct acreage, but

see Defendant‘s Exhibits 7 and 8.

7 Ind. 0:... Com. 519 52.9

The Isleta claim this tract by aboriginal use and occupancy.
Evidence offered as proof thereof is weak (see Pet. Finding 6). The
defendant submitted no evidence thereon. However, it is unnecessary
to go into this matter because this land was purchased by the Isleta.
In its objections to Pet. Finding 7 (Def. Brief pp. A8-55), the defendant admits that the Peralta Tract is within the lo de Padilla
Grant which was deeded by the legal heirs of Diego de Padilla to the
Pueblo de Isleta under date of February L, l750. The original Spanish
Grant was made by the Spanish Governor and Captain General of the
Province of New Mexico to Diego de Padilla Kay 14, l7l8.

Upon petition of the Pueblo de Isleta, the Court of Private land

Claims in Case No. 273 entered its Decree (Def. Ex. 2) on November 28,

  1896, finding that the In de Padilla Grant, containing about 27,000

iacres,was a perfect grant and that the Isleta had sufficiently COD?

nected themselves with the.grantee Diego de Padilla and his lawful
heirs to entitle them to have the court approve the validity of said
grant. The court adjudged that said grant_“is hereby established and‘
confirmed forever to the heirs, assigns and legal representatives of
Diego de Padilla, free and discharged from.any and all claims and demands for or against the same on the part of the United States". The T
Decree also contains this final paragraph:
It is declared by the court that the confirmation.in this
T decree contained is made under Title XII, of Book IV, of the
Recopilacion de Ieyes de Ios Reynos de Ias Indias, the Royal

Decree of the King of Spain of October 15th, l75hm, and the
law of the nations.

A Patent (Def. Ex. 1) was issued April 9, 1908 for said lo_de Padilla

al representatives of Diego de
Padilla”, in acordance with and so ject to the terms of_the Act of
Congress of Harch 3, 1891, which established the Court of Private land
-C1ains. The survey of said grant (Pl._Ex. 5) shows the acreage as
5l,9hO.82 acres. A great discrepancy will be seen between this figure
and the 27,000 acres in the 1896 Decree (Def. Ex 2); howeter, it is
reasonably plain that the Diego de Padilla Grant was intended to be

the larger acreage.

Some years later, in a qpietine title action specifically involving

the Peralta Tract entitled Federico Sanchez. et al. v. Pueblo de Isjeta,

the Valencia County'District Court entered its Findings of Fact, Conclusions of Ian and Decree (Def. Ex_3) on February'3, 1915, in favor

 

of the plaintiffs and against the defendant. Finding 1 concerns the
1718 Spanish Grant to Diego de Padilla; Finding 2, the 1750 conveyance
to the Isleta. The findings of not continue:

5 3. That on the 15th day of'Eay, 1797, Manuel
Aragon, Manuel Antonio dragon, Domingo Chavez, V_ncente
Chavez, Juan Aragon, Francisco Javier Aragon, Jacinto 0
Sanchez, Felipe Eontoya, Simon Sedillo, Francisco
Garcia, Jose Ignacio Holina, Iorenzo Romero and Fran-i
cisco dragon purchased from the said Pueblo of Isleta
and the said Pueblo of Isleta conveyed to the said
persons, a portion of the grant made as afresaid to
Diego de Padilla, and by his heirs conveyed to said
Pueblo de Isleta, which portion so purchased by said
above named persons is hounded_on the north by lands
of the defendant, on the south by lands of Ios Ientes
or Peraltas, on the east by the mountain, and on the
west by the Rio Grande del E-Eorte, measuring from
south to north 2425§ varas. .

h. That the said purchasers of said portion of
said grant to Diego de Padilla entered into possession

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 619 651

of the same, and they and their descendants and
assigns have remained in continuous possession
thereof without any interference from anyone
until just before the beginning of ’this suit,
am that the plaintiffs herein and those whom
"they represent and for whom they act, are desendants and assigns of said original purchasers
under the deed of May l5, 1797.

Finding 5 sets out the Cciurt of Private Land Claims action and 1896
Decree confirmingtthe Padilla Grant. Finding 6 finds that the
defendant made no claim to the land sold in I79? and no attempt to
interfere with the possession of the plaintiffs until shortly before

the beginning of this suit. In its"conclusions of law, the court

' held that the confirmation by decree of the Court of Private Land

Claims inured to the benefit of the plaintiffs as fully as to the benefit of the defendants, and that title was vested in the plaintiffs and

those whom they represent. The court, therefore, ordered title to the

' tract described in Finding 3 quieted in the plaintiffs and those whom

they represent, being the descendants or successors in title and interest

a of the persons nsizied in Finding 3 who made the I-£aypl5 1797 purchase from

the defendant, the Pueblo de Isleta.

We shall discuss the questions involving thesis ‘two decisions before
going into subsequent events .. The first question is the legal effect
°-if the.-1896 Decree of the Court of Private land Claims. The defendazlt
contends ‘that the court‘s decree and the patentpbased thereon were
conclusive only as between the Isleta and the United States and did
not affect the rights of any other person in the land (Def. Brief
P13» 1”’: 81-83). Ainsa v. I-Eew I-Ze:z::I.co and Arizona Railroad, 175 13.3.

76, 90 is cited. The patent is said to be only a quit-claizn deed from

- —.—..__.._.........._....-.--------.-v .- v

I:   _
4- _- . in
.- : ‘ 4 3'1
. . . . .
_-\.__ ._ . ‘_'.‘

“'.'I.°I-.' Jig’

7 Ind. Cl.Co1r.. 5.1.9 ' 552

the United States and third parties would have to assert their claim
of title in local courts of general jurisdiction.

The petitioner, in objecting to Defendant's Finding l9, maintains

- that the private rights of nonrlndians most certainly were affected by

the decree of the Court of Privateiand Clains confirming title to the

Io de Padilla Grant and the subsequent issuance of a patent to the petitioner (Reply Brief p. 5). This is not ccnsistent with petitioner's
own.statenents as to the same court in the second cause of action (Pet.
Brief pp. 35-36). "The Court of Private land Claims could not adjudicate
title between Indians and nonrlndians. This jurisdictionvwas expressly
forbidden under the Act that created the court“, referring to Clause 2,

Sec. 13 set out in Footnote 78.

i lAs'to the effect of the patent§.petitioner says "the Commission

has determined that the issuance of patents to nonrlndians amounted to

a divesture of title clearly'entitling the Indians to just compensation",

 

citing Creek Nation v. United States, 302 U.S. 290 (Reply Brief p. 5,
footnote 1A). ‘However, the 1908 patent expressly provided that it was
based upon the decree of the Court of Private land Claims and that “said
grant isimade subject to all the limitations and terms of the said Act
.of Congress of Harch 3, 1891” (Def. Ex.l). ‘we therefore agree with the
defendant that the court‘s Decree and the subsequent patent did not
affect any other private rights to such land. lThe Decreeonly confirms
the title "free and discharged from.any and all claims and demands for

or against the same on.the part of the United States" (Def. Ex. 2). This
is consistent with the holding in the dinsa caseznentioned above, in

which.the Supreme Court said:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 619 t L 553

. . . .all decisions under this act (of March 3, l89l)
shall be conclusive between the claimants and the United
States only, and shall not affect the private rights of
any person, as between himself and any other claimant.

pplying this to the instant case, the Decree in Case No. 273 and
the patent based thereon did not affect the private rights of those who
subsequently claimed title to the Peralta Tract in the Sanchez case,

and the Valencia County District Court had jurisdiction to determine

those rights in a quieting title action. As stated by the latter court,

a the confirmation in Case No. 273 inured to the benefit of all claimants,‘

in that the original grant was held to be perfect.

The next question, then, concerns the effect of the Sanchez decision.
The defendant has a section (Def. Brief pp. 77-79) devoted to the proposition that petitioner cannot recover for the geralta Tract under a title

by Purchase “since it has been judicially determined by a court of.compe4

—tent jurisdiction that petitioner has not owned the tract since l?97".

United states +; Candelaria (271U,s. A32) is cited to show that a

state court had such jurisdiction. The defendant concludes that "petitioner,
therefore,is estopped by that judgment (Sanchez) to claim that it owned

the Peralta tract".

an

The petitioner first argues that the defendant’s Answer does not

plead a defense of estoppel by judgment (Reply Brief p. 28). An.examination
of the Answer indicates this to be technica1ly'true. Allegations are cone
tained therein concaxdng the Sanchez case (pp. A-5)." Defendant‘s plea of
res judicata involves rather an alleged subsequent determination by the
Pueblo lands Board that the Peralta Tract was the property of nonrlndians.

(Answer p. 7). As will'be seen later concerning the Board's actions, its

deternination was based on the -court‘s decision in the Sanchez case.
Petitioner then argues that the Valencia County Court‘s decree was

voE, citing the Candelaria case (Reply rief pp. 30-34). The question

involved was 1.-rhether a state court judgment in a quieting title action

brought by the Pueblo of Iaguna and a subsequent United 5tates District

Court judgment‘ were res judicata in a third action involving the same

' land bnought by the United States on the theory that "these Indians were

wards of the United States. The Supreme Court held that the Indians of
the pueblo are wards of the United States and hold their lands subject
to the restriction that-the same cannet be alienated. in any wise without
its consent; that a judgment or decree which operates. directly or indirectly to transfer the lands from the Indians, where the United States
has not authorized or appeared in the suit, infringes that restriction;

and ‘therefore the United States is not barred by a former judgrnent unless

' the United States was a party to the suit or authorized the same. If the

suit was be=.un  prosecuted by the speciallattorney employed by the

'72:

United States to represent the Pueblo Lidians, a position provided for

bstcongress in 1898, the court said this would as effectively conclude
the United States as if it were a party to the suit. it Although the words
"begun and prosecuted" are used, it is assumed that the appearance of
this special attorney to represent pueblos as either plaintiffs, defendants or intervenors would have the ‘sane effect, the vital point
being that the ‘ted States was represented in the suit.

It is apparent that the United States was not a party in the Sanchez

case. The petitioner does not 337 who represented the Islets and it is not

7 Ind Cl. Con. 61? - »~ ah. __ f ;._6

\.!1
\}1

shown in the court‘s decree (bef. Ex. 3;. The decree (p; l) indicates
that the cause was argued and submitted to the court with leave to thei
respective parties'to submit written briefs; and that'Ee defendant
failed to present a brief.

VThe petitioner also cites Alonzo r. United States; 2&9 F 2hdmlS§, and
quotes therefrom (Reply Brief pt. 3lr33). The United States, in its
own.behalf and on behalf of the pueblo of iaguna; had hroughtaan aetion
in the United States District Court to enjoin certain narties'frdniprose-H
cuting an action inla state court in which the Pueblo nae one of the;
defendants. The United States Court of Appeals, Tenth Circuit; affirmed
the issuance of an injunction, holding that restrictions against aliene
ation apply to lands acquired by the Pueblo through purehase; as'eell as

to lands acquired by the Pueblo in any other manner, and that the United’

VStates'was entitled to injunctive relief, the United States not being a

party to the state court suitg
Petitioner lists cases (Reply Brief p. 335 to sdpport'the statement
that "though the Indians‘ interest is alienated by judicial decree, the
United States may-sue to cancel the Budgnent and set the conreyance aside
where it was not a party to the action“. ‘
Summing up this question of the effeet of the Sanchez decisiongi
it is our conclusion.that the court‘s decree is not void; it is sig—'
nificant in that it is the determination of a court of competent
jurisdiction that the Isleta sold the Peralta Tract in l797.‘.jhe

petitioner has produgea no evidence to prove that the l??? sale'was

 7 Ind. 0].. Corn. 619 ~ 655

not made. Petitioner is content to merely argue ‘(Reply Brief 13. 15)
that "the defendant's OWI1 exhibits wholly discredit the rihdigs (or
the court) as vague and indefinite, to-wit: (l) the Report of.‘ the
Pueblo lands Board and (2) Pueblo Indian land Grants of ‘Rio Abajo’ ,
New Me:r::I.co, Herbert 0. Brayer”. The reference is to the inability
of the parties to definitely identifyithe tract frompthe description
in the decree, resulting in continuous controversy betweenthe parties
as to their rights in the area. This matter becomes vital inthe
following discussion of the actions of the lands Board.

Proceeding then to subsequent events, the Pueblo lands Board was
created by Act oi‘ Congress of June 7, 1921+ (43 Stat. 636). The Board

consisted of three members: one representing the Secretary of Interior, i

 

another the Attorney General, and the third was appointed by the President
of the United States (Def. Brief p. 20). The Board was directed to
investigate, determine and report upon all lands within the exterior
boundaries of any land granted or confirmed to the Pueblo Indians of

New Eviexico under authority of the United States or any priorpsovereignties ,
I or acquired by said Indians as a comunity by purchase, --or; otherwise, "i
title to which the Board shall find not to hairerbeen extinguished in
accordance to the provisions of the Act. ‘The Board was to make an

award to the Pueblo for any loss of lands or water rights as a result

of the failure of the United states seasonably to prosecute the rights

of the Pueblo. The purpose of the Act was also to quiet ‘bit 18 '50 3-311513

claimed by the Indians, and the United States Attorney General was

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 61? P 55?

directed to file in the District Court bills of complaint to determine
adverse claizzs (Reply Brief 13. 11,2).

On August l7, 1928 the Pueblo lands Board issued two reports on
the Isleta Pueblo; Report $1 on title to lands granted or confirmed
to the Pueblo Indians not extinguished (Def. Ex. 7); and Report §2
concerning Indian titles extinguished (Def. Ex. 8). _In Report £2
(pp. 5-7) the Board.deals with the Peralta Tract as follows:

The lo de Padilla Grant, originally made to Diego
Padilla on May'1A, l7l8, was purchased by the Pueblo of
Isleta on February'&, 1750, from the heirs of said
Padilla and patented to the said Pueblo on April 9,

1908. Said grant so patented contains 51,940.82 acres..
All of the land indtuded in this grant was conveyed to
the Pueblo Isleta in 1750 by the heirs of Diego .
Padilla. The grant appears to have been confirmed by

the Court of Private Iand Claims on November 2, 1896.
However, on February_3, 1915, there was handed down a
“decision.by'the Judge of the District Court for thei
County of Valencia in a case known as Federico Sanchez,
at al; vs; the Pueblo of Isleta. It appears that in

1797 ten natives, presumably-the descendants of the
original grantees, purchased back fron.the Pueblo Indians
part of the grant. The decree states that the descendants
of these purchasers entered into possession and retained
possession.until just before the beginning of the suit.
The description.of the area in the decree however, which ~
it was allaged was at that time so deeded to the Indians,
is not such as to enable either the Indians or the non-I
Indians to de£initely'identify the tract, and this has
resulted in continuous controversy between the interested
parties as to their respective rights in.the area referred
to. iAt the tOWE10f Peralta a considerable settlement.is?
situated near the river, toward the eastern end of the
tract so deeded, and the Indians have never claimedpossession.of or any title to the area within and surrounding this town. I I

The situation.resulted in negotiations between the
people of Peralta and the heirs of the original Spanish
grantee on the one hand, and the Isleta Indians through‘
their duly appointed representatives on the other,

7 Ind. Cl. Corn. 619 _ 658

looking toward an agreement whereby a fair division

of the In de Padilla area could he arrived at. After

a good deal of negotiation, an understanding'was

reached whereby lh,7lO.85 acres, comprising the Peralta
settlement and adjacent lands were segregated from.the
lo de Padilla Grant, and to the satisfaction of the
Indians and non-Indians alike, set aside by the Board

as the area to which the Peralta people are entitled.
The Board therefore finds (see Report No. 1) that of the
51,940.82 acres patented as the lo de Padilla Grant, the
Indians are now entitled to 37,229.97 acres and thernnIndians to lA,7l0.85.acres. ' ’

The Board finds as to this 14,710.85 acres known as

the Peralta tract, that it could not have been recovered

by'the United States by seasonable prosecution as defined

in the Act, and that therefore the Isleta Indians are

entitled to no compensation for the loss thereof.

Defendant‘s Exhibit 9 contains amendments to the land Board's Reports
as to the Isleta,.showi;gthat suit was filed in the United States District
Court to qniet title to certain lands awarded by the Board to the Isleta
and a final.decree entered January 6, 1930. The court reversed the findings of the Board as to certain.smal1 tracts, for which the Board.made an
additional award. It does not appear that the Peralta settlement'Ras
involted in this subsequent litigation., ~ _ L ' I °_

One other document of the lands Board appears in the record, aIHemorandun.dated June 30,'l93l (Def. Ex. l9).i It covers the various areas
found to have been extinguished, upon whidn no award was recommended to
the Indians. The Board said that obviously'the Government could not have
recovered these lans by seasonable prosecution because title had become
‘perfect and complete in the nonrlndians prior to the Treaty of February 2,“

1848 (p. 3). Such an area was at Isleta. The Isleta case, however, is

said to be different from.the rest. “Here a voluntary agreement was

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 6l9 , 659
Retyped

arrived at between the parties. Deeds covering the compromise were
exchanged with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior”.

Details are given at p. 14, similar to the findings in Report #2,

with the addition of certain testimony showing that the Isleta approved the settlement. Jose Padilla, governor of the pueblo, is

quoted as testifying that it was a fair deal and was agreed to by

the council. Pablo Abeita, Antonio Abeyta, a member of the council,
and Jose Carpio, also a member, agreed to Governor Hagerman's statement
as to the exact area to be included in the transaction. Hagerman was

a member of the Board.

In 1931 a subcommittee of the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs
began an investigation of the condition of the Indians. In the case
of the Isleta, it included the Peralta settlement :effected by the
Lands Board. Testimony of three Isleta Indians was taken in June,
1931 (Def. Ex. 12). On January 28, 1932 Judge Richard H. Hanna, as,
private counsel representing the Isleta, made a statement (Def. 12 a,
pp. lll55-lll59) and introduced various exhibits (pp. lll59-lll70) in
seeking additional compensation, under the bill before the committee,
for the Peralta Tract.; A statement of H. J. Hagerman to the Pueblo M
Lands Board is included (pp. lll64-lll6-), which gives further information on the Peralta settlement. A.reading of this record shows somei
confusion, but generally indicates that the settlement was considered
fair by all parties, including Walter C. Cochrane, the special attorney employed by the United States to represent the Pueblo Indians.
Judge Hanna asked that the Isleta be awarded at least $2.00 an acre
for the Peralta Tract, since that was the value fixed by the Board

for two small parcels in the same area for which an award had

been made. The Peralta Tract had been appraised at $284,132.56 in the7 End. Cl. Com. 660

In Reports of Karch 16, 1932 (Def. 3.. 14) and of hay 10, 1932

(Def. Ex. 15), the House of Representatives Committee on Indian Affairs.

2 approved an additional award of $2.00 an acre for the lA,7lO.85—acre

 

tract. Both reports state:

The Board made no award for this tract, apparently

holding in error that it could not have been recovered for the Indians. (Def. Ex. 15, p. 4).

The appropriation was made bv Act of Congress of May 31, 1933 (48 538tlO8). yhe defendant sets out the conditions of the Act and the acceptance
of the payment by'the Isleta (Def. Finding 31).

Now as to the questions argued by the parties, the first involves
the defense of res judicata as made in defendant's third defense(Answer,
‘b. 7; par. 16). The petitioner considers this defense abandoned by the
defendant (Reply Brief p. 29). The situation is confusing because the
Answer refers to the land Board‘s deternination.that the 14,710.85 acres
"was the property of nonelndian settlers. Defendant's_Brief, however,
refers to the Board’s decision not to make a money'anard for the Peralta
Tract because it could not have been.recovered by seasonable prosecution
(Def. Brief pp. 2h, 90). Defendant says "this Commission is not authorized to overrule that decision by the Pueblo lands Board". It is the
matter of an.award which the 1924 Pueblo lands Act made subject to review
by the United 3tates District Court and Circuit Court of Appeals. '3ince
no appeal was taken, defendant contends that "suchcietermination has the

force and effect of a final judgment" (Def. Brief p. 2h)7 Ind. 01. Corr... 619   661

The next proposition is petitioner's claim that defendant's actions

were less than fair and honorable in causing the petitioner to dead its

- lands knot-In as the Perelta Tract (Pet. Finding 7, Pet. Brief pp. 25-32,

Reply riei‘ p. Al). In the settlement negotiated by the lands Board, the
Isleta and certain non-Indian clamants executed an exchange quitclam
deed on bay 1, l928 whereby the lsleta quitclamed all their interest in _
the llp,7lO.85—acre Peralta Tract and the non-Indians quitclaimed their
interest in the balance of the Lo de Padilla Grant. The original deed
was lost (Pl. E. 3), but photostats and copies preserved the record (see
Exhibit C in Petition). The dead expresses the desire of the parties to
amicably settle and dispose oi‘ the dispute and controversies between the
parties as to where within the Lo de Padilla Grant the 2.£|.2_5‘32 varas of
land purportedlyideeded by the Isleta and involved in they Sanchez case
lies. _ V

The petitioner contends that the lands Board should not have negotiated the settlement and the United States should have filed a bill
of complaint l in District Court to determine adverse; claims, as provided 4
in the first paragraph of the 1921;. Act (lPet.. Brief pp. 25-.27). ‘But it
appears that this was a situation in which a negotiated voluntary settlement was certainly justified. ' The Sanchez decision established that the
Isleta had sold by deed a tract  l7§7 toicertain non-Indians and no
evidence was presented to the Lands Board to prove otherwise. The deScription of the land in the deed was such that its location and extent was uncertain. This was not unusual in ancient docunents. And

since thepdeternining factor was the intention of the parties to the

 

7 Ind. Cl. C.n. 619 662

1797 transaction, the most practical so.ution'nould be an amicable
agreement between the successors in interest making certain the
boundaries of the deeded tract. This is what was done, as expressed
in the exchange quitclaimcieed itself. After such a settlement was
completed, itshould be unnecessary for the UnitedStates .ttorney
General to file a bill of complaint to determine adverse claims to

the lands involved in the settlement. After the settlement, the
Peralta Tract was not land claimed by the Isleta, as required in the
paragraph quoted by petitioner fron.the 1924 Act (Pet. Brief p. 25).

The petitioner asks that the Commission decide whether or not the

defendant used unfair tactics, persuasion and undmainfluence in effecting
this settlement (Pet. Brief p. 28). iFrom a review of the record, we

consider the proceedings fair and voluntary. iPetitioner’s statement that

the Board "threatened dire results if the Petitioner did not execute the

inst unent of conveyance to the non~Indians"is not supported by'eridence.

-C

oeine told that the settlement “would eliminate a lot of

-D

The Indians
litigation” was certainly a proper appraisal of the situation.i Mr.
Cochrane, the special Pueblo attorney, was present to represent the Isleta
and signed the exchange qnitclain deed as a witness §Exhibit C). Judge
Hanna, as private counse_ for the Isleta before the Senate Committee (Def.
Ex. 12a, p. lll58), said "that though our representation of these Indians,
as private counsel, was known and had continued for three years at that
time, we were not advised of any of the negotiations or proceedings refered to, and'were not in any way consulted about it, or given any opportunity
to advise them.“ However, the petitioner cannot consistently'complain of

9

their representation oy the special Pueblo attorney, because elsewhere in

31. Con 6l? o 663

t;-s ;g5e the petitioner complains that in certain litigation the

:»..:'.L

Etaoes was unfair and ne ligent in not providing represen":1 3y the United States District ttorney or the special Pueblo
+§ employed by the United States (Reply Brief pp. 31, 39, £03

Erief pp. 2l—23). The settlement was generally considered fair
(see Def. Finding 29). No subsequent attempt was.made to void the
settlement, only to obtain some compensation from the Government.

The petitioner further argues that in the exchange deed, the
Indians were given nothing that they did not already'have (Pet. Brief
p. 26). This is in effect saying that the deed lacked mutual consideration., It assumes that the Isleta were the undisputed owners of
all the land involved. This is an incorrect assumption. As has been
pointed out, the record is virtually unchallenged that the Isleta made
a sale to noneIndisnsir:l797. ihe lands Board found that the Indians"
had never claimed possession of or any title to the area within and‘
Surrounding the town of Peralta, where a considerable settlement was
5ituat9d (Def. Ex. 8, p. 6). Kntonio Abeita, an Isleta Indian, testified. when asked how far back the early Spanish settlers at Peralta =
dated, "Apparently it dates back to the Spanish rule" (Trans. Dec. A,
1956: Pg 32). Diego Abeyta, another Isleta, said that several hundred
P9°Pl€ lived in and surrounding Peralta at the time of the quitclaim
deed (Po 53). Pablo Abeita testified in 1931 (Def. Er. 12, p. 10073).
"- . . .1 do not doubt there are many of them.(nonrIndian settlers)
in eood faith had acquired good title to that, so they thought”, under

a deed executed by Indians. Under such circ=nstances, there certainly

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 619 664

was mutual consideration for the exchange quitclaim.deed. The disputed
location and extent of the land purchased in 1797 made the settlement
ofzmntual benefit to all parties.The petitioner also questions the sufficiency of the signatures

of the nonelndians on the quitclaim.deed (Pet. Brief, pp. 17, 28),
referring to the 1928 letter (Pl. Ex. 4) of Walter 0. Cochrane in which
he expresses his purpose to get the signatures of the people at Peralta
and forward the same to Washington for approval, securing the signatures
~of people outside of the state thereafter. He adds,

I believe if those at Peralta willeaxecute the deed
that none of the others would dare cause us any ‘
trouble.i That this view is not satisfactory from

a strictly legal point of view, I know - but it is
not a question of what we want to do, but a question

of what we can get done; (See Pet. Finding 7, Footnote 21) I - v '

Since the deed was executed to the satisfaction of the Pueblo attorney
representing the Isleta and since the record does not show that any’
"trouble" developed from.non-signers claiming an interest themin, it
does not appear that the Isleta were hurt in any way'by the manner in;
‘which the deed was drawn and executed.

Finally, the petitioner maintains that the exchange quitclaim deed
was void because it was not approved by the Secretary'of the Interior
(Pet. Brief pp. 30-32). Several legal cases are cited (p. 32). Two
general statutes are set out in.Footnote‘6S, and paragraph 17 of the
Act of June 7, 1924 in Faotnote 69. The latter provides that noisale
of lands “made by any pueblo as a community, or any Pueblo Indian living

in a commnnityhof Pueblo Indians, in the tate of New Mexico, shall be

7 Ind. Cl.Cor. 619 555

of any validity in law or in equity unless the same be first approved
by the Secretary of the Interior”.

A June 4, l929 letter (P. Ba. 3) from.the Lands Board‘s records,
but without signature, indicates that the deed was lost and any record

of it being sent to Washinoton for the approval of the Department was

i lacking. The writer expresses his inclination that the approval of the

Office was not necessary but that it would be better to find the document. Copies of the deed do not show any endorsement thereon by'the
Secretary of the Interior, although the text of the deed says, "by
and with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior”.

Although there are several other statements that the deed had the .
Secretary‘s approval (Def. Brief p. 87), the defendant admits "that there

is reason to believe that the deed was never submitted to the Secretary

B for.approval" (pp. 87-88). The Secretary of the Interior, by letter of

December lO,,l93l to the honorable Dennis Chavez (Appendix D., Def.
Brief pp. 115-117), advised that an e: nination of the files disclosed
no record of the receipt of the deed. He also wrote:

From.the context of the letter (from.Br._Chavez.

concerning the mutual exchange deed), it appears

that the deed was one executed in the settlement , t _ ,

of claims by the Pueblo lands Board, and does '

not require submission to the secretary of the

Interior for approval.

It is therefore defendant's position that the approval of the
Secretary was not required (Def. Brief p. 89), because "the approval

of such a settlement was entirely within the function and sound discretion Jf the Board". Defendant also says the Peralta Tract did not

fall within the provision of paragraph 17 of the Pueblo Lands Act

since it did not belong to petitioner. A "possible explanation of

why the 1928 deed contained language ‘indicating approval by the

' Secretary of Interior" is given in Footnote 2861-fnich quotes the

 

written statenentd of  Hagerman (Def.  12a, p. 11166) as follows:

As a ‘member of the Pueblo lands‘ Board andidpa-ticularly

.a representative of the Secretary of the Interior and . - Ignox-ring that this matter would be referred to me for

approval I have simply taken the part of an arbiter in

this matter but I told both parties that if the deal

was put through on the lines agreed upon I would

approve it. ‘

It appears to us that it would‘ have been better practice to have '
obtained the formal approval of the Secretaryof the Interior, and
certainly the loss oi‘. the original deed was regrettable. However, we
are not prepared at this late date tosay that the deedtwas void.

There are no legaldcases cited iaihieh determine whether such a settlement
negotiated by the Lands Board would be void nithont such approval ofdthe
quitclain deed involved. - In 1931 the Secretary of the Interior did not
think that approval was reduired because theqdeed was executed in the
settlement of claims by the Board. It seeds reasonable thatpthe -Lands
Board, a creationuol‘ Congress with a member appointed by the Secretary
of the Interior, should have that power. I

It. is therefore our conclusion that the petitioner has not established that the defendant*s actions in regard. to the Peralta settlement

were less than fair and honorable.‘ The settlement was not only fair but

desirable and of benefit to all parties.

‘several additional ouestions.

7 Ind. Cl. Con. 619 667

The payment by Congress in l933 of $2.00 an acre for the lh,?lO.85—
acre Peralta Tract, after committee hearings and recommendation, raises
-.e petitioner says this Act recognized
the liability of the United 3tates and amounted to a finding by Congress
that the lands Board was wholly wrong and erroneous in holding that the
land could not have been.recovered by seasonable prosecution (Pet. Finding
7 p. 15) The defendant, on the other hand, says this was a determination by'Congress that $2.00 an acre was a fair value for the land, and
under the terms of the appropriation, the petitioner is not entitled to
additional compensation (Def. Brief pp. 30-33; 90). The petitioneri
replies (Reply Brief pp. lh-16‘:

A Th? fact that Judge Richard H. Hanna pled for

§2;0O per acre-before the Senate Subcommittee in

Santa Fe and Congress later awarded this exact

amount totalling $29,A2l.?O is not material or ,

relevant, until.the Commission considers the matter

of offsets. This was a gift that Congress was not

,required to make since the statute of limitations.

had.lbng since run.against the Board's action in

gnot making an award. '

‘We consider the appropriation by Congress something less than a
recognition of liability for the loss of the Peralta Tract.g From a
reading of the committee hearings and reports, it appears that Congress
and its committees were literally leaning over backwards to satisfy‘
these Pueblo Indians and that the appropriation was in fact a gratuity.
The statement in the House Committee Report, previously'quoted, that
"the board made no award for this tract, apparently holding in error

that it could not have been recovered for the Indians" is not a

positive statement of fact.

The defendant also points out the l?L§ action of Congress in
directing that title to three tracts, including ll,lA2.39 acres of
the Peralta Tract acquired by defendant in the submarginal land program,
he held in trnst for the petitioner, as further evidence of the fair
and honorable treatment by the defendant (hef. Brief n. 90)." Thns
petitioner has been given almost all of the Peralta Tract, in addition
to the conpensation apnropriated by Congress based on the total acreage.

Accordingly, we do not belieXe_that the petitioner has shown that

the defendant is liable on its first cause of action.

SECORD CAUSE OF ACTION

.45‘: n

I. .. I ' ' I . . .
—1I§ Petitioner 3 second cause of action adcs Just and fair compensation

for the loss of 2,582.78 acres constitnting the Bosque de los fines, which
‘Will hereafter be referred to as the hosdne Tractrc It is designated
“Antonio Gutierres and Joaqpin Sedillo Grant, Tract No. 1" on the survey
plat (Ex D. in Petition; Pl. Ex. 6). The east boundary is the old bed of
the Rio Grande River and the west bonndary is the river bed after the river
changed dourse at a.tine'which has not been.madecertainin the record.Th3
‘Io dev Padilla Grant lies inmediately to the eastand.the Isleta Pueblo
' Grant to the north. . l d 0n£3epteEber'9, 1896 two p%titions'were filed in the Court of Private
Iand'Claims by J.1§ancisco Chavez against the United States, seeking conr
firmation of the Gutierrez and Sedillo grants (Def. Finding 35; Def. T. 18,
P» 1). On November l3,‘l896 the Pueblo de Isleta,:repr8Seni8d by attorney
G. L. Solignac, petitioned the court that it be alloeed to join as a copetitioner, adopting the allegations of the Chavez petitions (Def. Ex. l8,

7 Ind. Cl. com. 619 i ' G 659

p. 5). Upon the entry of such an order, the court consolidated the two cases, do. 27a and 275, and trial was had, as reported

U‘!

in the Transcript of Record (Def. ax. l8). In its Decree of_Confirmr

ation of June 2, l89? (Def. E3. £3 Def. Ex. l8, p. 35), the court
found that the Spanish grant to Antonio Gutierrez was.made on Nopember 5,
1716, and the grant to Joaquin Sedillo some time prior to 173k; and that

in 1785-Clemente Gutierrez died in possession of and owning both tracts.

C‘

The court also found:

A. At some time prior to the 3rd of May, 1808, the
Pueblo of Isleta had acquired the title of Clemente
tierrez to all of said land lying on.thevest side
‘of the present river bed of the Rio del Norte and had
entered into possession of the same and has held such
possession'down.to the present time . . . ..

5. By a number of diiferent deeds from the children

rand heirs of Clemente Gutierrez, beginning in the year
l8l9, Franciscoliarier Chavez acquired all of the
Gutierrez title to so much of said lands as lie to the
east of the present river bed of the Rio Grande del Rorte
which portion of said lands is known as the Bosque de_los ,

Pinos . . .'.

*7. ter the.making of the original grants the Rio
Gremde del Eorte formed a new channel west of'what'wasi
subsequently'known as the Basque de los Pinos, leaving‘

.. its:former aver bed at a considerable distance east .’ _
of the new one, and that portion of the land in question
lying between the old and new river beds has since been

. known as the Basque de los Pines and is that which was
acquired'by Francisco Xavier_Chavez.,

,The court therefore ordered the claim for the Bosque_Tract confirmed to
J. Francisco Chavez, who had inherited the title of Francisco Xavier _

k ' . . , . .
Chavez, and the land lying west of the present river bed to the Pueolo.

‘*1’!-, I

" a..,.,.. '

‘v. Chavez, l75 U.S,'5o9, October term, 1899.

Con. 61?

670

I

An opinion in Case No. 27¢ &Def. Ex. 18, pp. 37-LO) discusses
the two questions presented in the case: first, as to the boundaries of
the land granted, and second, whether the plaintiff or his co—petitioner
is so connected with the title as to authorize the proceeding. One judge

dissents (pp. h0—L4),

The United States appealed the decision of the Court of Private land

‘Claims to the United States Supreme Court. Defendant‘s Exhibit 5 is a

copy of the opinion affirming the lower court, reported as United States

 

Er. Frank M. Clancy is
attorney of record for-the appellees (p. 518). A sketch mapappears at
p. 519. The essence of the opinion, delivered bg Justice EcKenna, is
that the title asserted by the appellees is deficient in the support of

direct evidence, but such deficiency is supplied by the probative force

of the possession of the land. The possession of the Isleta is said to

have been.open and notnious “as far back as the.nenory of the oldest
liking inhabitant caneextend" (p. 524). The court further makes it clear
that a Proceeding before the Court of Private land Ulaims "is not a
litigation between conflicting private interests", but “is one against
the United States, and determinative only of the title against the United
States" ( p. 525). Confirmation is subject to all other interests and.
claims, and the forum for their determination.is the ordinary' courts

(Ainsa V. New Eexico and Arivons ?=ilr

 

, ante, 76; and United States
V. Conway, ante, 60; both decided at the present term).
On November l5, 1909 a joint patent (Def. V‘. 6) was issued to J.

Francisco Chavez and his heirs and to the Pueblo of Isleta for the

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 619 671

separate tracts as found and described by the Court of Private land
Claims.
The Pueblo Lands Board made no particular mention of the Bosque
Tract in its reports. In its Report §2 (Def. Ex. 8, p. h%-5) the Board
found within the area of the Gutierrez and Sedillo Grants, containing
il9,935.9l acres, fifteen tracts aggregating 59.8h8 acres_to have been‘
extinguished. The Board says, “There does not seem.to have been any
serious controrersies beéieen the Indians and the non—Indians in this
section”._ The Board found that the small tracts could have been recovered by seasonable prosecution and made an award to the Isleta therefor.
At the I931 hearings of the Senate subcommittee previously referred
30 (Def. EX. 12), Diego Abeita testified,“Now, we do not know whether
3/,the BosquePino was brought up before the land Board or not" :(P. 10092).
In the inquiry that followed (pp. IOCBQ-10095), Hr. Jennings, a member of
thefkerd, considered the confirmation to Chavez by the Court of Prirate
hIandtClaimsand therffirmance”by the Supre e Court to be res adjudicate,
,‘and that they had no authority to go into that.matter. Er. Hanna expressed
his view_that the Governnenthad not representedthelsleta before theBoard. -Hr. Fraser, special assistant to the Attorney General assigned to
the land Board's matters, said that the court decision and affirmance
“indicated_to the minds of the board that the title had passed long ago
in Spanish times, and that, therefore, the United States could not in
th? language of the pueblo lands board act have recovered this land by‘

seasonable prosecution".hcither the House (Def. Ex. la, 15} nor Senate (Def. Ex, 13) Comr

mittee Reports mention-the Bosque Tract, and it does not appear that

Congress ever made an award to the Isleta therefor.

The first question presented by the parties hereto involves the
defendant's Fifth Defense (Answer pp. 8-10) that the decision of the
Courtof Private Land Claims is res judicata of the question presented
by petitioner in its second cause -of action. The petitioner devotes a
section in its original brief (pp. .19-21) to this matter but claims in its
Reply Brief (p.  that the defendant has abandoned this defense. However
this may be _, both 3r.:t'ie-s how agree that the Court of Private Land Claims
did not have jurisdiction to decide any conflicting claims between Chavez
and the Isleta. Such claims had to be submitted to courts of general
jurisdiction. (Def. Finding 36; Reply Brief p. 20).

 - r The next question is whether the Isleta. at the time of the Treaty of

“Guadalupe Hidalgo, had title to the Bosque Tract by virtue of pm-chase of

said. land from others claiming title under a grant from Spain. The defendant contends that there is no proof of purchase by the petitioner at any

time (Def. Brief pp. 7'7, 79-81‘), emphasizing that-thzouguxt the litigation

- discussed above, the petitioner made absolutely no contention of ownership

of that tract. The petitioner (Reply Brief " pp. 27-35) answers that such

evidence is negative (p. 35). Actually, the fact of purchase depends

upon the time of the change of the river bed, which has not been made
certain in the record. The Court of Private Land Claiszzs found that the

Rio Grande del Norte formed a new channel on the west’ border of the

Bosque Tract ”after the making of the original grants " (Finding 7 previously
quoted). Since the court further found (Findings A and 5) that the Islets.
acquired title to the lands west of the net-:(pz-esent) river bed and that

Francisco Xavier Chavez acquired title to the land east of the new river

;: implication is present that the change of the river bed occurred
m'*? the purchase by the Isleta. It has been agreed th"t these findings

_:t‘res judicata. However, the petitioner has presented no:substan—

. wwidence to prove that the facts are otherwise.. As the record now
;%auds, we can see no other condlusion than that the Isleta never purchased the Bosque Tract.

(This leaves only one foundation for the petitioner's second cause of
action; its claim oi aboriginal title. ihe onlp evidence cited hr the
the petitioner in support of its Finding 5 on aboriginal use and occupancy
is the testimony of three Jsleta Indians( see Footnote ll, Pet. Brief,_
pp. lO—l2). Antonio Abeita (age 75) testified that during his lifetime
the Isleta has used approxinatelp the north one-third of the Bosque Tract

for irrigation.farming and had built small houses upon the land (pp l0-ll).

I

“The southern portion was used for grazing and_hunting (pa 12). He said,

'from'what*burpfathersntell us; they used it for a very long time; before

f’

they purchased the grant (p. l2)._ About 1913 or 1915 the Indians were

stopped from going on the Bosque Tract by a fence built during the growping season and the Indians couldn‘t harvest their_growing crops that

season -(Trans. p.127). Diego Abepta testified that according to tradition, they have used the Bosque Tract since time immemorial (Eet. Brief

P. 12). Felipe Jiron (age 73) testified that he farmed with his father a
S-acre tract near the north.boundary of the Bosque Tract from.about l893 or
15395 until it wasfenced between l9l3 and 1915 (Trans. pp._é&-68). About
20.Isleta Indians farmed 2 to 5-acre tracts in that area; a few having_
permanent houses and some going back to the village (pp. 6h~6S). The de-.

fendant produced no evidence on the issue of use and occupancy;

The Commission's decision in the Gochiti case (Dkt. 136) referred to

 

7 Ind. Cl. Coma 619 S ‘A 574+
above decided this question.

Since the Isleta did not have any rights in the Bosque Tract at the
time of the l8h8 treaty, it is elementary that there could be no recovery
in the second cause of action because it is based upon the loss of their
alleged rights in such land caused by the unfair and dishonorable dealings of the United States (Pet. Brief pp. 33*36). It also makes immate-rial such matters as thafailure of the Pueblo Iands Board to report on
the controversy'relating to the Bosque Tract (Pi 33), the failure of the
United States to represent the Isleta before the Court of Private land
Claims and Supreme Court (p. 34), the:failure of the United States Attorney General to file a bill of complaint after land Board action
(Reply Brief, p. 42), or the allowing of the fencing of the north boundary ofthe tract (p.‘1.-,1).

It is our conclusion, therefore, that the petitionerfs second cause

-F

of action is not sustained by the evidence. :§%T

1‘ n- an

'We,accordinglr, hold that the petition of the Pueblo de Isleta
should be dismissed.
It will be so ordered.

_ Iouis J. O'Hara:
Associate Commissioner

We coznur:

Eggar E.'Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

