BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE MIAMI TRIBE OF 0KLaHOMA,
also known as THE MIAMI TRIBE,
and HARLEY T. PALMER, FRANK C.
POOLER and DAVID LEOEARD, as
representatives of THE MIAMI
TRIBE and all of the members
thereof,

Docket No. 6?, (Consolidated) and
Docket Nos. 12h, 31h and 337
consolidated therewith

Petitioners,
V.

INTERVENORS DocE:et Nos. 15-13, 29-3, 89,
311 and 315

THE UNITED STATES OF‘AMERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: September 17, 1956

Appearances:

Edward P. Morse, with whom
were Edwin A. Rothschild and
Louis L. Rochmes,

Attorneys for Petitioners

in Docket No. 67.

Francis J. Clary, with whom
"was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry E; Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant,

0PIDION_QE THE CONMISSICD

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered.the opinion of the Commission.

The issues now before the Commission are the value of the 7,036,000
acres of land known as Area 99; according to Ro§ce's Map, as of October
6, 1818, and the liability, if any, of the defendant to the plaintiff
tribes.

The petitioners say that the present teasers of value is the fair

market value as defined by this Commission in its opinion in the Osage

b 399

0359 (3.I.C.C. 236) which is as follows:

“Market price is the highest price estimated in terms of

money which land will bring if exposed for sale in the

‘open.market'with.a reasonable time allowed to find a

purchaser buying with knowledge of all the uses and

purposes to which it is best adapted and for which it

is capable of being used." Petitioners contend that there'was, in fact, no "open market" for
the land and that the value to be found must be by applying to the
situation as determined by the facts, established and generally recognized principles of appraisal, and by assuming that buyers and

sellers were free to negotiate without compulsion or political rem

trictions. (See Pet. Brief, pages 2 and 3).

=c
(T)
(P

-itioners present to the Commission voluminous evidence as to
the nature of the lands involved; also evidence of the demand tnereu
for and for similar lands immediately prior to the valuation date and

continuing immediately thereafter, together with the development of

the contiguous territory. Much evidence was introduced.showing sales,

57

otn large and small, of lands in the vicinity of t.e land to be valued
during the years immediately prior and immediately after the valuation
date. Evidencetas also introduced as to the population trends of the
time and as to the general economic conditions. lee viewpoint of con»

tenporaneous public opinion as to the character of the lands, their

'3 I‘ 9 4. -2 4 3-‘ - ‘P x a _ Iv
C9olTaD;1lof and value were pot in evidence.
Based on the evidence as above outlined, the opinion of Mr. Esrkley
' " -_r s 0 _,I_ _ - _,e_ -. _: ,_ - 1
. Ducn, an einert appraiser, together‘wioh tee basis of same and toe

nod oy which his aopraisal was reached was put in evidence. the

exhaustive report of Er. Duck and his appraisal 5 the fair naskns

value of the area involved, as of date of October 6, 1818, to be 81.8763
per acre, is in eridence and constitutes the principal basis upon which
petitioners ask this Commission to find the land to have the market value
of 81.8763 per acre, as of October 6, 1818.

The defendant puts in evidence much historical matter showing the
development of the northwest country of which the land involved is a
part, together with the history of the settlement of that territory;
geological and geographical facts revealing the conditions faced by
the first settlers in 1818, together with the economic and financial
conditions of the country at that time and for the immediate years
thereafter. Defendant also put in evidence voluminous records of the
sale of lands in Indiana (in which state the tract involved is located)

by the United States Government beginning with the year 1801 through

_the year 1818, together with records of sale for the same years, of

lands located in the various states northwest of the Ohio river.

Based on all the evidence thought to have been available and kno'ledgeable in 1818, the said appraiser, Paul Starrett, evaluated Area
99, as a whole, as of Octoter 6, 1818, at 20¢ per acre or $1,hO3,000.

The witnss, Starrett, explained that in the absence of sales

of large tracts, comparable in size, location, character and.time,
informed purchasers would have made estimates of what the land might
be reasonably expected to sell for in the future and at what period of
time it would require to sell, in order to deterrine the 1818 value

of the land; defendant's a,praiser fixed the value based on the capital

cost that he thought could be sustained. He calculated the interest

11 .3401

and-other carrying charges and what the surveying, sale and.other expenses might be expected to be.i (See Def. Brief, p. bl). Based on such
matters as indicated, the WibH€SS evaluated the land as of 1818 as stated
at 20¢ an acre, or a total of $l,hO0,000.

It will thus be seen that appraisers, both for the petitioners and
for the defendant, relied upon what they thought the land involved could
be reasonably expected to be resold for to actual settlers in small
tracts over a period of approximately twenty years. The appraiser of
petitioners is shown (Fdg. 32) to have based his value on October 6,
1818, at $l.8?68 per acre, on an expected resale of 90% of the land
as $h.OO per acre and 10% of it at $2.00 per acre. The appraiser For
the defendant based his valuation of the land at 20¢ an acre as of
October 6, 1818, upon the assumption of a resale of three—fourths of
the total acreage at $1.10 an acre and one-fourth of same as nonu
saleable (Fdg. M1) .

The purpose of submitting the reports and testimony of real estate
appraisers is to aid the Commission in makiie this determination, The
determination itself, however, is to be made by the Commission on the
facts established by the evidence. An appraisal by an expert is no
more than his opinion. Opinion evidence is received when the person

giving the ooinion is a qualified expert in his f eld, however. “opinion

___-I -9 . ‘H’, 0 r! I’ g u_ o Ar
€vlC€§C€ 18 not egidence Oi fact.” The height to be given to opzljcn
evidence decends upon the qualifications of the witness in th, f1e?d in
'w1ich he testifies and vhetaer ne takes all relevant facts l”tO account

and the correctness o: the facts, upon which the opinion evidence is

based; and whether the assumptions made by the witness are proper and
supported by facts. The appraisal can only be properly evaluated by
giving consideration to the qualifications of the witness and in the
light of the true facts upon.which based.

The evidence shows that the market for new land in the northwest
territory was exceptionally strong on the appraisal date. The vast
westward movement, known as the Great Migration, was at its peak.

The population of the territory had multiplied many times in the pre‘ceding years and was increasing rapidly. The greatest population

pressures were in the immediate vicinity of the New Purchase. The
population of western Ohio in the Cincinnati Land District had far
outstripped the rest of the state. Eastern, southern and southwestern Indiana were growing at a tremendous rate. There was considerable population in Illinois. The sales of land reflected the population increase. In 1818 more than 70% of the lands in the Cincinnati
Land District had been sold and settled areas were on the east, south
and west of the hen Purchase. Ohio had been a state for fifteen years,
Indiana for two, and Illinois had been admitted into the union.
More land had been sold by the United States in 1818 than in any
prior year, and much of this increase occurred in the northeast territory.
.)

There was no indication at this time tha= these trends would not

.1.

n fact continue. While there had been cyclical

(3.

id

we

continue. They
booms and depressions in the past, each temporary sstback‘was followed

by a recovery which carried the market to a higher point than had been

witnessed before. Th re had been depression

E
U}
w
I._:
“J

( 2
C},_J
(D

Tl
(D
H
i..J'I
C)
Q4
0
kn
C*‘
3'
(D

confederacy and preceding and during the War of 1812. After each de~
pressicn and particularly after the'War of 1812, there was an nnprecen

dented boom. The year 1818 marked the peak of the boom.
In short, no one would have hesitated to predict in 1818 an active
land market continuing for many years, and.snch market did continue.
While it might have been anticipated from past experience that this
activity would fluctuate, the year 1818 gave little sign of impending
depression. It was, as Professor Gronert testified, a period of unprecedented optinism. (Taken from Petitioners’ Brief, pages 7 & 8).
As stated, the year 1818 was a year of unprecedented optimismuu
the Iestern migration was at ‘ts peak, hea~r sales of public lands
were made in that year and even higher sales the following year. The
sales of public lands in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois had jumped from
256,3h5 acres in 1813 to 823,26h acres in l81h; had passed 1,000,000
acres in 1815 and continued to increase annually thereafter through
1819. The sales continued to be heavy for years (see Fdg. 19).
"The lands in the vicinity of the lands involved in this law suit
include the lands of what is known as the Cincinnati Land District
lring immediate_r east of the lands involved herein. Among these lands
of said Cincinnati Land District are what are known as the Twe1ve—Mile

Strip and the Greenville lands. The Greenville lands had been open

.0

icr settlement in 1800. The Twelve-Nile Strip of the District had ceen

open for settlement in 1811.

no

Land District contained 3,709,hh§ acres and by 1818 almost threemfburths

vreenville lands and nearly 60% of the lands of the Tnelvemhilc

The total acreage conoosing the Cincinnati

Strip had been sold. In l8l8, when the land involved herein was acquired,
it was surrounded on the east, south and southwest by areas which had been
previously open for settlement; all its north and.northwest borders being
bounded by Indian land. Both Indiana and Ohio had achieved statehood and
were politically organized; the population density on its borders had so
increased that when it was open for settlement in l820, Ohio averaged
1b.? persons per square mile, the Greenville lands averaged 27.? persons
per square mile and Indiana had only 6.h persons per square mile (see
Fdg. 20). The average annual sale of the Greenville Lands had been
approximately h%; the average annual sales of the Twelve—Mile Strip
lands had been at the annual rate of 7.3%. According to defendant,
Area 56 sold at an average annual rate of h.5% and the Harrison Purchase at 7.7%%-petitioners‘ figures show annual sales to be at a
slightly greater per cent. There are some other variations as to the
annual sales of these near-by lands, but both parties agree that the
sales of adjacent tracts were sufficient to comprise the whole of said
tracts in the neighborhood of l8 or 20 years;

In quality, desirability and accessibility, the lands under consideration.were superior to that of adjacent lands and the sale of the
lands here involved could.well have been anticipated as being as rapid

as the sales of adjacent lands to which reference has been made.

tioners base their claim of

i....|o

Nr. Duck's appraisal, upon which pet
value as of 1818, was based on his conclusion that by reason of the
sales of land in the vicinity of the lands involved that had taken

place in the years immediately preceding the appraisal date, and the

h hOh

unquestioned heavy demand in l8l8, that there would be a continuing
demand at prices in keeping with the prices paid by settlers during
these previous years for lands in this section of the country, and,
particularly, for the lands under considerationo In view of the
character and location of the land under consideration, he was of the
opinion t.at the evidence of these previous sales warranted a conm
clnsion that 90% of the acreage involved.cculd he sold in small tracts
over a period of 20 years for the average price of $h.OO per acre and
that 10% of the land could be sold at $2.00 per acre; and based on this
assumption that the value in 1818 was 31.8763 per acre. ewe think the
assumption of re—sale of 90% at $h.0O per acre is unwarranted.

Mrs Starrett, defendantis appraiser, although having knowledge of

the same land sales, considered by plaintiffs‘ appraiser, and having

knowledge of the same conditions, generally, as considered by plaintiffs‘

appraiser, seemingly gave more consideration to economic conditions

generally, including the then available money in circulation and the

receipts of the United States Treasurer. He predicted a “slump” in

land sales and a resale of only threeufourths of the lands involved
over a period of 20 years to actual settlers at only $1510 per acr

with 25% of the lands unsaleahle. It is difficult to understand how

.‘...I 3

the defendant‘s appraiser could have concluded under all the facts .n

that any great percentage of the land involved would he nan

saleable, or that much would not be saleable over a period or years

'1 
“ms

to settlers for homes for a larger price on the average than the $lg_c

I

t

which he makes a basis of his l8l8 value. The subsequent experience
of the Government in the sale of the land involved confirms the viewpoint of petitioners‘ appraiser, that the entire tract would be in
demand at a greater per~acre value than that assumed by defendant's
appraiser. The evidence was that more than.ninety per cent of the
land was sold.within a period of twenty years and that less than onehalf of one per cent of the land was unsaleable.

Taking into consideration the evidence of sales as shown by the
Findings of Fact, the large amount of public lands available for sale,
the population of the country as a whole, the economic conditions at
the time involved and the large tract involved, it is the opinion of
the Commission that the land under consideration at the time in question
had a reasonable market value of 75¢ per acre; that is, that the tract
of 7,036,000 acres on October 6, 1818 had the value of $5,277,000; and
that this was so far in excess of the amount paid the Indians therefor
as to make the consideration they received unconscionable.

Area 99 involved herein, was acquired by the United States by
treaties made on October 2, October 3, and October 6, l8l8, from its
recognized Indian owners, the diamis, the‘Neas and the Delanares. All
parties in these consolidated dockets agreed that the value of said
land should be determined as of the date of the Miami Treaty, October 6,1818, and that this determination would be binding upon the petitioners
representing the Haas and the Delawares, that is, the petitioners in
Docket Nos. 31h and_337; however, the defendant in its answers in

Docket Nos. 31h and 337 have set up the contention that the petitioners

hm?

in said docket numbers have not the capacity to make the claims being
asserted therein. The issues made by said contention of the defendant
were not submitted in this consolidated case, but, that issue as made
in Docket 31h is considered in the consolidated hearing of Docket Nos.
65, 66, 99, 289, 313 and 31h, and it was held by this Commission that
"the claims presented by the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, the
corporation, for and on behalf of the Deoria,'Hea, Kaskaskia and
Piankeshaw”‘would_be within the jurisdiction of the Commission "upon
proof that there are existing members, or descendants of members, of
the tribe for which claims are so made." There has been no further
hearing had on the issue thus presented in Docket Nos. 31h, et al.,
and, therefore, the Commission is not in a position at this time to
give consideration to the matter of an award to the petitioners in
Docket ho. 31h.

Eo consideration of the same issue raised by theziefendant in

Docket No. 337 has been made and, therefore, this Commission is not

i

523

a position at this time to consider the matter of an award to the
petitioners in Docket ho. 337.

The defendant does not controvert the right of the petitioners

{L

in Docket Nos. 6? and 12h to bring the actions they have brought an

U)
3
$1)
(U
1.:
L3

thus an.award can be made in Docket Nos. 6? and 125 and it i.
an Interlocutory Order of even date herewith.
Attention might also be called to the ;act that while the retin

tioners and.the defendant in Docket Nos. 6? and 31h agree that the

M t0?

consideration provided by the Miami Treaty of October 6, 1818 was
$280,500, and the parties in said docket numbers agree that ihis amount
was received by the Miamis (Petitioners’ proposed finding 38; Defendant's
proposed finding 20), the amount received by thc'Wees and the Delawares
is not in evidence.

Edgar E,'Witt
CHief Commissioner

 

‘we concur in.the above:

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

 

we. M} Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

11140

