7 Ind. Cl. Com LL22

BEFOJI TEE BIDIAN CLADES CQ-EMISSION

PUEBLO DE COCHITI,
Petitioner,

v. Docket No. l36

THE UNITED snmss or Aléinf-IICA,

\..._/\.../\....l\._,.a'\-...J'*-.—!"~u.¢"N-.d"N..«/

Defendant.

Decided: March 27, 3.959

Appearances:
Dudley Cornell,
ttorney for Petitioner
1-falter Rochow, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General

-= Perry W. Horton,
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION 23 THE CC}-It{ISSION

-2

0'1-iarr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The petitioner, Pueblo de Cochiti, is a tribe of Pueblo Indians
recognized by the Secretary of the Interior. They live in a pueblo
about 25 miles west of the city of Santa Fe, New Mexico, in the present
county of Sandoval, a site so occupied since about 1700. The pueblo is

near the center of a 214,256-acre tract known as the Pueblo de Cochiti

Grant, clearly shown on the map Cl. Etc. 19. This grant, which is trav-'9

ersed by the Rio Grande River, is one of eleven Spanish grants to pueblo

Indians in this vicinity made in or about the year 1689. fter a favorable

L13’?

7 Ind. 01. Can. b22 h38

report by the Surveyor-General oi‘ New Mexico (Def . Ex. ll) , the United
States on November 1, 186h issued a patent (Def. Ex. 12), to the Pueblo

of Cochiti for the said 24,256 acres. The present claim does not involve
this land; it involves lands outside the grant and these lands will be
herein referred to as "claimed area.'i But it should be noted that two
Spanish grants to non-Indians (the La Majada. Grant of l69S, patented
October 26, 1908, and the Caja del Rio Grant of l7h2, patented February 20,
1897) overlap both the Cochiti Grant and the “claimed area." In all subsequent litigation and transactions, the Cochiti Grant has been found to

be superior to both of these private grants as to conflicting areas.

_The petition in Docket l36 asks just and fair compensation for a

tract of approximately‘ 25,000 acres lying immediately east of the Cochiti
Grant. The tract, marked by an orange dashed line on the map Cl. Ebc. 16,
actually contains l3,l1lt,0 acres, as shown by the evidence and now accepted
by both parties (Pet. Brief, p. 2; Def. Brief, 13. 3). The petition alleges
that petitioner had aboriginal title to saiditract; that in protection of
its aboriginal title, petitioner purchased said land on August ll, l7lLl*.,
from Bartolome Fernandes de la Pedrera, as shown by copy of deed and translation marked Exhibits B and C attached to the petition; that their aboriginal rights were recognized and protected by Spanish laws and decrees and
their property rights were guaranteed by the United States in the Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo of February 2, l8h8; that at all times since the
United States obtained jurisdiction over such lands from I*Ee:=c:Lco, the Pueblo

Indians have been under the guardianship and protection of the United

States; and that in violation of such trust, the United States has permitted

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1122

non-Indians to occupy said lands and issued patents to others, wholly
depriving the petitioner of the use and possession of said land since
the fencing of the La Hajada Grant in 1912. The La I-iaj ada Grant will
be discussed later, but it should be noted here that the petitioner's
evidence shows that the fencing was done in 1933, and not in l9l2 as

alleged in the petition.

While the petition does not specify the clause and section of the

Indian Claims Cdnmission Act upon which its cause of action is based,
petitioner‘s brief at page 1 states, "This claim is asserted under Section 2, Clause (5) of the Indian Claims Commission Act." The loss of

petitioner‘s land is said to be the result of unfair and dishonorable

dealings on the part of the defendant.

The defendant, in its answer, admits the capacity of petitioner to

bring the action but it denies most of the material allegations of the

Petition. At the trial of this case in Santa Fe on December 3, 1956

(Trans. p. llO), the defendant was granted permission to file an amended

answer. The amended answer, which was duly filed, set forth a new defense to the effect that in an action in partition, known as Civil Action

No. 26 in the District Court of Sandoval Count'y, Territory of New Iviearzico,
in which the Pueblo de Cochiti was an intervening petitioner, 
Of Juli? l6, 1913 ami January l3, 1920 are res °udicata, or con;:;'i;.;.2,,'tn_
estoppel by judgment, of any rights claimed by the Cochiti e::i—  
deed. The petitioner assumes in its Reply Brief (p. l6) the -1.7.}u:; 

55-On: at its discretion, wi 1.1 consider that the amendrnent was ur1ti;l:1ef;=_3r

and prejudiced the petitioner. However, the amendment was a;i;;}.,<;,A;we:..E,,  

1:39

7 Ind. 01. com. 122

specific purpose of setting up this defense.
The parties hereto agree that the principal questions presented by
this case are as follows (Def. Brief, p. 39; Reply Brief, p. H):

1. What right, title or interest did petitioner have in the
lands here in question when the United States acquired sovereignty over this territory under the Treaty of Guadalupe I-Iidalgo
February ,2, 18148,

(a) by virtue of aboriginal ownership or "Indian title,"
._and

(13) under its deed of August 1.1, 1714);?

2. was there any "taking" of such lands from petitioner by the
United States and, if so, when? ‘

3. was the United States guilty of unfair and dishonorable
dealings in its relations with petitioner resulting in loss of
the lands herein claimed?

Because of the special defense of res 'udicata, or estoppel by judgment, as to any rights of petitioner by virtue of the 173.114 deed, we‘-shall

treat this subject first.

DEED or AUGUST 3.1, 17141:
One copy and translation of this deed is attached to the petition as

Exhibits B and C. A photostat copy of the deed is in evidence as Cl. Exhibit 6 and a translation by Miguel Jorrin as Cl. Ebchibit 15. Mr. Jorrin

testified that there is no material difference between his translation and
Exhibit C attached to the petition, and that the deed has all the legal
formality to make it a valid public document according to Eighteenth Century Spanish Law (Trans. pp. 7-12).

The said document, executed on the llth day of August, l'7L=J.L in the
village of Santa Fe, New Mexico, is by Juan Fernandes de la Pedrera and

his son, Bartolome Fernandes and witnesseth in part as follows:

7 Ind. C1. Com. 1:22 11,141

that we sell to the Governor, people and natives of the
Pueblo of San Buenabentura de Cochiti, oueres nation,

Acertain lands and site which are Eznown as Santa Cruz Spring,
together with all thereto annexed and belonging, grazing
lands, waters and watering places, entrances and exits,

uses and customs, rights and servitudes 3 which are bounded

on the north as far as the hills of Santa Cruz 3 on the east

by the house of the little spring; on the south by the boundary of the pueblo of Santo Domingo and on the west by lands

of the said pueblo of San Buenabentura3 '
The price is set out as one thousand five hundred pesos, receipt of which
is acknox-zledged therein. Among other provis ions, it provides for the return of the above amount and payment by grantors of all costs , as well
as all expenditures for certain specified mprovements, in the event the

grantors were unable to comply with the agreement.

Petitioners‘s witness Mark ‘:1’. Radcliffe, who marked in orange on the

map Cl. Ex. l6 the "claimed area“ (Trans., pp. 1? and 18), and who testi  fied that it contains 13,hLo acres (p. 22), stated thatthe "claimed area"

was smaller than the tract described in the 171:1; deed (p. l9). He was recalled (pp. 79-86) to explain that in drawing the boundaries, he used the
description in the deed itself together with the statements made to ihim
by the Indians. (p. 81;). when asked why the east line did not run due

south of the stone house by the little spring (p. 83), he testified that

there was an old Spanish settlement at La Bajada at the time the deed was
made and therefore he ran the line so as not to include this settlement.
He said the Indians showed him certain identiifing marks not referred to
in the deed (p. 85). In briefing their case, the petitioners have treated
the deeded area as being the same as the "claimed area ,"f and it shall be

so considered in this opinion.

7 Ind. C1. Ccm. h22

The entire deeded area is enclosed within the Sh,hOIl-acre La Majada
Grant, shown on the surveyor’s plat (Cl. Etc. 16). The United States

Court of Private Lam Claims established by Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat.

85h) to determine the validity of certain Spanish and Mexican land grants,

in Case No. 89 entered its decree (Def. Ebc. 3) on September 29, 1891;,

'hOQ:§_ii.I1g that the February 10, 1695' grant by the Governor and Captain General of the Province of New Mexico, under authority of the King of Spain,
to Captain Jacinto Pelaez was valid, and was revalidated in 1698, 171.0
and 1728 in favor of the grantee and certain heirs. On October 26, 1908
a patent (Def. ‘Ex. 8) was issued to the parties named in the court's decree.

The Caja del Rio Grant covers approximately the north one-fourth of
the deeded area, shown on C1. Ex. 16 by blue striping. The February 20,
189? patent (Def. m. lo) is based on the court's findings in case No.

63 which confirmed the grant made on May 30, 171:2.

The defendant makes clear its position that these two actions in the
Court of Private Land Claims and the patents based thereon did not affect
any rights of the Cochiti in the "claimed area” (Def. Brief, pp. 78-81).
Defendant points out that the 1891 Act gave the court authority "by final
decree to settle and determine the question of the validity of the title
and the boundaries of the grant or claim presented for adjudication" as
Well as ’’all other questions properly arising between the claimants or
other parties in the caa and the United States” (Sec. 7), that the United

States was the defendant in these suits and their only purpose was to es-tablish claiinant‘s title as against the United States, that the court had

7 Ind. Cl. Com. h22

no jurisdiction to settle disputsbetw.-zeen private claimants to the same
land, and that therefore any Government patent was in the nature of a
quitclajm - an admission that the rightfhil ownership had never been in
the United States. an examination of the two decrees and patents supports
this position.

The judgment, which the defendant contends estops the present petitioners from relitigating the issue of their rights under the 173.111 deed,

was entered in Case No. 26 in the District Court of the County of Sandoval, Territory of New Mexico, title TRINIDAD BACA, ET AL., Pmnvslrrs, v.

THE UNKNO:JN HEIRS OF JACINTO PALAEZ, DEFEI®’§.NTS, and THE PUEBLO DE COCHITI,

INTERVENER. The action, begun.on March 3, l90h, was for partition of the
La Majada Grant. The AMENDED PETITION O§'I§T3RVEKER (Def. Ex. 25), filed
December ll, l909, was by F. C. Wilson, Special.Attorney for the Pueblo
Indians of Raw Mexico, “with leave of the court first had and obtained,"
and aiieges;
lst. That on the lOth day of January, of the year l7lO,
the La Majada Grant, was revalidated and made de novo in favor '
of Maria Palaez, daughter and sole heir of the original grantee,

Captain Jacinto Palaez.

That the said Maria Palaez married Juan Fernandez de la

2nd.
fPedrera, the date of said.marriage being unknown to your petitioner.

3rd. That said Juan Fernandez de la Pedrera and his gv

TBartolome Fernandez on the llth day of august, l7hh, exectrec
jointly a good and sufficient deed to the Indians of the Faerie
de Cochiti and conveyed thereby to the said Indians of ti; 7:‘
Pueblo de Cochiti in fee simple, all their right, title 3§Q.iHF
terest in consideration of the sum of Fifteen Hundred Dallarn
($1500), to a place called ”Ojo de Santa Cruz", bounded and err

scribed in said deed, as follows, to-=2-zit:

North, they reach to the
east to the house at the

of Santa Cruz, and on the

s
4-‘P -I: IL‘ 40ietle spring, on the south by

11143

7 Ind. Cl. Can. 1422

the boundaries of the Pueblo of Santa Domingo and on the
west by said Pueblo de San Bueno Ventura (Pueblo de Cochiti),

a translation of which deed is attached hereto and made a part hereof. (Ex. A)

hth. That the said tract of land is practically co—en:tensive
‘with the tract known and patented as the La Majada Grant.

Sth - 8th (allege, among other things, that there is on file
in" the office of Surveyor General at Santa Fe a petition by
Bartolome Fernandez and an order by the Governor General of
New Mexico on July 17, l7}.Lb. granting him permission to sell
said tract; that after the date of the deed, the heirs of
Bartolome Fernandez fraudulently conveyed parts of the La
Majada Grant to other persons, resulting in a partition approved by the Governor and Captain General of New Mexico on
February 17, 1805, a translation of the decree of partition
and approval being attached (Ex. B), in fraud of the fee simple
estate of the Pueblo de Cochiti.)

9th.. Under said deed of conveyance hereinbefore described,
made  Bartolome Fernandez and his father, ._Tu:.:'n F‘¢=y;~n_:;_jnde_r7: cje
la Pedrera, to the Indians of the Fueblo de Cochiti, said Pueblo
de Cochiti acquired title in fee simple to all lands within the
boundaries of said La Majada Grant conveyed by said deed and now
own and possess all lands within said tract as described in the
said deed, unless acquired by adverse possession by other parties.

10th. That said Pueblo de Cochiti was prevented from maintaining its claims for said tract in a certain suit brought in
the Court of Private Land Claims, entitled Benigno Ortiz. y
Sandoval et al vs. The Unitedstates, No. 89, in which a decree
of confirmation was rendered by said court in the city of Santa
Fe, on the 29th day of September, A. D. 1891;, for the reason
that said deed was in the possession of adverse parties, who
prevented the production of said deed at that time.

llth. That the Indians of G said Pueblo of Cochiti have clained
and occupied said tract of land in fee simple by virtue of said
deed and have exercised ever since the year l7hh, in which year
they obtained title, mmership over said tract as aforesaid, under

said deed.

1-IHEREFORE, Intervener prays that the heirs, of their assignees

or grantees, of the said Eartolome Fernandez be decreed to have

no right, title or interest in that portion of the La I-iajada grant
conveyed to the Pueblo de Cochiti by deed under date of .i‘.ugust ll,
l7hJ.L, and for such other and further relief as to this court sh ll
seem just and equitable.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 13,22

The A1‘ES'a.-ER TO AHEIEDBD PETITION OF PUEBLO DE’ COCHITI (Def a BC. 25') 3
by plaintiffs, filed Decezfoer l6, 1909, contains a demurrer, a general
denial and the further defense that the cause of action did not accrue
within l0 years prior to the commencement of the actione

The B.EFEIRE'E’S aerom" (Def. Ex. 25), filed any 1, 1910, refers to
various exhibits as being returned therewith, including "intervenor
Cochiti Indian Pueblo exhibits numbered Eel to E-l0 inclusive" (p. 2).
The referee made findings as to the Cochiti as follows (p. 5):"

The referee finds that there is a conflict between the
La Majada grant and the grant of the Pueblo of Cochiti, as
more fully shown by the pleadings; and upon the question of
conflict the referee finds that as between the said grants
the grant of the Pueblo of Cochiti is the elder and superior,
and that the plaintiffs and their cot-tenants are not entitled
to have a partition of any of the lands within said Pueblo of
Cochiti grant; the boundaries of said grant of the -said Pueblo
of Cochiti being more fully set forth in the patent fran the
United States therefor, which is filed here:-Iith, and to which
reference is hereby made.

The referee further finds that the claim of the Pueblo of
Gochiti for lands within the 1-Iajada grant and beyond the boundaries of the land described in the patent to the Pueblo of
Cochiti, is not well founded, and that said Pueblo of Cochiti
has no right, title or interest in or to any portion of the
Majada grant outside of the boundary lines of the lands described
in the patent to the Pueblo of Cochiti.

In the JUDCR*IE1‘~I’I‘ OFPARTITION, filed July 3.7, 193.3, the court adopts the
findings of the referee and makes specific findings in paragraphs V arnci 
just as set out above in the Referee‘s Report. The court finds and Cii;"?:C:3T"%?€:?:1-;ff;:'.
that the La Hajada tract, subjectgto certain exceptions 3 was owned  

Simple by designated persons and orders a partition of said real estate

w’

among them.

Defendantis _n:l"F“ dbit 23 also includes a subsequent intervention by

M6

7 Ind. Cl.Co:n, n22

Benjamin F. Pankey, filed June 9, l9l7', and a JTJDCIENT AND D.-‘JOE thereon filed January 13, 1920. The court finds that a decree entered in
Cause No. 14123 in the District Court of Santa Fe County, New Mexico, on
February 19, 1915, wherein the court found there was a conflict between
the Majada Grant and the Caja del Rio Grant, is _r_e_s__ judicata in this
cause; and that Pankey is the owner in fee of the lands so in conflict.
The 1920 judgment recites that all parties were duly served but no appearance was made except by the plaintiffs. This subsequent judgment
did not alter the original findings of the court as to the rights of the
Cochiti.

The defendant, in support of its defense of res judicata or estoppel

by judgnent (Def. Brief, pp. 60-73), cites Southern Pacific Railway V.

United States, 168 U. S. l, as the leading case establishing the judgment

 

of a former decision as a bar or estoppel to a second cause (Def. Brief,
pp. 62-63). On the question of whether the United States, which was not
a designated party in Case No. 26, may avail itself of the plea, the denfendant quotes from Bernard V. Bank of America Nat. Trust &: Say. Ass‘n. ,
122 P. 2d 392 (Def. Brief, pp. 65-67). The three questions, which the

court terms pertinent (Def. Brief, p. 67), can be answered in the present
c_:ase as ‘follows: (1) was t.’;:ie'*'issue decided in the prior adjudication

identical with the one presented in the action in question? The pleadings
and findings set out above leave no doubt that the issue is identical.

(2) was there a final judgment on the merits? The judgment filed on
July 17, 1913 was a final judgnent which appears to be on the merits.

There is however a lack of supporting evidentiary findings thereon.

7 Ind. Cl. com; 1422 I an

(3) was the party against whcm the plea is asserted a party or in privity
with a party to the prior adjudication? This must be answered in the
affirmative since it is undisputed thatuthe Pueblo de Cochiti, the petitioner herein, was also the intervening petitioner in Case No. 269

The petitioner, in its brief, pp. 17-18, contends that "the State
Courts would be without jurisdiction to adjudicate Indian title" because
'ft_he Pueblo Indians were Wards of the Government" and the government had
complete control over their lands. The question here is not one of
“Indian title“ but rather the rights of the Cochiti under the l7}.Lh deedo
That a State Court had such jurisdiction is decided in the case of United
States v. Candelaria, 271 U. S. 1432 (See Def. Brief, PPo 59-71% The
original action to quiet title was brought by the Pueblo of Laguna in a
territorial court and transferred when New Iviexico became a state to the
succeeding state court. A subsequent suit by the Pueblo of Laguna in the
United States District Court was dismissed because the former judgment
Ifias _r_e_s_ judicata of the matters presented. A third suit involving the
same land was begun by the United States to quiet title in the Pueblo of
Laguna, on the theory that these Indians were wards of the United States..
It too was dismissed, the court hold@ that the two prior decrees operated to bar its prosecution. On appeal, the Circuit Court of Appeals cer-i::-ified two questions to the Supreme Coum:

10 Are Pueblo Indians in New Mexico in such a state of tutelage as to their lands in that state that the United States,

as such guardian, is not barred either bya judgment in a suit

involving title to such lards begun in the territqrial court

and passing to judgment after statehood or by a judgment in a

similar action in-‘the United tates district court for the
District of New I-'Ie:<ico, where, in each of said actions, the

7 Ind. Cl. Cc:-:1. 1422 has

United States was not a party nor was the attorney representing
such Indians therein authorized so to do by the United States?

2. Did the state court of New Mexico have jurisdiction to

enter a judgment which would be res judicata as to the United

States, in an action between Pueblo Indians and opposed claimants concerning title to land, where the result of that judgment would be to disregard a survey made by the United States

of a Spanish or Mexican grant pursuant to an act of Congress

confirming such grant to said Pueblo hidians?

Answering the second question, which is the only one the defendant
is here concerned with, the Supreme Court eliminated the reference to a
survey and then held that "the state court had jurisdiction to entertain ,

thesuitand proceed to judgnent or decree.“ Whether the outcome would

be conclusive on the United States is answered in the court's discussionof
thellfirst question. As to the first question, the court held that "the
 of the pueblo are wards of the United States and hold their lands
subject to the restriction that the sane cannot be alienated in any I-rise
without its consent; that a judgnent or decree which operates directly or
indirectly to transfer the lands from the Indians, where the United States
has not authorized or appeamd in the suit, infringes that restrictiongh
that therefore the United States is not barred, but with the following
qualif icationg

As it appears that for many years the United States has employed

and paid a special attorney to represent the Pueblo Indians and

look after their interests, . . . . if the decree was rendered

in a suit begun and prosecuted by the special attorney so employed

and paid, we think the United States is as effectively concluded

as if it were a party to the suita

The petitioner argues (Reply Brief, pp. 17-18) that Case No. 26 was

not "begun" or "prosecuted" by the petitioner, that the United States was

not a party to the action, and that the record is bare of any evidence"

7 Incl. C]-o Ccm. 3422

that the United States employed the Pueblo attorney and paid him to
represent the Pueblo de Cochiti in Case 330. 26. In the absence of proof
to the contrary, the representation in the AE*EE~IDED PETITION OF INTERVEZ‘-ICE
that F. C. ‘.~Ii_'l.son was Special Attorney for the Pueblo Indians of New

9

Mexico indicates that he was the special attorneyemployed by the Secretary of the Interior and paid by Congressional appropriations, which
position the court in the Candelaria case says was provided for by Congress in 1898 and had been filled since that time (see list of appropriu
ations, Def‘. Brief, p. 20, footnote 67). The Candelaria case was decided
in 1926. The defendant notes that the sane F. C. Wilson represented the
Pueblo of Laguna in the original state court proceedings (Def. Briefs p.
20, footnote 68). We further see no merit in the argument that Case No.
26 was not "begun and prosecuted" by the Cochiti. Certainly the reasoning
behind the rule would make it inclusive of a petitioner in interventions
as in Case No. 26. Q
It is therefore our conclusion that the judgment of the Sandoval
County Districtcourt in Case No. 26 corstitzutes a bar to the relitigation of the issue of the rights of the Pueblo de Cochiti in the "claimed
area" by virtue of the deed of August 113 171$. The court, with jurisdiction to decide the issues determined that the Cochiti.   :*§~:;}:1t
title or interest in or to said area. 0
ABOEGIEAL TITLE
W e could rest our decision in this case 1lPon the bar of.‘  :iii.e5.::é.s?i;‘%oof the case of.‘ Baca et al. v, Heirs of.‘ J acinto Palaezq deceaseadipamandtyppwpithe

Pueblo de Cochitig Intervener, decided 3‘ the District Court of Satr1r.€m.éI:-1:3

7 Ind. Cl. Com. L22

County, New Mexico, just referred to (Def. Ex. 25) but there are other
grounds equally conclusive of the merits of this case which we deem
proper to discuss.

It is obvious that since the l7hh deed conveyed no title to‘"claimed
area," the Cochiti must depend upon rights derived from some other source,
and they rely upon aboriginal title, meaning the Indians’ right to use
and occupy Crown lands required for their livelihood.

It is quite plain that the Spanish recognized the right of the
Indians to use such lands "as may be conveniently necessary for them
to cultivate and to sow and raise cattle; and the lands which they now
have shall be confinned to them and others which shall be necessary

shall be given them." (Sec. D5, p. 21, Def. Ex. 29 and Sec. 8h, p. 52,

Def. Ex. 31). However, while these and other laws of the Recopilacion
show a purpose to protect the Indians in their occupancy of lands in New
Spain, they created no vested legal rights in the Indians which we are
required to recognize.

But whatever the Indian‘ rights were the unquestioned fact is that
the lands in.the “claimed area" were included in the Spanish grants we
have referred to as the Iaihajada and the Gaja del Rio grants (see Pet.
Ex. 15) and so remained at the time we acquired formal cession of the
lands by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in l8h8. It is unnecessary to
determine the respective rights of the owners to the lands in the Majada
and del Rio grants because the "claimed area" lies in both grants? about

one-fourth being in the part of the del Rio grant which overlaps the

northern part of the Majada Grant (see Pe . Ex. 16), and the remainder

7 Ind. Cl. Com. LL22 LL91

being in the Iiajada Grant. Incidentally, the conflict bpeti-seen the two
grants was resolved in favor of the owners of the Caja del Rio Grant by
the District Court of the Territory of New Mexico of Sandoyal County, on
January 13, 1920. (Def. Ebc. 25). So the entire "claimed area" was in the
area covered by the Majada and Caja del Rio grants -which were confirmed
and a patent was issued on October 26, 1908, for the I-Iajada Grant (Def.
Ex. 8) arxi for the Caja del Rio Grant on February 20, 1897 (Def. Ex:. 10).

Bothof these grants were made by the Spanish authorities more than
a century before the Mexican cession, which included those lands, and
our Court of Private Land Claims found the title of the grantees valid.
Such action of that court is not now open to contest here.

By Article VTLIE and Article DI, for which Article Ill of the Treaty
of Louisiana was substituted, the United States agreed that the inhabitaants of the ceded territory, which included Indians, shall enjoy all. the
rights of citizens of the United States and that they shall be maintained
and protected in the free enjoyment of their property. That those articles were intended to protect either Spanish or I-Sex ican grants is indicated by the second paragraph of Article 2 of the Protocol which reads:

Confomably to the law of the United States, legitimate

titles to every description of property, personal and re:.L"L,

existing in the ceded territories are those which were legitimate under the Mezcican l 2-: in . . . New Mexico up to the 13th

day of May, l8h6 . . . . cf. Cessna V. United States, 3.69 U. S.
165, 186.

As we understand it - and petitioners do not dispute it - the I~Ie:<ir::an,

Government recognized the Spanish grants, as well as their own, and, as
shown above, by treaty required defendant to respect them, as was done.

There is nothing in this record indicating anything but an Ill“.-.I?."F:j".' 

7 Ind. 01., Com. n22 1:52

grant to the persons named in the Majada and Caja del Rio grants of
the lands covered thereby, Had the Spanish Goverment intended to
reserve any right of use of the granted lands for the Cochiti Indians
one would have expected a plain provision to that eifect. So, as the
record stands, the ‘grantees in both grants received full title to the
exclusion of the Cochiti Indians‘ rights, if any they had. Moreover,
the title of the Spanish Crown had passed to the grantees of those grants
and, as will be seen later, the title to those lands, which included the
"claimed area," never passed to the United States by the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, nor did it pass from Spain to Mexico by the Treaty of Cordova
of August 21;, 1821, between those two nations. T I

It is a principle of International Law, adopted by the courts of the
United States, that a cession by a conquered nation is not a cession of
the property of the inhabitants of such a nation and where, as here, the
title to the Majada and del’ Rio grants passed to the granteesin 1695 _
and 1.7142, respectively, the title passed from the Crown to those grantees
and the king by the l82l cession conveyed no title to Mexico nor did Mexico
convey any title to the granted lands to the United States by the Treaty
of Guadalupe Hidalgo. The principles referred to is expressed by the
Supreme Court in Strother v. Lucas, 9 L. E . 1137, llb,8, l2 Peters LL10, LL38:

. . . In following the course of the law of nations, this
court has declared that even in cases of conquest, the conqueror does no more than displace the sovereign, and assume
dominion over the country. 7 Peters, 86; 10 Peters, 720,

729, 730, passim. "A cession of territory is never understood to be a cession of the property of the inhabitants.

The king cedes only that which belongs to him; lands he had_
previously granted were not his to cede., Neither party could
So understand the treaty. Neither party could consider itself
as attempting a wrong to individuals condemned by the whole

7 Ind. Cl. cm. 1.22 1:53

. civilized world. ‘The cession of_a territory‘ would necesw

' sarily be understood t0.paSS the sovereignty'only, and not to
interfere with private property." Ib. 87. No construction of
a treaty which.would.impair that security to private property
‘which the laws and.usages of nations would without express
stipulation have conferred, would seem to be admissible further
than its positive words require. "Without it the title of individuals would remain as valid under the new government as they
were under the old; and those titles, at least so far as they
‘were consummate, might be asserted in the courts of the United
States, independently of this article." Ib. 883 6 Peters, 7u1,
7h23 S. P. 9 Peters, l33.

And in United.States v; Arredondo, 6 Peters 6913 735w6 the Supreme

Court stated the rule:

ho land which has been severed from the royal domain, by ante»
cedent grants which were valid by the laws of Spain, and created

any right of property to the thing granted in the grantees,
passed to the United States % % % '

Thus % * % the land embraced in the grant was no longer a part
of the royal domain, at the date of the treaty, but private

property—~land not vacant, but appropriated by*a prior valid
deed.

‘As indicated above, the validity of the two grants having been affinned

by a proper tribunal of this country is not now open to question or cone
test.

The petitioner would.have us pass upon the propriety of the action of
Spain in making the grants of lands apparently occupied and used by the

Cochiti Indians at the time the_grants were:made. But here again the

Supreme Court has decided against the petitioners.

Cessna v. United.States9 l69_U; S. l65, l86, was a case predicated up 

on a grant made in 1823 to one Heath of lands in.New Mexico for colonization
purposes under a Mexican law. The grant was finally repudiated by the Mexican authorities in;l82h and continued in that condition until we acquired

the land in l8h8. Aside frdm the question whether Heath qualified for the

7 Ind. c1° can. h22 usu

grant, the court said this:

. . g. It is the duty of a nation;-receiving "a cession of territory to respect all rights of property as those rights were

recogz:n'.zed by the nation making the cession, but it is no part

of its duty to right the wrongs which the grantor nation may

have theretofore committed upon every individual. . . . When

this government ac-cepted the cession of". the territory it did.

not thereby assume an obligation to satisfy any pecuniary demands which he as an individual may have had against the Mexican

government. In-other words, it took that territory bound

respect all rights of property which the Mexican government c

respected, but under no obligations to right the wrongs which

that government had theretofore committed.

It is obvious that under the above decisions" we acquired the ceded
‘lands from Mexico subject to the titles of the grantees of the two grants
and under the treaty we were required to recognize their validity under
Maican law, as we did. If Spain or Mexico perpetrated a wrong on the
Cochiti, we are under no obligation to right it under international law,
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, or under the Indian Claims Commission
Act. H

The petitioner invokes the aid of the fair and honorable dealings
clause of the Indian Claims Commission Act to support its claim but has
offered no proof or cited any law" to make the clause applicable. As
pointed out above, the defendant did not acquire the lands here in question irom Mexico and has never had any dealings with the Cochiti respecting them, nor had defendant at any time recognized that the Cochiti had
any title to the "claimed area." The record is devoid of proof showing
any duty or obligation of defendant to the Cochiti that makes defendant

liable in any way for the action of the Spanish government in granting

Cochiti lands ‘to non-Indians.

7 Ind. Cl. Com. n22 ._ -_ _   L55

Mention.is made in some of the exhibits and briefs that the defendant acquired part of thelhajada Grant:by'purchase, however, the evidence
respecting this is so sgetchy and inadequate as to be of little or no

value, but assuming the defendant did acquire part of the grant from its

iowners, that is, the successors in interest of the original grantees, it

would help the Cochiti none because, if they had any rights in the granted
lands, such rights were taken from then by the Spanish when they made the
grants to"°the non-Indians. r'So when the defendant acquired a.ny part of
the’Iia‘3"ada; lands, if it did, it obtained title clear of any Indian title
or interest.

We, accordingly, hold that the petitioner has not proved an actionable claim against defendant and the petition.nill therefore be dismissedo

Louis J .. O'*Marr
.Associate Commissioner

 

Eb concur:

Edgar E.'Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

.14.. Holt .~

 

Associate Commissioner

