)
)
)
)
)
3
‘.King; and Sebetn smash, ;
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

1 ma. c1. comm. 195 L . 195

BEORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

was LOYAL CREE BAND OR GROUP 03'
CRlEK'ZRDIANS9 £QE)!EHE ‘EAL oases
GIzAIM.A1€’i‘S' C02:f2vEI;’£‘T¢':';Ep on the relation
of Joseph Brunero 3. Vs Brown, Jesse
MeDe2'mott, Lesley Faynes, Ben Johnson?
Robert Severe, E-Zosa Ee3.l'e;::g, Noisy Buck, %
John Es=Jones, Elmer Bill, Thompson

Plaintiff s,

Vs. .Deeket.Noo 1
was Ummrse sessss or maszca, ‘
Defendant.

Appearances: Wilfred Hearn, with whom was
George E, Eorvell, Attorneys

,6 -- -v-_--1-.-...a...*x=r-...
A041.‘ ¢£'.8,:.‘-‘-.3.A.H:.L.!...3.bg

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
2:30 Assistazri; attorney General

Ag Devitt Vanech, Attorneys for
Defendants

siiii. 3. 4 1950
FINDINGS OF FaCT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact in the aboveentitled causes

ls That the inaividuals whose names appear in the title, namely,
Joseph Bruner, Jesse Me3eraott and So W. Brown (see stipulation filed here»
in March 17, 1950), are Greek Indians and are descendants and heirs at
law of persons who were members of the group of Greek Iniians and freedaen
who remained loyal to the United States during the Civil War and who are

tstorieally knewn.and have been recognized by the executive; legislative

1 1nd; c1. Com. 195 196

-02:and Judicial branches of our government as "Loyal Greeks“ and "loyal refugee
Indians and Freedman.“ That the claim here involved is submitted and prose?

outed by said named persons for and on behalf of all members, and the de_iscendants of members, of such.groupa 2. yet the beginning of the Civil War, and for long prior thereto,
the Oreek:Nation of Indians was located in the Indian Territory in what is
now the State of Oklahoma, and at the commencement of hostilities in said
war the members of the Creek:Nation were about evenly divided in their
sentiments between the Confederacy and the United States. However, the
governing authorities of the Creekrhation supported the Confederacy and
many members of the Nation Joined in hostilities against the United States,
and in fact, on.July 10, 1361 concluded a treaty with the Confederate States
oftnmerica by which they.agreed that there should be perpetual peace and
friendship and an alliance, offensive and defensive; between themselves
and the Confederate States of America. the members of the Creek:Nation
who remained loyal to the United States were, as stated above, known as
the "Loyal Creeks" and were driven from their homes in the Creek.Reservation. Their personal property, consisting of improvements upon their lands,
machinery and livestock, was destroyed by enemy forces and the Loyal
cracks were required to seek:refuge and protection behind the lines of
the Federal forces. That as a.result of enemy action, the losses sustained
by the Loyal Creeks amounted to a large sum of money, as will hereinafter
be Shown. Many of the male members of the Loyal Greeks Joined the Federal

forces and served during the civil war.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 195 . 197

65330! —

3e Following the end of hostilities, the defendant and the Creek

-nation of Indians concluded a treaty at the City of'Wash1ngton on the

lush day of June, 1866 (in Stat. 785), whieh.was ratified on the 19th
day of July, l8669 and proclaimed on the 11th day of.angust, 1866. In

said treaty the'Un1ted States recognized the sufferings and losses susFtained by the Loral Greeks, and by Article 3 of said treaty protided as 6:

follows:

“One hundred thousand dollars shall be paid in money
and.divided to soldiers that enlisted in the Federal.nrny
and the loyal refugee Indians and freedmen who were driven
from their homes by the rebel forces, to reimburse them in
proportion to their respeetire lessees"

.And Article R of said treaty provided as follows:

“immediately after the ratification of this treaty the
United States agree to ascertain the amount due the respeem
tive soldiers who enlisted in the Federal Armye loyal refugee
lndians and freedmen, in proportion to their several losses,
and to pay the amount awarded each, in the following manner,
to wit: A senses of the Greeks shall be taken by the agent
of the United States for said nation, under the direction of
the Secretary of the Interiorg and a roll of the names of all
soldiers that enlisted in the Eederal Army9 loyal refugee
lndians, and freedmene be made by him, The superintendent of
Indian Affairs for the Southern snperintendeney and the agent
of the'United States for the Creek.Eation shall proceed to
investigate and determine from said roll the amounts due the
respective refugee Indiansa and shall transmit to the Com»
missioner of Indian Affairs for his approval, and that of the
Secretary of the Interior, their awards; together with the
reasons therefor. In case the award so made shall be duly

. approved, said awards shall be paid from the proceeds of the
sale of said lands within one year from the ratification of
this treaty, or so soon as said amount of one hundred thousand

($lO0,000) dollars can be raised from the sale of said land to
other lndianseu '

he That pursuant to the provisions of said Article R, a roll of the
names of the loyal refugee Indians and freedmen was nadee Said roll listed

the names of 1523 “Loyal Creek Indians and Freednen,“ and pursuant to the

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 195 193

requirements of said.Article U, the Commission named therein investigated
and determined the amounts due for losses sustained by the respective
Indians and freedmen whose names appeared on said rolls That the claims
submitted by such Indians and freedmen aggregated the sum of $5fC90,808.50,
and said Commission allowed such claims in the aggregate sum of $lo835,830,4l,
and as required by said Article 3 the sum of $l§3;0£C was paid to such claimants in proportion to their respective awards made by said sommissicn. (See
Claimants‘ Ex. 3, pages 18 to 37, for names. amount of claims and amount of
awards to the Loyal Creek Indians and freedmen).

5. By an agreement approved March 1, 1901 (31 Stat. 861) the Creek
Nation of Indians and the defendant recognized the Loyal Creek claim, by
Section 26 thereof, nhich provided as follows:

@311 claims of whatsoever nature, including the ‘Loyal

Greek claim‘ under Article War“ of the *“°e‘v of s‘~“‘“““

.._--...-....-.. 4-o-c...-r --v..r-...-- van»-9 94. —u._.. U0" -A[-:,-J-US!‘-I64

hundred and sixty-six, and the ‘Self-emigration claim‘ under
Article Twelve of the treaty of eighteen hundred and thirtytwo, which the tribe or any individual thereof may have against
the United States, or any other claim arising under the Treaty
of eighteen hundred and sixtymsixa or any claim which the
United States may have against said tribe, shall he submitted
to the Senate of the'United States for determination; and with»
in two years from the ratification of this agreement the Senate
shall make final determination thereof; and in the event that
any sums are awarded the said tribe, or any citizen thereof,
provision shall be made for immediate payment of same.

"Of these claims the ‘Loyal Creek claim,‘ for what they
suffered because of their loyalty to the United States Governy ment during the civil war, long delayed, is so urgent in its
character that the parties to this agreement express the hope

that it may receive consideration and be determined at the
earliest practicable moments” (Clainants‘ Ex. No. R).

6. Following the agreement of 1901 and pursuant to the provisions of
said Section 26, the Senate of the United States considered said claim of
the Loyal Creeks and referred the same, together with the Indian Approprian
tion 3111 (H. 13. 1.550%), hereafter referred to, to its Committee on Indian

.Affairs, with the result that on the l6th.day of February, 1903 the

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 195 I99
Retyped

Committee made the following report:

"we consider the Greeks had strong equities and have
deducted from the amount allowed by Commissioners Hazen and
Field, the $100,000 which had been paid them, and deducted

a further sum of $536,830.40 and recommend the payment of
the balance amounting to $1,200,000, to be distributed to

the claimants or their heirs, in the proportion indicated
by the original list of awards." (Claimants' Ex. No. 2,

page 6).

The Committee on Indian Affairs also reported an amendment to be insertexi

in the Indian Appropriation Bill (Act of March 3, 1903) which amendment

was as follows:

"In pursuance of the provisions of section 26 of an act
to ratify and confirm an agreement with the Huscogee or Creek
tribe of Indians, and for other purposes, approved March 1,
l90l, there_i§“h§rehy awardedmas fine} determination thereof
on the so-called ”lo al Creek clagm§:' named in said section
26, the sum sf $1,300,000, and the same is hereby appropriated
out of any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated,
and make immediately available. And the Secretary of the
Treasury is hereby authorized to pay, under the direction of
the Secretary of the Interior, to the loyal Creek Indians and
freedmen named in articles 3 and 4 of the treaty with the
Creek Nation of Indians of June 14, 1866, the said sum of
$1,200,000, to be paid to such Indians and freedmen only
whose names appear on the list of awards made in their behalf
by W. D. Hazen and F. A. Field, as commissioners on behalf of
pthe United States to ascertain the losses of said Indians and
freedmen as provided in said articles 3 and 4, and such payments shall be made in proportion of the awards as set out in
said lists and shall be in full settlement and satisfaction
of all claims under said articles 3 and 4; Provided, however,
That if any of said loyal Creek Indians or freedmen whose
names are on said list of awards shall have died, then the
amount or amounts due such deceased person or persons, respec~
tively, shall be paid to their heirs or legal representatives:
And provided further, That the Secretary of the Treasury be,
and he is hereby authorized and directed to first withheld from
the amount herein appropriated and pay to S. W. Peel, of
Bentonville, Ark., the attorney of said loyal Creeks and freed»
men, a sum equal to 10 per cent of the amount herein appropriated»
as provided by written contracts between the said S. W. Peel
and the claimants herein, the same to be payment in full for

 

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 195 . 300

ao6—

all legal and other services rendered by him, or those
employed by him, and for all disbursements and other ex»
penditures had.by him in behalf of said claimants in pure
suance of said contract. .And further, said Secretary is
authorized and directed to pay to Darid M, Hodge, a Greek
Indian, of Tulsa, in the Creek Hation, a sum equal to 5 per
cent of the amount herein.appropriated, which payment shall
be in full for all claims of every kind made by said David Mo
Hodge, or by those c1aiming'under him, by reason of any ongagement, agreement, r understanding had between him and
said loyal Creek Indians.“ (Vol. 36,.Cong. Rec. 2252;.Plaintiffs' 33:. No. 8). (Italics supplied).

That said amendment was agreed to by the Senate (Vol. 36, Cong, Hec. 2255)»
That the Appropriation Bill which became the Act of March 3,tl903, as pssed
by the House, and which the Senate was considering (H. H, 1580M), did not
contain an appropriation for the payment of the Loyal Creeks‘ claim.

7. .A£ter the passage of said Appropriation Bill by the Senate, with
the amendment referred to in.Finding No. 6, the House refused to accept the
amendment to the Bill made by the Senate, so that the disagreement between
the House and Senate was referred to a conference committee, with the result
that the committee agreed, among other things, to the following:

That the House recede from its disagreement to the amendment of the Senate number 27, and agree to the same with

amendments as follows: In line 7 of said amendment strike

out "one million two hundred thousand" and insert “six hundred

thousand;“ in line 22 of said amendment, after the word "list,"

strike out all down to and including the word "four," in line

2%, and insert in lieu thereof the following: “Provided, That

said sum shall be accepted by said Indians in full payment and

satisfaction of all claim and demand growing out of said Loyal

Creek claims, and the payment thereof shall be a full release

of the Government from any such claim or claims;" and the
Senate agree to the same.

That the report of the conference committee containing the above—quoted

agreement was. on February 25, 1903, agreed to by the Senate. (vol, 36.
Cong? Rec; 

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 195 301

;a—.s?u

and the conference report was later, and on Februarv*27, 1903, agreed
to by the House (Vols 36 Cong, Rec, 2770), and the Bill was enacted into
1am'and contained the identical provisions of the amendment agreed to by

the conference committee,

VT

Before the House acted upon the conference report, the.House conferees submitted a statement of the managers on the part of the House,
which was separate from the conference report, and which contained the
following reference to the loyal Greek claim:

“Nos 27 the House recedes with an amendment, making the
appropriation $600,000 instead of $1,200,000, The amendment
provides for the payment of the sowcalled loyal Creek claim,
It has been mooted for some time, and it is claimed that the
Senate has heretofore been made arbiters by action of both
bodies of Congress, and that, acting as such, they have den
termined that $1,200,000 was just and due, The sum fixed
herein is a compromise and provision is made in the amendment
that it he accepted in full payment of all claims and demands
and act as a general relief of such claim against the Govern»
manta” (36 Cong, Bees 2768).

.And while the House was considering the conference report, the following

discussion took place between.Mr. Sherman and Mr. Curtis, two of the House

confereees

Ms, ssasnl , v s 9 I was about to say, Mr. Speaker, that
the main item of appropriation added by this report is.$600,000
to pay the so-called Loyal Creek claims.

Qhis is an item which the conferees on the part of the House

believe to be a gratuity; that is, that it is a claim about

which we believe there was no legal obligation on the part of

the Government. The contention of the Senate conferees was the
reverse, Their contention was that by the act of the two Houses
in referring this claim to the Senate as arbitrators in the last
Congress, and by the Senate appropriating in this bill, or in»
sorting in this bill, a provision fixing the amount of the arbia
tration at $1,200,000, that thereby the'United States became
bound to the payment of that claim of $1,200,000.

. _.. ._. .~...- 

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 195 202

It was the claim which kept us in conference longer by
many'hours—-yes, by several days-than we would have been
but for this. At the conclusion of a protracted conference
the House conferecs receded, with an amendment providing
that the amount paid should _be $600,000, rather than
$1,200,000, and with.a provision that the payment of this
sum should be in full for all claims in satisfaction of the
claims of these Indians, and the payment should be accepted
as a discharge of the United States Government from those
claims. The House confereos believed it wisdom‘under all
the circumstances to dispose of this claim now by the pay»
ment of $600,000, and believed by doing so that we would
save to the Government money, because were it not paid new
the Indians would surely present this claim to every succeeding Congress, and one of these days probably slip it through
at $1,200,000. So we believe- MR._CUREIS. In view of the fact that the Senate had found
in the arbitration for $1,200,000.

MR. SHERMAN. So that we believe, in disposing of the
claim as we have, we have saved to the Government $600,000.
(36 Cong. Rec. 2769).

8. The Appropriation Bill which was enacted into law (32 Stat. 982),
contained this provision for the payment of the Loyal Creek claim, toawit:

"In pursuance of the provisions of section twenty-six
of an.Act to ratify and confirm an agreement with the Muscogee
or Greek tribe of Indians, and for other purposes, approved
March first, nineteen hundred and one, there is hereby awarded,

 

as a final determination thereof, on the so~called Llcyal Creek
claims‘ named in said section twentywsix. the sum of six hundred thousand dcllars, and the same is hereby appropriated out of
any money in the Treasury not otherwise appropriated, and made
immediately available. and the Secretary of the Treasury is
hereby authorized to pay, under the direction of the Secretary
of the Interior, to the loyal Creek Indians and freedmen named
in articles three and four of the treaty with the Creek Nation
of Indians on June fourteenth, eighteen hundred and sixty—six,
the said sum of six hundred thousand dollars, to be paid to

such Indians and freedmen only whose names appear on the list

of awards made in their behalf by U. 3. Hanan and ?a.A. Field,
as commissioners on behalf of the'Unitcd States to ascertain
‘the losses of said Indians and freedmen as provided in said
articles three and four; and such payments shall be made in
proportion of the awards as set out in said list; Provided,

That said sum shall be accepted by said Indians in  ment and satisfaction of all claim and demand growing out of said

 

1 End. e1. Comm. 195 203

loyal Greek claims” and the payment thereof shall be in full
release of the Government from any such claim or claims;
Providedg however, That if any of said loyal Creek Indians

or freedmen whose names are on said list of awards shall have
died, then the amount or amounts due such deceased person or
persons, respect1vely9 shall be paid to their heirs or legal
reyresentatives: And provided further, That the Secretary of
the Treasury beg dad he Isuherebr, anthorized and directed to
first withheld from the amount herein appropriated and pay to
So We Peale of Bentonvilles srkansas, the attorney of said
loyal Greeks and fr.edmen9 a sum equal to ten per eentum of the
aaonat herein app?Op$iat€d9 as provided by written contracts
between the said S? N, Peel and the claimants hereing the same
to be payment in full for all legal and other services rendered
by him, or those employed by him, and for all disbursements and
other expenditures had by him in behalf of said claimants in
pursuance of said contract. and further, said Secretary is
authorised and directed to §a§wto David M9 Beige, a Greek
Eadiano of Tulsa, in the Creek Eatien, a sum equal to five per
centea of the amount herein appropriated? which payment shall
be in full for all claims of every kind made by said David Mo
Badges or by these claiming under him, by reason of say engage»
acute agreements or understanding had between him and said loyal

"I

Creek Eneiansa” Qitaiics supplied?“

 

     

 

99 Following the passage of the Appropriation 3111 which included the
isiees qdet'i 1” the nest preceding finding of fact; the.Acting Score»
tars of the Interior directed the on, 5. Indian Insgjsecter for the ladies).
Eerritory to obtain an acceptance of the terms of the Act before the Depart»
meat would be authorized to direct the payment of the $600,000 appropriatedo
and thereaftero and pursuant to the directions of the Secretary of the
interiors the National Council of the Croek:Nation adopted the following
resolution on the 22d day of Mayo 19039 and transmitted it to the Acting

'39 So Eediaa inspector of Indian Territory, who, in turn, transmitted it

on dens 1, 13039 to the Secretary of the Interior;

BEi?T e33Q§?ED by the Katioaal Council of the Muskogee
ion, as follows: That

W:;a;;S the Congress of the United States is an act on»

titled Van act making aypropriatiens for the current and
eowtiegeat ergenses of the Endian Department and for

1 Indo Cl. Comm. 195 204

fulfilling treaty stipulations with various Indian tribes
for the fiscal year ending June thirtieth, nineteen hundred

and four, and for other purposes", approved March 3, 1903,
made provision for paying the soucalled Loyal Creek claims,
and appropriated the sum of Six Hundred Thousand Dollars for
that purpose, and said appropriation being made on condition
that the sun so appropriated should be accepted as payment

in full of all said claims.

HOW, TE?.‘3...“‘..E‘@, be it resolved that the said sum of Six
Hundred Thousand Dollars, appropriated as aforesaid, is hereby
accepted in full payment and satisfaction of all claims and
demands growing out of said Loyal Creek Claims, and that the
payment thereof as directed by said act shall be a final:release of the Government from all such claim or claims.

Adopted May 22nd, 1903.
Holey Mclntosh
Pres. E. of Kings.

Lee MdNevins
Clerk: Concurred in May 23rd,, 1903,
Amos McIntosh
Speaker House of Warriors
A. 1’. McKellop pro ten‘.
' Clerks
Approved May 23. 1903.

P..Porter

Prin. Chief.
E X.E C'U T I V E 0 F F I G E.

Muskogee Nation. Muskogee, I. T., May 26, 1903

I, P. Porter, Principal Chief of the Muskogee Nation, do
hereby certify that the attached and foregoing is an act of
the National Council of said Ration, passed at its extra
session held May, 1903, and approved by me in my official
character on may 23, 1903, and I do hereby certify and submit
the same for the approval of the President of the United
States under the provisions of Section he of the act of
Congress approved March lg 1901, (31 Stat. 861) entitled
9An.act to ratify and confirm an agreement with the Muskogee
or Greek tribe of Indians, and for other purposes.”

1 Incl. C}... Comm. 195 205

lH'HITNESS WHEREOF I have hereunto signed my name as
Principal Chief of the Muskogee Nation this the 26th day of
Maya 1903, and caused the great seal of the Nation to be

affixedg

‘ P, Porter
.Pr1ncipal Chief, Muskogee Nation.
attest:
Virginia Westrope
Acting Private Secretarm,

(Seal? 0 ' ‘WHITE scUss,'sAss1nseon, Do Cc
Approved, June 6th, 19030
E, Roosevelt

That thereafter, and pursuant to the provisions of the Act quoted
in Finding 8 hereofg there was paid to S. W, Peel the sun of $609000
and to David M. Hodge the sum of $30,000, both payments having been made
out of the $6009000 appropriationa

10¢ Ehe payment of $60,000 to S,‘Wg Peel was made pursuant to an
agreement between said Peel and the Loyal Greek Nation of Indians and by
Isparhecher as.Attorney in Fact for the Loyal Creek claimants, and said»
payment of $30,000 to David M; Hodge was made with the consent of said
Loyal Creek.Indians and the Creek Nation of Indians.

11. And after the resolution of acceptance, referred to in Finding
No, 9, the defendant caused to be distributed to the individual Loyal
Creek Indians and Freedman, or to the heirs or legal representatives of
sueh thereof as may have diedg the sun of $510,000, being the remaining
part of the appropriation after paying the amounts to Feel and Hodge;
that at the time of the payment of the sums due the respective members
pf the Loyal Creek Indians and Freedman, their heirs or legal representatives, each recipient thereof was required to and did sign a receipt therefor

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 195 205

in a record book with a heading reading as follows:

“We, the undersigned individual members of the Creek Tribe
of Indians and Individual Freedman, and the heirs or legal
representatives of deceased Creek Indians and Freedman, do
hereby acknowledge receipt of ......,.................. Dollars,
 from J. an-us ssomrrir, United States Indian
Agent, in the sums set opposit our respective signatures, and
the same is hereby accepted as a full and complete settlement
of'our'claims against the United States for property taken or
destroyed during the Civil War, as provided by the act of
Congress approved March 3rd, 1903, and Act of the Creek Council
of May 3rd, 1903."

Upon the foregoing findings of fact which, with these conclusions of
law, are hereby made a part of the judgment herein, the Commission concludes
as a matter of law that the plaintiffs are not entitled to recover anything

upon the cause of action set forth in the amended petition herein.

