BEFOaE THE IKDIAN CLAIMS COEHZSSEON

THE NEZ PERCE TREBE OF IKDIANS,
OR CHAR}.-ES E C 1-EI.LLI.é.I~iS MID
JOSEPH REDEHULIER, as representatives of the N32 PERCE
TRIBE OF INDIRKS3

Petitioner,
‘gr, Docket N00 1754;

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

~..,/~../~._..a\..z\._.z\..x\../x_./\-./*——"--/'*-*"--/

Defendant“
Decided: December 31, 1959

FINDINGS 93 FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. Petitioner timely filed this claim pursuant to the Indian Claims

til Commission Act of August 13, l9h6. The claim is for additional compensation for reservation lands ceded by petitioner to defendant by the
Treaty of June 9, 1863, lb Stat. 6&7; for an alleged unconscionable con»
siderationo The ceded lands were earlier established as a reservation
for netitioner by the Treaty of June 11, 1855, 12 Stat§_957o It is
iclaimed alternatively that petitioner has a right of recovery for unfair
'and dishonorable dealings resulting from defendant's acts in acquiring
the cessio“ of the landso
2. Petitioner, the Nez Perce Tribe, is an Indian tribe having a
tribal rganization recognised by the Secretary of the Interior as
having authority to represent such tribe, and this claim is presented

by such tribal organisation f r and on behalf of such tribeo Members

8 Ind... Clo Como 228

£3 (3

of the tribe reeide_prino1pally upon the Nez Peree Indian Reservation in

the State of an Reservation in

2%

resiae on the Colrille Ina
the State

3.

now the States of Oregon9'waahington, and Idahog and by rrticle 1 of the

Treaty of June 11, 1855, l2 Stato 95?; II Kapea 702, it ceded

lands except a reservation described in Article II as follows:

Commencing where the Mohnhamnemahe or southern tributary

of the Palonee River flora from the spurs cf the Bitter

Root Mountains; thence down eaid tributary to metth of
the Timnatmpanmup Creek, thence southerly to the crossing

of the Snake River ten miles below the mouth of the Almpomwam
Hi River; thence to the source of the Almpomwamwi River in the
Blue Mountains; thence along the crest of the Blue Mountains;
thence to the crossing of the Grand Ronde River, midway beu
tween the Grand Ronda and the month of the Woll=lowmhow
River; thence along the divide between the waters of the
'Woll~low~how and Poaéer Rivers; thence to the oroseing of

the Snake River fifteen miles below the mouth of the Powder
River; thence to the Salmon River above the crossing; thence
by the spurs of the Bitter Root.Mountains to the place of
beginningo ’

1:.

.x.
u 13

Following ratification of the Treaty of June ll, 1855, Indian
Agent Cain caused a notice to be posted warning all persons not to
attempt to trade with the Rea Peroe without a lieenee and he informed
the Indians in July, 1859, that whites were not allowed to live on the
reservation and that some whites had been renewed therefromo

In the fall of 1850 a small party of whites intrnied upon the rem

servation in search of goldo The Nee Perce agent aotemptei to have them
removed by'tne military who refused to eat H3;833 ‘he intreiers stc“:“d

to work on the

_-3-_

I
hundr8 Indo C10 Cor.-,~ 220

Indians, assured the Indians that the military would be sent in the

spring to remove the minerso During the winter whites continued to

3

intrude on the reservationo By March 1861 some 1800 claims had been

prospected although not more than five or six of these were being
operated.

iAs a result of the chaotic conditions existing on the reservation
resulting from.the gold rush and to avoid a threatened uprising, and
agreement was entered into on April l0, I861, between the Superintendent
of Indian Affairs for Oregon and Washington and the chiefs and head men
of the Nez Perce Tribe by which the tribe would agree to permit white
men to enter upon roughly the northern half of the reservation for

mining purposes. However, rich placer mines were later discovered and

5. (a) ‘Following the Agreement of April 10, 1861, a company.of
soldiers was sent to the reservation to undertake the duties required
bY'ATtiC1e h of the Agreement [see Fdg. 7, 3 Indo C1. Comma 571, 57h for
provisions of said Agreemen§7. The presence of this company helped to
preserve peace and quiet on the reservation by preventing intrusion on
the root grounds of the Indians and in suppressing the whiskey traffic.
The Presence of'the militaryg however, utterly failed to confine the
miners to north of the Clearwater River as required by the agreement,
for in August 1861 it was reported that prospecting had been going on
and rich mines discovered south of the Glearwatero

Some five to seven

thousand whites were reportedly on the reservation Z?dg° 83 3 Indo Clo

';COnun° 571, 575, 5767..

F‘)

in)

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 228

(b) Bren prior to the negotiation and execution of the Agreement
of April 10, 1861, the officials of the United States, including the
agent for the Nez.Perce, Superintendent of Indian Affairs for Oregon
Territory and the Acting Governor of Washington Territory, had urged
their superiors in Washington, D. C., to take immediate steps to obtain
a cession of the gold lands from the Nez Perce, not only to prevent war
but to protect the Nez Perce from the effects of a gold rush into their
territory. In February 1861, a resolution of the United States Senate
instructed the Committee on Indian Affairs to inquire into the expediency
of negotiating for a cession of the northern portion of the reservation.
The Commissioner of Indian Affairs recommended to this Committee that a
treaty be made for the purchase of said lands. It was the summer of 1862,
however, before Congress appropriated money for the purpose of negotiating
a treaty with the tribe. ‘I'
; 6. In November 1861, Superintendent of Indian.Affairs Kendall reported to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs that at the junction of
the Snake and.Clearwater rivers a town.had been laid out and a record
for lots established under the tacit approval of the former Superintendent
and the.Agent for the Nez Perce. In January 1862, the agent reported
that in spite of'his warnings against it and request for military aid
the town had been staked out and a dozen wooden houses and fifty others
of cloth erected on the lots. By June, lewiston reportedly had a popuu
lation of 1200. In March 1862, the agent reported that the legislature
of Washington.Territory had divided the reservation into three counties,

granted charter privileges such as turnpikes and ferries, and had set

8 Ind. Cl. Como 220

into action political machinery for the countieso dining towns sprang

up at other locations such as Oro Fino, Pierce City and Florenceo with

the withdrawal of troops due to the Civil War, whites intruded upon the
agricultural and grazing land of the Indianso By the summer of 18529
there was an estimated white population of 15,000 on the reservation in
the towns and mining districtso

7. The situation on the Nez Perce Reservation remained a powder
keg through the fall and winter of l862° The Commissioners authorized
by Congress did not treat with the Indians in that year for a cessiono
Superintendent Hale in September attributed this delay to several reasons
such-as not having received notice of funds being placed to his credit
for such a purpose; that the fact that on the reservation whites were
settling on Indian grazing and agricultural lands would make it difficult to treat; the need of restoring the confidence of the Indians in
the Government and the necessity of fulfilling prior treaty obligations
before attempting a new treaty with the tribe. On the reservation in
the early fall of 1862 matters were in a turmoilo Agent.Anderscn was
Ordered to have traders obtain licenses in order to control the liquor

.1:

traffic»-the funds to be held for the benefit of the Indians subject to
the discretion and approval of the Indian Departmento In.August, the
Agent C0mPlained that many whites had squatted on the agricultural and
Brazing lands of the Indians contrary to his express rohibition. Agent
Anderson said they took up these claims under the supposition that a

9" 9
1'1

new treaty would be made and the Indians removedo He said the mifitary

had informed him.that under its orders it could not interfere or remove

22h

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

the trespassers or halt the bringing of whiskey upon the reserve. A

few days later he reported the military had broken up one or two grog
shops. In October Anderson issued notice to all persons trespassing
on lands outside of Lewiston to remove and that the military refused
to act unless such notice was first posted. A few whites and Indians
were murdered during this period but open hostilities did not break out.
On October 15, 1862, General Alvord reported to Headquarters, Department
of the Pacific, that the Commanding Officer at the Nez Perce reservation
had under his instructions recently removed a good many intruders from

the Indians’ farming and grazing lands and broken up various grog shops,
to the satisfaction of the Indians. He also reported rebel sympathizers on
the reserve were trying to incite the Indians.

The military decided to

leave a garrison on the reservation during the winter. On October 2h,

‘l862, General Alvord met with the Nez Perce chiefs on the reservation

and assured them that the Government would protect them and that the
troops would remain to prevent the whites from settling on their grazing
and farming lands and to punish whiskey sellers. Alvord said, "In this
unfortunate and unlocked for state of affairs the best the Government
can do for you is to provide, as it has, for the making of a new treaty,
so as to compensate you so far as possible for the unauthorized occupation of the gold mines by our people." In January 1863, Agent Anderson
reported the Indians had agreed on May 10th for holding the treaty council.
Anderson reported the arrest of several persons selling whiskey to the
Indians, that the military didn't

seem disposed to render much aid in

suppression of the liquor traffic and that the Indians complained taat

225

8 Ind, Cl, Com, 220

hites passing through had burned their fences, In March the military
were instructed from headquarters to punish those who sold whiskey to
the Indians and on application for aid from the agent to remove whites
who trespassed on grazing or farming lands of the Indians,

8, Superintendent Hale and Agents Hutchins and Howe as Commie»
sioners on behalf of the United States began treating with the Nez
Perce chiefs on May 25, 1863, for the cession of a portion of the
reservation. Superintendent Hale in explaining why'the Government was
seeking this cession said:

About a year ago, the Government was informed of the
discovery of numerous gold mines in and around your re»
servation, Knowing that white men would rush in to work
these mines, before it would be possible to send a force
of soldiers, sufficiently strong to prevent them, and
that there would be men who would violate the laws framed
for your protection, the Government at once began to enn
quire, as to the best way to preserve peace, and protect
you from.suffering wrong, Knowing you were friendly to
the Government, and perceiving, by the Maps, that the Nez
Perces had a much larger Reservation, than they could use,
so large too, that it would be impossible for the U,S, to
Protect you, without an army of soldiers, a larger number
than could now be spared, the President thought you would
be willing to make your Reservation smaller, and by being
paid for it, relinquish such-portions as contained the Gold
mines, and as were necessary to enable to work them, It

was known that you.would not work the mines, and that you
did not want them.

Lawyer, the head chief of the tribe, in replying to the above speech
said that the government had previously marked out their boundaries
(1855 treaty) but that it had broken that treaty and that many articles
in the treaty had not been fulfilled, Lawyer wanted to know what the

Government offered before considering the proposition, Superintendent

\f1
\J’L
11+

"1
Gr
0:
cl"

‘<$
U‘
Q}
U.
C3
Q
cr
U
to
(‘D
L2‘

Hale agreed many of the stipulations of the 18

8 End. Cl. Com. 220

not but pointed out that he had caused many pr'Visions to be carried

out recently and promised any deficiencies would be made good. Lawyer
related the history of the contact the Nez Perce had had with Government
officials and pointed out the many acts of friendship, loyalty and
service to the Government committed by the tribe over the years. He
then asked:

I now shoe to you the other side. There is a Ferry
kept by white men near the Alponai. I an about to ask
what shall I receive for the privilege? There is another
at the mouth of the Clearwater; — another across the Snake
River. .Another question I put to you, - when are we to
receive for the town of Iewiston? ‘What for the ferry at
the North Fork of Clearwater. There is a mining town at
Oro Fino, — what are we to receive for it? What for Elk
City? There is a Ferry also on this side, at another of
the Forks of Clearnater, and another above the'Forks, near
Quil-quil-se-ne-na3s camp. shat shall we receive Ior these?
What for the country thus taken?

I have named these grievances, these violations of the
treaty, of the law by the side of our services to the whites.
I wait now to know what we shall receive for all these. we
wish you not to be offended, and we want to keep nothing
back, - let us know. % s %

I have friends in Lewiston, but I have said nothing to
them about this. I have not prevented miners and others
from going through my country. ‘we have all been willing
for this, and said, My friends dig the gold. I am willing

for any to look back on my doing, and see if there is‘my
fault with my past conduct. * * %

I will now give you the great answer, dig the gold, andi

look at the country, but we cannot give you the country you
ask for.

Other chiefs supported Lawyer and insisted on keeping the reservation as
laid out in the 1855 treaty. Superintendent Hale pointed out that it
:as because of the gold discoveries and the lawless faction that go

where gold is found that the Government sent Commissioners to advise

PO

8 Ind, Cl, Como 220

the Indians for their own preservation and to keep peace, prevent war
and bloodshed. Hale said by making the reservation smaller the Indians
could be better protected since it would be impossible to protect them
on a large reservation even with an army, As to what they were to re:
ceive for the ferries and mining towns Hale informed them that “these
are some of the questions we came here to settleo“ Later on Hale told
the Indians they had been sent to consult with them in reference to any
wrongs which the Indians may have suffered and to prevent them from
suffering any further'wrongs, Finally Lawyer and the other friendly
chiefs agreed to making the new treaty.

9. The treaty was execnted by the Commissioners and the chiefs

and head men of the Nez Perce Tribe on June 9, 1863. By this treaty

__Tlh Stat. 6&7, II Kapp. 8h3) the tribe relinquished to the United States

s

,5a11 the land theretofore reserved to said tribe except the tract of land

within the foll wing boundaries:

Commencing at the northeast corner of Lake'Wa»ha, and

running thence, northerly, to a point on the north bank

of the Clearwater River, three miles below the mouth of the
Iapwai, thence down the north bank of the Clearwater to the
mouth of the Hatwa Creek; thence, due north, to a point seven
miles distant; thence, eastwardly, to a point on the north
fork of the Clearnater, seven miles distant from its mouth;
thence to a point on Oro Fino Creek, five miles above its
mouth; thence to a point on the north fork of the south fork
of the Clearwater, five miles above its mouth; thence to a
point on the south fork of the Clearwater, one mile above the
bridge, on the road to Elk City, (so as to include all the
Indian farms now within the forksg) thence in a straight line,
westwardly, to the place of beginning,

I-4
E1
(U
C}...

This treaty'was not ratified until April 1?, I867, and was procla”

and became operative on April 20, 186?. By Article IV of the treaty the

228

ceded by the 1863 treaty.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

United States agreed to pay to the tribe in consideration of the relinquishment of said lands the sum of $262,500 to be applied as provided
in said article. In Article V the Government also agreed to expend
$2500 in erecting and furnishing houses and ploughing and fencing lands
for two subordinate chiefs and to pay said Chiefs salaries of $500 a
year for-20 years. ‘The Government also agreed to employ two matrons for

the boarding schools, two assistant teachers, one farmer, one carpenter

and two millers in addition to the employees specified in Article V of

the 1855 treaty.

NORTHERN BOUNDARY

 

10. The parties do not agree on the northern boundary of the area

The disputed area involves some 670,000 acres

of land in the Palouse region. According to mapping of the area—reserved

to the Nez Perce Tribe by the 1855 treaty by Charles Royce (Royce Area
hhl, BAE, 18th Report), upon which defendant relies, the 670,000 acres

would not be included in the ceded area. The description of the controversial northern boundary in the l8SS treaty reads as follows:
Commencing where the Moh-ha~na-she or southern tributary
of the Palouse River flows from the spurs of the Bitter Root

Mountains; thence down said tributary to the mouth of the Ti- g

nat-pan-up Creek, thence southerly to the crossing of the
Snake River * s-%.

The Moh-ha-na-she has been identified as the present day Palouse River

(Pet. Ex. 18). The Ti-nat-pan-up Creek is now known as the South Fork

of the Palouse River according to petitioner’s expert, Mr. Brown. The
early maps of record (Pet. Exhibits l38—lhl, lhh) show Ti-nat-pan-up

Creek flowing into the Mb—ha-na-she or sometimes named the Palouse on
c: J

229

8 Indo C10 220

said maps, at a point almost due south of a landmark designated Pyramid
Peak, now known as Steptoe Butte. This landmark is located almost due
north of the present town of Colfax, Washington, which is on the con“
fluence of the Palouse River and the south fork of the Palouse Rivera
Based on the evidence submitted with respect to the present day names
of the streams designated on the old maps the inclusion of the lands in

the north in the Palouse area is consistent with the treaty callsn

WESTERN BOUNDARY

 

11¢ (a) The reservation set aside by the Treaty of Jane ll, 1855,

is fully described in Finding 3 herein. The Confederated Tribes of the

Umatilla Indian Reservation v. United States, petitioner in Docket No.

 ,~_:_,j,

26h before this Commission takes issue with the mapping of the western

eehoundary line of the Nez Perce 1855 reservation by the experts for the

“*hez Perce Tribe. As to the disputed portion of the western boundary the

pNez Perce 1855 treaty provided (Article 2, 12 Stat. 957):

* * * thence along the crest of the Blue Mountains;
thence to the crossing of the Grand Ronde River, midway
between the Grand Ronde and the mouth of the Wollnlonmhow
River; thence along the divide between the waters of the

‘W011-lowahow and Powder Rivers; %-% *
The land cession involved in Docket No. 26b, The Confederated Tribes of
.E22_E22§i}}§_£§§§§g_§3§er3§tién, was negotiated by'the Treaty of June 9,
1855, with the walla. walla, Cayuse and Umatilla Indians, 12 Stat. 915,
II K3PPo 59h, wherein the eastern boundary of said cession res described

in Article 1 as:'

230

8 Ind. Cl. 220

% % % Commencing at the mouth of the Tocannon River, in

Washington Territory, running thence up said river to its

source; thence easterly along the summit of the Blue

Mountains, and on the southern boundaries of the purchase

made of the Nez Perce's Indians, and easterly along that

boundary to the western limits of the country claimed by’

the Shoshonees or Snake Indians; * % *

(b) The Confederated Tribes in Docket No. 261, claim that their
area, as mapped by their experts, overlaps the Nez Perce boundary
principally in the vicinity of Elgin, Oregon. In the Nez Perce case
the western boundary line is drawn across the Grand Ronde River near
the present city of Elgin, Oregon. In the Umatilla action the petitioner's
eastern line is drawn across the Grand Ronde river at a point about eight
miles below (i.e., northeast of) the city of Elgin. The issue rests on
the location of the "crossing of the Grand Ronde" referred to in
Article 2 of the Nez Perce 1855 treaty. According to petitioner*s expert, Mr. Brown, there was an old Indian crossing at Elgin, Oregon.

Mr. Brown also interpreted the words "Grand Ronde" as used in the treaty
description to refer to the "grand turn" of the Grand Ronda River and

that midway between this turn and the mouth of the Wallowa River would

also be right at Elgin. The western boundary is found to be as depicted

on the Nez Perce map, Petitioner's Exhibit 2h7, near Elgin and_also as

shown in the small overlap area in southeastern Union county where the

overlap occurs due to the difficulty of following the crest between

watersheds.

12. The tract relinquished by the Nez Perce by the Treaty of
June 9, 1863, is situated in northeastern Oregon, southeastern Washington

and north central Idaho‘between the Salmon and Palouse Rivers. Commencing

31

I-uI¢III-v-4u--.-v0——— :—---uunon

8 Indo Clo Com, 220

on the north it is bounded by a line which folloas the Palouse River from

the Bitterroot Mountains to the point of its confluence with the presentday south fork of the Palouse River at Colfax,‘washingtono On the was

it is bounded by a southeast line from the mouth of the south fork of

the Palouse River, formerly known as Ti-natnpanmup Creek, to Bishop

Bar on the Snake River; thence southwestward to the source of.Alpowa

River, and thence along the crest of the Blue Mountains, The line then

runs from the Blue Mountains to the crossing of the Grand Rondo-River
s'midway'between the Grand Ronde and the mouth of the'Woll~lov-howg The

line then goes southeastward along the divide of the Wallowa Mountains

to a point on the Snake River fifteen miles below the Powder River,

thence northeastward along a diagonal line to McKay Bar on the Salmon
,~%River. The boundary on the east runs on a generally north and south
,:%line between McKay Bar and Pierce City and on the northeast by*a northwestward curving line between Pierce City and the source of the Mo~ha—nashe Creek (Palouse River). A

The ceded tract contained 6,932,270 acres. The diminished reserve,
described in Finding 9, consisted of an estimated 78h,996 acres.

13. (a) Much information pertaining to the climate, topography,
fertility of the soil and natural resources of the Nez Perce ceded area
and the region of the country in which it was located was contained in
3 general way in the early reports of explorers, such as Lewis and Clark
in 1805 and 1806, and Indian agentsa It was long believed that parts
of this region contained fertile soil suitable for farming and sett-em

ment and that large areas contained excellent buns, grass and water

23;

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

making the country adapted to stock raising., While these early reports
were general in nature, officials of the Government in later years referred specifically to the Nez Perce tract. Governor Isaac I. Stevens as

early as 1855 observed:

* * * The Nez Perces country is exceedingly well adapted
to grazing, and is for the most part a remarkably fine,
arable country. % % %
In traversing lands between the Snake and Palouse Rivers, Stevens noted

the luxuriance of the grass and the richness of the soil which he likened

to the soil of the prairies of Illinois. Stevens further reported that

"under the spurs of the Bitter Root mountains the whole country is arable,

the soil as rich as the best prairies of Minnesota, and every convenience
for the house and farm at hand - water, wood for fires, and timber for

building. «

(b) The annual report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for

the year 1860 contained the following concerning the Nez Perce area:

The Nez Perces are located upon a reservation of immense area and great natural resources, embracing extensive
pastures and agricultural tracts, abundance of game and fish,
while forests of pine, cedar, and larch, found along the
course of the "Clear Water" river, with the timber of the

lmountains, would yield a permanent income to the tribe, the _
stream being adapted to rafting, and navigable for batteaux.

(0) Edward Giddings, in a report which in 1862 became part of an
official presidential message to Congress made the following statements

concerning the subject area:

Here is situate the city of Lewiston . . . A large portion
of the lands for miles east, west, and south of this place
has been located upon and claimed by American citizens, and
the Indians were powerless, except to complain, and behold

233

8 Ind. C19 Como 220

Jith astonishment the great tide of immigration rushing on
and taking possession of their territory reserved to them
by treaty,

'1'.‘-%-35*

* * % Camas prairie contains an area of about 200,000 acres
of first quality land, and is pronounced by those who have
settled upon it to be equal in fertility to the famed Eissouri
bottom lands , . . There is a skirt of most excellent timber,
white and yellow pine and fir, for a mile or more back from
its edge, extending entirely around said prairie,

'3‘.'--‘}--3‘{* * % The /?alouse7 country lying between the Clearwater
and Coeur d7Alene riyers is an excellent body of land, well
watered, an abundance of timber on the streams, and a large
portion of land arable. At the present time there is but
little doubt that the Nez Perce, Salmon river and Colville
mines will prove a source of incalculable wealth to Washington

Territory. Men of Sagacity, energy, and capital have seen
this . . .

(d) Agriculture in Nez Perce country was successfully pursued

f§ starting in l836 when the_Reverend Henry Harmon Spalding arrived at

,9’

-....‘_|,-.n-'

Lapwai (in the area reserved by the Indians in the l863 treaty), There

he built‘a mission and developed a farm and later built a flour and

saw mill. This missionary also instituted irrigation methods in

the area although he reported irrigation unnecessary in a number of

Years. Mr. Spalding, whose farm was in the valley, raised large crops

# of wheat, corn, potatoes, peas and stated “Every kind of grain or vegetable which I have tried in this upper country grows well.“ Under his
guidance the Nez Perce Indians also commenced farming with favorable
results. While the agricultural adaptability of the valley lands, in

the reEi0n of the country in which the Nez Perce tract'uas located, early

had been shown, it was not established until l86h that some of the hill

23.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

lands in the region were adaptable to the raising of cereal grain. ,This
notable event occurred on the highlands adjoining'Walla"Halla Valley to
the west of the ceded tract.

lb. The area of the tract located between the Palouse River on

the north and the Glearwater and Snake Rivers on the south, and bordered W

on the east by Potlatch Creek, is known as the Palouse section. It has

a gradual westward gradient with varying elevations between 1,800 and

3,000 feet. It is comprised of gently rolling prairie and contains many

small streams and springs.

The southwest area of the tract, bordered on the north and east by
the Snake River, on the south by the Walloua Mountains, and on the west
by the Blue Mountains, is basically a plateau, except for the slopes of
the Blue Mountains and the walloua Mountains. The surface of this area
is broken by the Snake River, Grand Ronde, Joseph, Imnaha and many lesser
canyons. The Blue Mountains on the west rise from 3,000 to 5,000 feet;
the Wallowa Mountains to the south are more rugged and rise £rom.3,S00
to 10,000 feet. The plateau land on Anatone Flat, in the northern part
of this area and‘Walloua Valley, in the south central part of this area,
is predominantly level and gently rolling in character.

The extreme south section of the area, east of the Snake River,
is predominantly mountainous with lesser areas of moderately level
mountain meadows. The surface of this section is broken by the Salmon
River, Snake River and lesser canyons.

The central section north of the Salmon River, east of the Snake

River and south of the Middle Fork of the Clearwater River, has the

—-_-——_...-..:_.._..j.-__._.;.__, __.,______

235

8 Ind. Cl; Coma 220

following topographical features: That portion lying between the
Clearnater River on the west and the east boundary consists of several
low, folded, forested hills and ridges; the middle portion contains
the Camas and Nee Perce Prairies which have elevations of approximately
3,000 feet and consist of table land with a slight gradient toward the
water courses; the western portion east of Tammany Flat is comprised
of a series of steeply declining hillso Tammany Flat, south of Lewiston,
consists of 505000 acres of land which is rolling and terraced, but not
exceedingly roughe

The area north of the middle fork of the Clearwater River and

east of Potlatch Creek is predominantly an elevated, forested plain

of medium gradient with no appreciable area of rough, mountainous land.

15. There

The majority of the land in the tract is well drained.
is no drainage problem as most of the surface water is immediately absorbed by the soil in the cultivated areas and the drainage in the forest
and grazing areas is adequate as the surface water subsides from the

soil. Excess'water, if any, is drained off through channels which lead

to the smaller tributaries of the main rivers thus forming a general
channel system which drains into the Snake River.

16.‘ Most of the agricultural land of the tract consisted of
Palouse and Nez Eerce loans The Palouse soil is dark brown to black
in color, and predominantly of silt loam textureo These soils are
high in organic content and are very fertileo The Nez Perce type soil
is also dark grayish brown to black in color; and consists of predominantly silt loans and silty clay loamso This soil is found in the upland plateau wheat sectiono

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220 237

_In the forested upland ranges at high elevations are found the
Halmar and associated types of soil. These are light colored soils and
are of lower fertility when compared to the Palouse and Nez Perce types.

Other important soil types which occupy limited and restricted
areas of the northern and northeastern prairie portions of the ract
are'waha silt loam, Tolo silt loam, Moscow loam, Southwick silty clay
loam, Sagemoor silt loam, Beverly fine sandy loam and Caldwell silt
loam.

In the Wallowa and Grand Ronde Valleys in addition to several of
the above-mentioned types of soil, the Alicel, Hyrum, LaGrande, Springdale, Gooch, Klamath, Conley and the more recent alluvial Catherine

soils are found.

§; 17. Generally, the climate throughout the tract is mild as com»
pared to similar latitudes east of the Bitterroot Mountains. This is
because it is sheltered by the Rockies and outlying ranges on the east
and north so that the cold waves which sweep down over the central plains
from Canada are less severe. The moist air moving inland from the
Pacific Ocean loses much of its moisture when forced over the Cascade
Mountains. As it moves inland it is dynamically warmed so that as it moves
inland over Eastern Washington and into'western Idaho it becomes a warm,
dry wind that is able to take up moisture rather than bringing about
precipitation. This action contributes to the dry,tnt summers found
here. The process is reversed as the air mass reaches the Bitter Root
Mountains, so that the easterly part of the subject area is somewhat more

favored as regards precipitation. The climate within the tract is varied,

however, due to differences in topography.

8 Ind. Clo Com; 220

The northwest section of the tract, consisting of asotin, Columbia,
Garfield and'Whitman Counties, Washington, and Latah County and the
western half of Clearwater County in Idaho has an average growing season
of 155 days. The summers are dry with most precipitation coming during
the winter, commencing with the last two weeks of September. The rainfall is sufficient for all common crops, and it is reported that a crop
failure from drought has not occurred since the first settlement.

The growing season on the ridges in eastern Latah County is longer
than that for the county as a whole, and permits the growing of such
crops as corn and field beans. The northeast section, consisting of
the eastern part of Clearwater, Idaho, Nez Perce, and Lewis Counties,
all in Idaho, has an average growing season varying from 203 days in

the Lower Lewiston country, decreasing gradually with elevation to 113,

,%
ggdays at Nez Perce, Idaho County. The summers in this region are dry,

‘fat?’

with most of the precipitation falling during the period from September 15
t0 M3? 15. The rainfall is sufficient for most all common crops.

The southwest section comprising Wallowa, Union, Umatilla and Baker
Counties, Oregon, has an average growing season of lSO days at Grand
Rondes and 135 days in the'Wallowa Valley. ‘With the exception of July
and.August, which are nearly always dry, the rainfall is evenly distributed throughout the year. This distribution of precipitation is favorable to the growing of winter grain. The relative humidity is low, and
eV3Doration is rapid. Thus, although high temperatures are common in

summer, the heat is not oppressive,

238

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

Adams County and a portion of Idaho County south of the Middle Fork
of the Clearwater and east of the Salmon River have comparatively short
and cool summers. Oceanic westerly winds cause an increase of precipitation in this area. July and August are the driest months, and the
heaviest precipitation occurs from November to April, much of it in the
form of snow. Although there are extremes of cold temperature in the
winter, they are of short duration. 3

The climate of Idaho and Adams Counties within the ranges of the
Salmon River and Seven Devils‘ Mountains and the Payette Lakes area are
marked by climatic variations within short distances, owing to great
local difference in elevation. Thus, temperature and precipitation
records from any one location are not representative of this area.

18. The dominant grass cover of the prairie plateau is blue bunch
wheat grass and fescues. At the upper margin of the plateaus, yellow
pine is found with a pine grass understory. Also found on the prairies
are wild current and rose shrubs. In the drier areas of the lower
canyon gorges, needle grass and Indian rice grass are found. Some sagebrush is found on the lower lying prairies, but it is exceedingly rare.

The mountainous section of the tract has a wide variety of vegetation. The coniferous trees present are red fir, white fir, western
yellow pine, red cedar, hemlock, spruce and lodgepole pine. In the
seeps and wet areas along the stream.cnannels are found aspen, cottonwood, alder, birch and willow. At elevations above 6,000 feet is found
alpine fir, noble fir, and grand fir.

In the lower altitudes are found

yellow and white pine, and higher, hemlock, Douglas fir, spruce and

239

tleiand Springs and connected with the Clearwater route.

western larch. The areas above 7,500 feet are devoid of heavy vegetation.
There the soils are thin, there is much bare rock surface, and a few
alpine dwarf trees, shrubs and forbs are present.

l9. The most direct and economic trade route to the settlements

along the Columbia River was by way of the Snake River. There was

steamboat traffic on the Snake River from l86l. gDuring high water
season, three boats a week were operated. When the wheat shipments
started, there was an average of a boat a day. The Snake River could

be navigated beyond Lewiston to a point called Pittsburgh Landing, which

was near the mouth of Salmon River.

By 1862, six primitive overland roadways had been established through
the tract. One went along the Clearwater River to the mining towns of
Pierce City and Oro Fine. The second ran from Lewiston through Craigs
Another route
went between Springs and Elk City. Another route went between Springs

and Florence by way of Games Prairie. A direct route had been established
through the present site of Grangeville to Pierce City and Oro Fino.
Several trails connected these routes with the Salmon River.

Captain Mullan‘s wagon road from Fort walla Walla to Fort Benton
was located eighty miles west of Lewiston. The Nez Perce Indians had
established a trail over Lolo Pass to the Bitter Root Valley in Montana.

Access to the Oregon portion of the tract was from the northern
immigrant route of the Oregon Trail which passed through the Grand Ronde
Valley.

Access from Boise Basin to the tract was by means of pack trails

via Payette River and other routes to New Meadows and the HcCall area.

2hO

8 Indo Clo Com; 220

20¢ Congress did not establish formal territorial government in
the Pacific Northwest until the creation of Oregon Territory in 18b8,
although informal provisional government by the residents of the Willa»
mette Valley'had been enjoyed since July 5, l8h3, when the settlers of
the Oregon Territory passed the “law for the Provisional Government of
Oregano" The creation of Oregon Territory by Congress in l8h8 fixed
exterior boundaries of that territory very nearly identical with the
boundaries of the present State of Oregon, and left the remainder of
the original Oregon Territory as unorganized territory until 1853.
On March 22, 1853, the Territory of'Washington was created. The new
Territory of‘Washington was bounded on the south by the Columbia River
and the héth parallel, on the east by the crest of the Rockies, and on
the north by the Canadian line and on the west by the Pacific Ocean.i
It was enlarged in 1859 by having added to it that small area in the
northwest corner of the original Oregon Territory not included in the
State of Oregon.when Oregon was admitted to the Union in 1859. In 1863
Idaho Territory was created and included all of the Old Oregon Territory,
except the State of Oregon and what is now the State of Washington,
plus the additional territory now included in the present States of
Montana and Wyoming east of the summit of the Rocky Mountains. In l86h

Idaho Territory was reduced by the creation of Montana Territory, with

the same'boundaries as the present State of Montana.

J

The last step in

the reduction of Idaho was the creation of Wyoming Territory in I868.
210 In dealing with the history of the lands included in the Nez

Perce ceded area, it must be borne in mind that while those lands as of

2hl

 

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

the present date are shown as including a portion of six counties in the
present State of Idaho, four counties in the present State of Washington,
and three courzties in the present State of Oregon, as of April 17, l867,
the lands were wholly located within the then boundaries of the three
counties of Shaoshone, Nez Force and Idaho in the Territory of Idaho, the
counties of Walla Walla and Stevens in the Territory of ‘.:Tashingt.on, and
in the counties of Union and Baker in the State of Oregon.
The counties of Latah, Lewis, Clearwater and Adams in the State of

Idaho were not organized until after April 20, 1867-, and the counties of
Asotin, Garfield, Whitman and Columbia in the State of Washington were

not organized until after that date. These last named counties were all

organized out of territory formerly included in the State of Oregon in
1862 and the County of Union in 1861;. The county of I-{allot-za was organised
out of a portion of the territory formerly included. in Union County in
1887.

22. (a) The earliest settlement in the region was in 1836, when
Henry Harmon Spalding established a mission farm in Lapwai Valley. In
18140, William I-‘Craig settled upon an Oregon Donation claim iapproximately
four miles above the Spalding mission. The region east of the Cascade

Mountains was ordered closed to white settlement in 1855.

I

In 1858, the
Walla Walla Valley was opened to white occupation. About 2 ,OOO settlers

are said to hava taken claims in the walla walla and Uznatilla Valleys

during that stnrnraer. These valleys are i_vr;rrlediatel;,' waist of the subject

tract. The early settlements were made in the valleys and along the

water courses. This was because of cor 'enience and. road access and

2142

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

because the requirements of frontier economy favored claims which fur-.
nished the best wood, water and grass, combined with as much agricultural
land as possible. The discovery in l86h that grain could be raised in
the hill soil of the Walla Walla area gave impetus to the settlement of
the region.

(b) The majority in the early occupation of the subject tract-was

a transient population. By 1867 many of the miners had left the tract

for newly discovered mining areas in the Coeur d'Alene country. Chinese

began to rework all but the richer placer areas within the subject tract.
According to the 1870 census report the total population of Shoshone

County was 722 including 568:Chinese; in Nez Perce County the population

‘was 1607 including ?h7 Chinese and in Idaho County the population of

8&9 consisted of h25 Chinese. By 1880 the population of Idaho County
was 2,031; for Nez Perce County 3,965; and for Shoshone h69. In the 1870

census it is shown that Idaho County had lh farms with a total of 825
acres of improved and 2,h6h acres of unimproved land; that Nez Perce
County had 32 farms consisting of a total of 2,725 acres of improved

lands and 3,395 acres of unimproved lands. The 1880 census showed 258

farms in Nez Perce County, consisting of 36,377 acres of which 18,992
were improved lands; that Idaho County had l55 farms totaling 30,9lh

acres with 22,830 acres imprcved; and Shoshone County with 5 farms

.htotaling 859 acres of which 699 acres were improved. Most of the farm
land in Idaho County is concentrated in the fertile Camas Prairie northwest of Grangeville.'

2h3

'~ '*.‘a :7, 2!  .l' 
"-<1‘.'~€Er8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

23. The first appreciable E? Vlenént in pre-ent day'Whitman Co nty

occurred in 1869, when several fanilics located on Union Flat. At first
it was erroneously believed that the altitude in this area would render
it subject to frosts that would injure its value as a grain producer,

a though known to be excellent arable land. For the next two years

immigration came slowly but steadily and in 1871 there were 83 permaPi

nent settlers with families or a onulaiio: of about cOO on Union
3 17.. 3

Flat and around the Palouse forks. The early settlers of the county

reportedly busied themselves with the care of their flocks and herds,
giving little attention to agriculture, c:ee.t for raising a little
wheat for themselves and some wheat hay for their horses and other stock
kept for use on their farms. This wheat was produced on the "flat lands“
or narrow valleys, since it was erroneously believed until 1876 that
cereal grains could not be raised on the hills. Livestock was the chief
enterprise of this county until the coming of the railroad in 1883. From
then on the production of wheat increased rapidly. ‘Whitman County was
part of the than large Stevens County until 1871. Stevens County had a

population of 73h in 1870. ‘Whitman County population figure for 1880

shows a total of 7,0lh. According to the l8?O census there were 1,930
acres of improved lands and 2,833 acres of uni proved lands on farms in

Stevens County; After Whitman County was organized from a part of

Stevens in 1871 the 1880 census shows 711 fern? ih'%hitman County consisting Of lhh,207 acres of which llO,26l acres are shown as improved

lands.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

2h. During 1871, the first agricultural settlement was made
near Moscow in the vicinity of Paradise Valley, Idaho, in what is now

Latah County. This county was organized from part of Nez Perce county

in 1888.

‘Wallowa County was a part of the large Union County, Oregon,
until 1887. In the Wallowa portion of the tract the first settlers
appeared in 1871 for the purpose of engaging in stock raising. The.
Joseph Band of Nez Perce objected to the presence of the settlers on
lands they claimed were not ceded.

Indian Agent Monteith in recommending

'Wallowa Valley be kept for Indian use, in 1872 stated.the'Wallowa country
was adapted to stock raising and observed:

%-% % It is a great pity that the valley was ever 0P€?9d
for settlement. It is so high and cold that they can raise

nothing but the hardiest kind of vegetables. One man told me

that the wheat was frozen after it was in the milk. It is a

fine grass country and raising stock is all that can be done

to any advantage. % % *
In June, 1873, the Wallowa Valley country was closed to white occupation
until June, 1875, by Presidential proclamation. The first population
figures for this county appear in the 1890 census which shows 3,661
persons. Agricultural development in this county was gradual until
about 1900. Between 1900 and 1920 much more rapid expansion took place
due chiefly to additional irrigating facilities. ‘The percentage of the
county in farms rose from about 10 percent in 1900 to approximately2S
percent in 1920; the number of irrigated farms increased lh0 percent in
the same period.

According to the 1930 census the population of the

county was 7,8lh which was concentrated in the Wallowa Valley, other

sections of the county being very sparsely settled at that time.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

25.

. , ‘P K "3 J 1 ‘L 1'.
Counties, Washington, were part of Walla Lalla Count)

At one time the lands in present Columbia, Garfield and Asotin
Columbia County
was carved out of walla'Walla in 1875 and Garfield Ccunty‘WaS 0T8aniZed
from Columbia County_in l88l while Asotin County Wa3 then Carved Out Of
part of Garfield in 1883. Asotin is entirely within the tract. A Small
part of Columbia, consisting of approximately 52,500 RCTBS: is “ithin the
subject tract. Of the 356,960 acres in Garfield County some l2h,OOO are
within the tract. In l87O the population of'Walla walla County uhich
then included the above mentioned lands and extended to lands in and
around Walla Walla Valley, which valley was well settled, totaled 5,300.
In 1880, Nalla'Walla had 8,715 people and Columbia 7,103. In 1890

Garfield had a population of 3,897 While AS0tiH numbered 1:580 

__ VALUATION METHODS

26. 'William C. Brown, a professional real estate appraiser, testified as a witness for petitioner as to his opinion of the market Value
of the subject lands as of April 17, 1867.8 That 0Pini0n was based On
an extensive study made by Mr. Brown and other technical and professional
assistants under his direction. This witness prepared an appraisal
report (Pet. BX. 238 in 3 volumes). The period covered in the land
valuation of Mr. Brown*s appraisal commenced in 1859 end ended in 1902Petitioner's appraiser classified the 6,932,270 acres in the Subject

tract as to land use as follows:

Townsite 510 3CT95
mineral 21,168 acres
Agriculture l,l6h,O8h acres
Timber 3,152,553 a3T€S
Grazing 2,377,953 EC???
Was‘:-,9 215, 8'32 acres

2

6

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220 2h7

Mr. Brown concluded that the contemporary uses of the subject tract as

of April l7, l867, were small grain production, diversified agriculture,
irrigation, lumbering, mining, grazing, townsite location, steam navigation,
water development and water shed protection and that these known uses

were those for which the tract was best adapted as of that date. lMr.

Brown assigned no value to the 2lS,802 acres of waste land.

AGRICUIEURAL LANDS

   

27. Mr, Brown in his appraisal report (Pet. 8x. 238, p. 107)
states that a careful consideration of 2,h53 recorded sales and inspection of 928,993 acres of land conveyed by said sales, dform the
basis for the estimates made“ in his appraisal. Of these transactions
969 are “index” sales, that is sales within the tract, and 1,299 are
“comparable” sales located in counties adjoining the subject tract which
were used as indications of value. These sales of small tracts of land
took place during Mr. Brown's "valuation period" 1859 to 1902 with an
average valuation date of 1882. Petitioner's appraiser based on a study
by classification and physical inspection of these sales determined the
amount of agricultural, timber or grazing land in each sale. All sales
were classified as either mixed or unmixed sales. Sales which were at
least 90% agricultural land were classified as unmixed agricultural
land sales while those which conveyed less than 90% agricultural land
were termed:mixed land sales. according to'Witness Brown's study there
were index sales covering 92,h93 acres of agricultural land during the

entire valuation period for a total adjusted value of $633,h95.00, after

discount for improvements, or an average price of $6.8h per acre. Of

235 acres were conveyed according to the

. 0 ., , __ ' __,
-0- r. V“'|r-'f'\l"\'\'V  . ., . ,. ,._ .,_ __- '1 .’'\.
ufle  -:J.... :3. «'.i...*..’ S.-'_:,_._';'.;~.  ;_,:_3"_';-:' _:_;_:»_J. _*

QOLOSQ after adjustments

 _. . . 9 U n
and a two dlsooant for inn: rcments c“ an average price of $7.61 car

A

52'

acre. An adjustment was made in these transactions where the consideration

raid in cold coin in order to adjust to currency

values. Another adiustnenl was qccr in those sales in order to relate

the value of sales made at times ot’er than the valuation date through

the use of an economic time value adjustment‘ Sales were classified

33 Dreutreaty and pootntreatyo 'F_e«trea;y sales were discounted 10%

£0? i“PT0Vements. ?cst treaty sales were discounted 20% for improvements.
28. In addition to index and comparable sales, three other valde

indications were used bv netitionerie app;a’3er in arriving at a final

1.‘ ti‘,

value indication for the agricultural lands of the subject tract. Rail. ...r._ _
.'.._'.g

 - ‘*1 . ,\,__ . , 5 _ _ _ _
.,yroad S349. totaling l;t ?hE acres for a total aoguoted consideration of

or‘

53582373 or an average ' acre value of $3.h9 constituted another value

‘\

indication. A fourth : indication considered oy the witness was

4—..¢u.. .
In..based on an award air= Q the Puget Sound Agricultural Company and the
fifth was based on an aeard made to the Hudscnie Eay Company by the a «

Joint British-American Commission for settlenrri of the claims of those

C°mPanl€SJ Taking into consideration the are ace of these “five value

I . i . a .
d t ‘* .2. *- ..°.___ -:.f 5 , 3,‘ _13 1CaulOns' and bhe" app;t 5 a 209 dieconrt “fr size Mr: Brown was of
    ---'-. - -L e f‘}f"i‘Na'5--Q F1‘-1 ¢I—-;--l-f':.v---1 -1 rwrxr-3 --u--:. _f,_-‘_‘,' 1 $1,. _.‘ r______‘'‘__‘ l’____ —’u Jag.-.;-,,-‘-L 1-y-5 an.
‘‘ “HF ‘L "cH"' L’‘‘' ‘"i--* ""*""'-"--~'-"-‘-~'-‘-4- -=»’~--—-.- I-_‘.. -.'.-_.-..-i '._--..‘:; at--'=-’}-_?‘~3'Cv Luzc-‘.\.»L: V‘.c'..‘::
 1- T1 vJ- G-\ I‘ r‘ -\ (7
I. G‘... 8. .  O__ ,Y.:''‘ ' -1-; 'I‘:;'‘,‘-'\ 
29 ’~) -».i  » ..  - -,_ . 1 .
= \d Lo- inoea :1: c3~P3.a-i; seize co::r a Vii? ettenoeo
_ _
"‘:"“ ‘ 1:‘ ''''*‘° .- ...-::.:..: - _- ' *- : - - - ~ «PV‘1°d C4 vatic COr-;;; rs Ge?? tale proicbasd csricd can not remain

f0
CO

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

the same. .Transportation facilities improved during the latter part of
the "valuation period" in the region covered by these sales. Increased
settlement in the region over the "valuation period" with the resulting
amenities of life brought condition changes that would effect the market
value of lands in the area covered by the sales. Events, such as the
adaptability of the hill lands in the Palouse region to grain growing,
were not known for a number of years after the valuation date. Railroads did not serve any part of the region until the 1880's except for

a small line between'Nalla'Walla and Wallula completed in 1875. Markets
for the products of the region for many years after 186?, except those
local in character, were either non-existent or virtually cut off by
lack of transportation or high freight rates. .

(b) A study of the comparable sales discloses that the lands involved were mostly small select tracts favorably located along or near
the then major routes of travel such as the Emigrant Road. Many of the
comparable sales were in the vicinity of communities such as'Walla'Walla
and in the Walla Walla Valley; As of the valuation date'Walla Walla was,
comparatively speaking, well developed and the supply center for the
region. ‘Walla'Walla Valley was favorably located on the Oregon Trail
and the Mullen Road ran northward from walla Walla. Petitioner's ex-L
pert, Mr. Brown, testified he had excluded all sales.in the immediate
vicinity of a town or community (Tr. l2l).

(c) The comparable and index sales used as indications of value
were undoubtedly for the most part sales of small tracts with improvements. The extent of improvements is not shown by the record and

adaptable to agricultural and livestock pursuits}

"‘ 5

. I 0
- _:«::'-  a . -'-- ~-~—--_--..-,.‘.-'...._. ...-I ...‘ .3. . - .-. 1 ‘'‘..:—.‘J-' -.. . - —' ._
‘'pC‘'’‘)-‘’1''‘ 1”” C’-* C (5 «Kw? . ....,._,T-. 'J..‘-. 3.; cl .: L..:._*..E; ...'..':1 be  -o IJE3 U..L '.-_‘..Cr'.'i{:Z.T‘ ‘  rF.L'tIlE‘:..~53;

'£ : 1 ; "'. I"I -- ‘\ -s -'c- -"5 v -.r- -.-1 - - r r-. ‘ i?- BTOWE: aPP1~€3 u;¢CuLhoS 0; l3» for p&C”tr6aty sales for improvements

It . .J- ' var -'u- \ .--_ ‘r-.d"~ .'-r:-I ' 1.
case e ulm$u€S were udS€d mainly oh

I. . "1 ‘ L”. r-v v.-.-s - '\¢‘~< *1.-s . r- -1

indications CDbdln€£_frC& C€hSU: ieports. Census figures ale not con. 7' 1-\-1 U J--pr .... -‘ ..‘..L ' .v.’ 1 __ _ ‘ _, -,cluslve. The only epazacioh of realty values made by the Census was

that made between buildinns on the one hand and land with fixed improvements on the other. Census never attempted to separate the value
of fixed improvements such as wells, orchards, plowing and clearing
and so on from the lead.

(d) A study of the index and comparable sales made at or

was some demand in the region of said sales for small tracts of land

-.' ‘J
.,r

i jeesa_L:.r-ms

 

i306 (a) The tract contained 3,152,653 acres of timber-land

according to petitioner's expert witness, Mr. Brown. The dcainant
Species were Western White Pine; Ponderosa Pine, Douglas Fir; white Fir,
Western Red Cedar and Western Larch. Timber operations were an industry
in the subject tract even prior to the valuation date; They were small
in size and the market was local in nature. A study of the index sales
of timber-land discloses that the earl" traasactiors were of swell
acreages and were apparantlv Sale3W7
of sales conveying l28,E§? acres of timberulaad deriaa the period l86l
through 1902.

Some of the timherwlands included in this to*=7 are

\r’-..—o—_

#(*1
‘.1.
w
Ho
2:}
(3
‘g__ J
F3
U)
M»
O
:11
(1)
U)
<.'*‘
l:Jn
,~_¥
r:J‘
(T)
H
U)
Lu
;...J
('1
U1
(1)
H
( ‘W

cccsticnablo.

4On

250

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

The sales include 585829 acres conveyed by private sales for a total
adjusted consideration of $h90,h32.00, or an average price per acre of
$8.33. State of Idaho sales of timber-land in the amount of 25,000
acres for a total adjusted consideration of $l69,hSl (the State sales
in 1901 and l902 were timber deeds only and petitioneris appraiser
arbitrarily added $1.25 per acre for the value of the land) sold for
an average per acre value of $6.78. Also included in the index sales
is a sale by the Northern Pacific Railroad of hS,0h0 acres in 1901 for
an adjusted consideration of $2§h,02S for an average per acre value of
$5.611.

(b) .As of the valuation date 1867 much of the 3,152,653 acres
classified as timber—land would not have been considered economically
accessible although the timber may have been commercial in nature. No
great amount of the timber on the tract would have been required to meet
the local demand and there was no other market than existing for timber
from the tract and no means of suitably transporting the product. While
river transportation was available freight rates were high.‘ As of 186?
the lumber industry was centered in the Great Lakes States. Railroad

facilities were needed to give impetus to the lumber industry in the

area and the Northern Pacific did not build through the timbered area
of the tract until about l900.

GRAZING LANDS

 

31. (a) Petitioner’s expert, Mr. Brown, used “five value indidations“ in arriving at a value of $1.27 per acre for grazing land within

the tract. These were index sales, comparable sales, the awards to the

251

sale by a railroad. The ancrazser s total gra.-;v

. 1 I-" “ r r\ - -: ,.., -. ——.— ,5 . ,_..L - Q r.      ,3:   '._.:..-‘..    u

73‘
")
I};
N)
r_'+'
(D
5
F3.
E3
{'0
CL
5.1
CU
. "5
G)

. GK  . I‘ ' . .. -1 A ., .. -yr I‘ 9 r -I  -1- - Jrrazina lanes in his mlL€d sales There here tor» ;ex sales or So?3l9nb
ca £9 o L:

4

grazing land within tne tract or surrounding area To ascertain the

amocnt of the total sales arise in each tran act on enicu Mr. grown
believed should be allocated as the sum paid for the grazing land in

a mixed sale he applied a four to one value ratio between agricultural

and grazing land. According to Mr. Brown's method there were total

index sales of grazing land durinr his valuation rericc of l7,hS3 acres

" ..

H-7

with a total adjusted consideration of $El.?§l er an average price per

9 0

acre Of $2-3? and a total of corn rahle rrazinc 483d in adjoining counties

*5
I

Q

amountin. to l?,?3? acres for a total adiasted value of $hl.h63 or $2.38

0

_.u4 ..-'u

“a
fper acre.

-—..z\

(b) It was known as of the 'a1nation date that the Hes Pcrce tract

contained a large amount of grazins land. It was also a fact that some

;1
-.

of these lands on the subject tract were considered excellent for grazing

-Pnrposes. The Nee Perce Indians hoe for years ranged large herds of

horses_and some cattle on their lands and ranchers brought cattle to the

tract following the gold discoveries to saonlv the mining canes. -Parts

1'\)
f\)

8 Ind. Cl. 220

ADJUDICATED AWARDS

 

32. The awards made by the Joint British—American Commission in
settlements of the claims of the Hudson's Bay and Puget Sound Agricultural
Companies did not set a value separately for agricultural, timber and
grazing lands. The opinion of the Commission which adjudicated the
claims gave no indication of how it arrived at the value of the rights
and claims of the companies. Petitioner’s expert allocated the award
in proportion to the composite estimate shown by evidence of the United
States witnesses concerning the value on the various types of land involved in the claims before the Joint British-American Commission.
Since the Commission adjudicating the claims did not separately state
the value of the classes of land involved nor indicate the method of
reaching a value any attempt to allocate said awards on the basis of
testimony of witnesses would be mere conjecture and theoretical.

(b) The lands involved in the adjudicated awards to the Puget's
Sound Agricultural Company and the Hudson's Bay Company were for the

most part located a remote distance irom.the subject tract in the
Pacific Northwest west of the Cascades. The Puget Soundls lands were
at Nisqually and Cowlitz plains and the Hudson's Bay lands were for
the most part in.the vicinity of Vancouver, Washington, closer to

markets and population centers and with better transportation facilities.

TOWN SITES

   

33. At the date of valuation, Lewiston, Pierce City and Florence
were the only occupied white communities within the subject tract. The

Lewiston townsite consisted of some 550 acres according to_petitioner‘s

253

C -' I Q C 0 $3 ‘
in Bel it contained aocut hO acres

Brown valued

Hr.

this area 83 53O.3?Q.00 “*9 F:CT3KC: tovnsite was estimated by Mr. Brown
to contai_ L0 acres and xas valued by nr. Bro.n at $122,710.00. Petitioner's witness fired a value of $13,625.00 on the rierce City tosnsite
consisting of sons 20 acres. The process used in evaluating the townsites

was based on an analysis of sales of lots within the communities. For

Leuiston the sales covered the period l86l thrcurh 1869. The sales used

in studying the Florence t

A. .f‘....,\ J.

wnsite were, except _c- two transactions, recorded in 1862, at which time mining activity was at its height. host

of the sales considered with respect the Pierce City townsite were

-transactions after the valuation date and occurred be seen 1866 and 1876.

‘ii
E
‘}'

Many of the sales of lots or fractions of lots within the communities

--our

were sales of improved property for which discounts for improvements were

allowed by petitioner’s witness. Many sales did not indicate whether or

not improvements were involved in the transactions. The discounts allowed

for improvements were necessarily arbitrary and the consideration of many

sales as unimproved lots an assumption. As

"|:~’P".' 0
I

of lac , mining activities
in the subject tract were on the wane. Florence and Pierce City were

r at the

Icl‘

mlnlng Casps primaril Lewiston on the other hand was

1-’  ")'N""  ."-. ‘II: 'V"t‘-‘y'\1'-'\—'*.'j—a;)"—'- ,-5:’. ct 't- -3 an «:5;-.-.— To,’ (5.3. .'~ D _uELx}.lDa 3- L-'-..) .i_i.i.‘-._‘.‘_ '.;x.....‘.l..4.., ‘:3 -tui'»'... S?..’...'u...u.; -t....C1.vb  CL’.
C IF“ ‘ .' T - -.3 .. I‘ .,.. --‘ 1 3., ......“. ".' *
O-“unltl V33 F¢COgn1s:a etc: belo_e the case of +a;aation. Lnder the

s expert, however;

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220 25

\}'1

the most valuable townsite, Lewiston, containing 550 acres would be worth
but $89,370.00 while the more remote and less promising townsite of Florence
consisting of no acres would be given a value of $122,710.00. The existence
of these townsites, however, as of the valuation date would have enhanced

_the value of the tract.

MINERAL LANDS

3b. (a) Mr. Philip J. Shenon and Mr. Roy P. Full, mining geologists,
were qualified as expert witnesses by petitioner. ,These witnesses were
employed by the Nez Perce Tribe to estimate the fair market value of the
mineral lands within the subject tract as of April 17, l867. To determine
the acreage of the mineral lands Shenon and Full made a study of the
literature and records, such as sales and location notices, which were
available to attempt to ascertain the areas where mining activity'was”
indicated as of 1867. ‘Much of the sales and location data relative to
mining in the area is very scarce at this late date. The records have
been lost or destroyed. These witnesses found that while they could
identify some streams and gulches where mining activity took place prior
to 186?, others could not be identified now. To compensate for the un~
identified areas of mining activity the witnesses included streams or
gulches for which no documentation was available in their mapping of
the area in order to secure what they believed would be a fair representation of mining activity as of ld67. ‘These streamszxrgulches were
marked in red on maps prepared by the witnesses. The red lines were

then traced with a map measurcr to determine their length in feet.

Once this measurement was ascertained, it was divided into mining claims,

,_sales for an average sales price of $116.08

— -* n my oer
B  Ci: ‘~..'{:’1 e a:.._/\,
accor 1-: to the lcrjch oi C3mLK3 3 pres.rihed hr the {icing code of

O ‘L’! "_.-‘A H ta. F H U _. F‘. . -‘
pending P 3 vi- r. :n o- .*c stream o1 galch, or? or R518 clains vere
. 'L "" .1‘ . a-4-.-I r—r-a- - I. - {K -rv
assigned no each 11E: _ cl; e“_t as set :1: in two uLnlH: 1 n3. By

districts within

‘*0 4 “ 1 L. _ F‘-g ‘ U .
the tract contained in the neasareo areas a total of 16,462 claims,
0 0 :3 ....f
consisting or 13,503 acres. % ,

(b)

and Full relied on

To arrive at a valuation acreage Shenon

'1 I; 0 L1
 L-;.

sales of claims in is Pierce City - Oro Fino

Sales

area only for the year innediatelr preceding the 'aluat;

9
{.4

records in the other districts were lost, destroyed or meager. The Pierce

City claims transactions for one year prior to the valuation involved 182

per claim. The measured placer

4%

»£ground within the subject tract was estimated by Shcnon and Full to have

a total value of $1,910,908.06 by this valuation procedure.
(0) Only in the Florence District did Shanon and Full assign a

Specific Value to 305 acres of lode deposits. The length of the lodes

was estimated by the rumber of claims reported on From the con{' !

sideration shown in a claim transaction the wi:n-sses computed the average

PET foot value of the lodeo Using this nethoc the witnesses estimatedthc total measured value of tse lice defosits to be $ll?,633 in the
Florence District.

(5) Shcnon and Fu'l assigned a value or $3?l5L33-OL to what they

-L 1
c€I”"“' + w~ , w -r» #.
“r” "he a3m€aSur~a consistinr of ?;QO acres
a .

C0n51Sted of areas "here ihrwc

256

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

but for which there was not believed to be adequate information for
assigning a measured value. These experts were of the opinion that “the
overall value of the mineral deposits within the ceded lands, as of
April 17, 1867, including measured and unmeasured deposits, is not less
than $3,OOO,OOO.OO.5
T (e) The mineral land appraisers for petitioner made no allowance

in considering the sales of mining claims for improvements on said
claims. The record indicates that some expense was incurred and labor
performed in opening placer mining claims. Improvements such as cabins,
ditches, flumes and sluices were usually found on these claims. No
adjustment was made for improvements in considering the lode claims.

The consideration in those transactions may have covered but the deV910Pment work thereon. There is no substantial evidence that the lode
claims were paying properties in 1867. The $9?l,h83.0h value assigned
to the unmeasured areas is purely arbitrary. The method of determining
value based on allocating claims for the total length of streams or
gulches in the measured areas assumes that most of such areas contained
pay dirt and were salable in 186? at a time when mining activity in the

tract was on the decline and much of the mining then engaged in was the

reworking of claims by the Chinese.

(f) .A study of the detailed and informative report submitted by

Shenon and Full indicates that the mining districts of the subject tract

were still being actively worked, some more than others, as of the
valuation date. For example, these witnesses estimate that the production in the ?ierce City - Oro Fino district (about 75 percent of the

0 I
r i ' 3
tract) produce: S:§;.C-3 io: 2%: veers 19;?-l8?l; that tre Florence
‘ C.

district crod::ed S93$5C3U_SC ::“in~ the same ceriod; that the Warren

,t mines (about two~thirds of which were located outside the tract)
produced $338733:-2:3 for the  :-_E3{~
in the tract produced varying amounts of goldb These estimates are based
on incomplete records for the most part but do indicate continued mining

activity. As of ldé? the known presence of gold producing land upon the

tract would have sebstantiallv ezhances th: value of the Nez Perce ceded

8.l"€8..

LAND DISPOSAL

 

35. According to figures supplied by petiticner‘s appraiser, Hr.

-v

"1

Brown, land disposals of the subject tract had taken place up to 1900

Settlement Tota s for Tract eooctouoooocobneonooa 1 S
Retained in Eat onal Forest ............o9.,..... 3,1
School Land in 382 Townshifs oceocoocoooooccocooo 3”i ”
State Selections Cleerwater Co. to l902 90...»... "
N. P. Ry. Selections Clearwater Co. to l8?6 .¢..° 5,699 ”
Wasteland .........o.........o..o.......°.¢...... 2lS,802 "
Unacc.unted to 19$; ....o.............¢c¢rn¢,o... 1,529,269 ”
0

36° (3) Ar. C. Karo Jiller, a oualified aceraiser, testified as an

TVA‘ '|' . ‘I . o - -I; A - . 1 eXP€4u witness for deteedanz ane :nsm;tted an eva;uation report of the

11'.‘ H‘ 'L 3- 7 ___‘_ Pr‘ 3 f .
5*UJt9v tT3Cu (dsi. 3”‘ 5:). This *4 nezs classifies 6,2:3,000 acres

.1.‘ “Q9 d15PHt€3 Palosse area of ”?”3 o?2-0GO a;r;s ass not ircluded in

4’

1'” 1 _;___ -:__ __ .. _
D1119? 3 Sudcvl as fc_l*'3;

O’)

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

Open Prairie h?9,6Sh acres
Open Timber h12,1o8 "
Timber land h,OlO,126 "
Grazing land 1,2e1,h87 "
Waste land 76,525 "

(b) Mr. Miller, although he looked into the private sales of small
acreages within the tract and adjoining counties, testified he did not
use such sales as a measurement of value since he believed the consideration
in many of these sales would be paid, in his opinion, to cover but the
improvements on the land. Defendant's expert testified on cross-examination that the main basis of his evaluation was the value indications
obtained from a study of sales of Spanish and Mexican Land Grants in
southern Colorado and northern New Mexico.

(c) Defendant's appraiser concluded, among other things, from his
study of the many factors affecting value that the northwest interior
region of the United States, within which the subject tract was located,
was peculiarly isolated as of the valuation date; that there were no
markets for the products of the tract except those limited and local in
nature; that transportation from the interior region of the northwest
was by steamboat to the coast and the high cost of transporting products
by this means was excessive; that as of 1867 only a small portion of
the subject tract nould have been classified as agricultural land; that
there was no demand for the timber land on the tract which he found to
be inferior to timber lands particularly in western Oregon and western
‘Washington both as to accessibility and per acre yield, and that the
grazing lands in his opinion were inferior to the free, open range land

of other parts of the interior region. Mr. Miller did not assign any

 

‘L "  "--. nr.~—“.:- -I: pa. ;-. -\ -5» pl. -— -I ‘-0 -I-‘  “ .a- -t r I". -"- \ I
separate value fo, use mineral lan.n ulunLn tne tract since he believed
' 1 J-"" " "‘: "'1' «ca . a--— r  r -r'- 5-. 1' . rs 5 -1-‘ —¢ 1 . ‘
that under 03: n.:ina methods see at tee time o: Lne ialuation tne

I

minin»

(0) Mr. Miller‘s oeinicn of value was based mainly on value indications obtained from a study cf spanish and Xexican land grants in

southern Colorado and northern Hew'Kexico. Thea land grant transactions

-.

C’!
(D

are located far from the subject tract and tee remote to be a proper.

value indication for comparison purposes with the Ne: Perce lands.

3..

37. The Corrission finds, based on the findings of fact made
herein and the record as a uncle, that the fair market value of the

5,932,270 acres of land located within the Hes Perce tract ceded by the

“*3 Treaty of June 9, ld63, as of the evaluation date of April l7, 1867,

W85 $h;6§0,000.00. The value of the tract as a whole is based on

)

finding the l,l5&,‘3h acres of agricultural land had a value of
$1:0OO:OO03 the 3,lS2,6S3 acres of timberulands a value of $1,600,000.00;
the 2,377,953 acres of grazing land a value of $19OOO,OOOoOO3 the 21,360
acres of mineral lands a value of $l,000,000¢003 and the townsites a

'81 é ,--\l o C 9 0 I _ o
Vdeue Of v50,000.u0, with Levisten being valued at $h0,000.00 and Pierce

City and Florence at $5,000.00 each: R0 value is found for the 215,802

 

38» (E) The General £cco:n*ing C:;ice of tee ”aited States prepared

02

0

8 Ind. Cl. Com, 220

Perce Tribe by the United States for the cession of the subject tract.
The G. A. 0. found it impracticable to render an accounting under the
Treaty of June 9, l863, separately from the Treaty of June ll, 1855,
due to the fact that said treaties provided for similar objects, and
certain disbursements could not be shown to be made under one treaty
rather than the other.
(b) Pertinent articles regarding the consideration under the l855

treaty are as follows:

Art. h. In consideration of the above cession, the United
States agree to pay to the said tribe in addition to the goods
and provisions distributed to them at the time of signing this
treaty, the sum of two hundred thousand dollars, in the following manner, that is to say, sixty thousand dollars, to be expended under the direction of the President of the United States,
the first year after the ratification of this treaty, in providing for their removal to the reserve, breaking up and fencing
farms, building houses, supplying them with provisions and a
suitable outfit, and for such other objects as he may deem
necessary, and the remainder in annuities, as follows: for
the first five years after the ratification of this treaty,
ten thousand dollars each year, commencing September l, l8S6;
for the next five years, eight thousand dollars each year;
for the next five years, six thousand each year, and for the
next five years, four thousand dollars each year.

.All which said sums of money shall be applied to the use
and benefit of the said Indians, under the direction of the
President of the United States, who may from time to time
determine, at his discretion, upon what beneficial objects to
expend the same for them. And the superintendent of Indian
affairs, or other proper officer, shall each year inform the
President of the wishes of the Indians in relation thereto.

Art. 5. The United States further agree to establish, at
suitable points within said reservation, within one year after
the ratification hereof, two schools, erecting the necessary
buildings, keeping the same in repair, and providing them with
furniture, books, and stationery, one of which shall be an
agricultural and industrial school, to be located at the agency,
and to be free to the children of said tribe, and to employ one
superintendent of teaching and two teachers, to build two black»
smiths‘ shops, to one of which shall be attached a tin-shop and

to the ther e ::2s:;ah?a shoe; one cirrenterie she}; one wagon‘
‘ -. ‘W 1’ ~r'-.1 -.u.‘, 9 --s ;-- —~_-...-. .. --'. ,.., ....,_ I ..._..,v-.,.-. u-‘J -. a- .
ans piouga Ka5:.'; _ht,. end .0 kuzp the any? is reeeir, and
D '2 -3 V--\ an-I, .4 F‘ -- -—- _. p -3 on 'v -1 d.-- P: - C .
iurn_eo:d tit: ,ne p3,; 5»; Lnc;;3 io emyitg one superintendent
1,‘ f.r'-~'Iv'tr»--: 7-.r-v i'\ -7‘ --E»-..-,— fig--.-..,. .—-........ ...-- I-‘ti;-‘-.‘;r-~ 3-9';-. -- r-‘V -  a-eyg C3
O--- 5--i In-«—-‘--‘g_-J C11..- ut.‘-' J .: ;'.. 1'5: LY-«C3 ....Lc:. .é:--_:-C".-. =.‘:...-: J, u.=.-*3 u.-.LI’lI'1'.:‘.«. 5 Ono
gunsmitz, ohe oereet%:*> o*= ";rot and piamrh maker, for the
I ‘L - «- -4 G — -4. --—o.. u-p-..--In - - -".,qS..'.--ya.--._.-..'....‘.j,.,.. .0 ‘.*r.,_, "-',_,.,';_ -,-,_ _e___ ,,r,_ _,~___ , _H_:: _: _.C_(._. ._._, ..:."H,,., ° 3.1.1‘;
1;; Lu L-.-..- -..a.‘..‘---‘;.' C; -.::_: --..;-.---A -_ .'.'._é _L_-’. L_J._ _ .A';; _, 5, c,. M. g,._, c:i.,.__L{.:L 1.u.LL,.m In L»: \—l
_a‘'__ 0' _ A ’_~'_'' _ Iv‘ _‘ - -I _ _-M -. '6 K '1"! . ::
same; to eieev owe gen‘ ii eh} oge f;o-“;*:~m:;i3 herring the
' -...—\.._.‘ . ,_ -_ , _ 3 3;... ' - ,.. __. , '1 " D same in reteir. eni fo-“-sheo i»; I‘: As a:se’J LCULS and iiiI ' I} I
tures, and to empio" its mzil r 5 to erect a hospital “eeping
0 .\ V‘ , -L - F‘ 9
l L 49- 3 C

the same in rew~
and furniture

CI.
'3
e C
1n repairo and prov 1; furniture the
7"

, 1 - t A cee nee_;ee
buildings requi ed for the accommodation of the said emm
ployeeso The said buiidings and establishments to be maintained and kept in rereir as aforesaid; hi the employees
to be kept in service for the period of treaty yearso

And in View of the fact that tee heed cgief of the tribe
is expected, and will be called upon; to perform many services
of a public character; o:ovpyihg me:h of his time, the United
States further agrees to pzy to the he" Feree tribe five hundred
dollars per gee for the term of tweet? years, after the ratification hereof; es a salary for such ierson es the tribe may
select to be its head ehiefo To build for him; at a suitable
., .L . 3 and properly fur.cuvh and fence for his use ten acres of

o 3d to, and the said house to be

"K ‘T
'-' C.)

rplated in this
bv the United

In

I" cl-‘.}"€ oz
e ;e annuities agreed to
1' L the cost or transporting the
goods for the annuityeoejments be a charge upon the annuities,
but shall be defrayed ow the Uhited Steteso
8

Aria he In consideration of the reliequishmeet herein made
the United States agree to pay to the seii tribes in addition
to the annuities oroviied by the treat? of June 1“, 18559 and

- . the EQOJS 335 provisions diatribezed to thee at the time of
Srgning t5iS treaty; tie e.i sf tvo ..¢ir:d ::d siityatxo
thousand and fire hexdsei ecllersk 1; rears: Eoliowunv. to wit:

-,

. .. u " _.' IL 1' . -._
V ‘ .
""' V " A ‘F - "  on. an -. no — .. ‘I up n... . ., 5:...

ab]e th: T%;Wn H 4- H ,, _ - _ _ ‘ _ _~ H _ .F “__ _
J ‘ *“4*&33 Lu ’‘J r 334 "q-vt: hpoJ I3: w23“.8L CD3
b -no ‘__ __ ‘v __ __'-' ‘.0
5° 9 €*??3lt1 i3 ii. 3- -¢-1eg of la 3 and I ‘ i€n"i:e of
"H "' r C.2

2

8 Ind. Cl, Com. 2:

O

I

-In

the several lots, which mar be assigned to those individual.
members of the tribe who will accept the in accordance
with the provisions of the preceding article, which said sum
shall be divided into four annual instalments, as follows:
For the f t year after the ratification of this treaty,
seventy thousand dollars; for the second year, forty thousand
dollars; for the third year, twenty-five thousand dollars;
for the fourth year, fifteen thousand dollars.

C;.'.'lT’r’!C>
L— h—uai;\.-I

.1‘''‘'\f:--'\

.!..?.-.‘D

Second. Fifty thousand dollars to be paid the first year
after the ratification of this treaty in agricultural implements, to include wagons or carts, harness, and cattle, sheep,
or other stock, as may be deemed most beneficial by the
superintendent of Indian affairs, or agent, after ascertaining
the wishes of the Indians in relation thereto.

Third. Ten thousand dollars for the erection of a saw
and flouring mill, to be located at Kamia, the same to be
erected within one year after the ratification hereof.

Fourth. Fifty thousand dollars for the boarding and
clothing of the children who shall attend the schools, in
accordance with such rules or regulations as the Commissioner of Indian Affairs may prescribe, providing the
schools and boarding-houses with necessary furniture, the
purchase of necessary wagons, teams, agricultural implements, tools, etc., for their use, and for the fencing of
such lands as may be needed for gardening and farming purposes, for the use and benefit of the schools, to be expended as follows: The first year after the ratification
of this treaty, six thousand dollars; for the next fourteen
years, three thousand dollars each year, and for the succeeding year, being the sixteenth and last instalment, two
thousand dollars.

0

Fifth. A further sum of two thousand five hundred dollars
shall be paid within one 3-.aar after the ratification hereof,
to enable the Indians to build two churches, one of which is
to be located at some suitable point on the Kamia, and the
other on the Iapwai.

Art.’ 5. The United States further agree, that in addition to a head chief the tribe shall elect two subordinate
chiefs, who shall assist him in the performance of his
public services, and each subordinate chief shall have the
same amount of land ploughed and fenced, with comfortable
house and necessary furniture, and to whom the same salary
shall be paid as is already provided for the head chief in
article 5 of the treaty of June ll, l8SS, the salary to be

id and the hous and l to be occupied during the same
period and under e restrictions as therein mentioned.

_ ‘I
c:.I3C1

J""'.
3&9
lik

263

.- -.-«,}--‘x

a
La!

r~
rn
I
C";
(kw:
III "'\
I
.'\_‘n
I I

F . 1 ' r-1 2 ‘ . 5 ' “
" ‘ . - -- - ,— » a - -. - - I» J'— .

x:_ ?‘ M; _ _ C‘ :h‘.z.nQ 1:“ ::;-, be €T“Cv sald
 "‘..*.'. .. -. - . w 1 . .- , '1 - ~ . “'1 .1.
be5}.:L—' ‘._-‘. __' ':f’\: r  l I‘ I‘. ._i- r-‘!_ v 1 :| { ;}Qf \I'.!‘t\__) J...E.;_‘, J1‘ .:  i-.L (T S ‘do

I
'V"‘\“""'~"\ '\-\/- o-- -—. , — - -. _, -._ -—-I 1 .-— - ‘.- -' ‘ K ‘ -‘ 1--.-mgr : -'
1}‘. ‘J \ " ‘ ‘ "-7   r_T' - -I ‘_ -i I. : ; - K _.. ’ f F‘ ‘C’ L'(:'I‘ C’ L. It . r ' ‘ C -I '¥ '’-1''' 0 J‘ 
r .
‘ '3 . . 9 ‘ 1 -. H s 3- -‘ 1 1
_f_"5 3" F - I 1 — — -- _ . .- - 1: -I-u--;I\ r"‘- 
‘tr?-H‘ I '---v r I- I: f..- i 'f: .I.1( ‘ ’{  5. Err’  ~. \*Di( “C t-- L3‘ 
Jlr "' -‘~ 7" " .. ---—- ..... ..f .;._ .' '— 1- - -.. . ‘-. ." -—" . ‘ 41- -5‘-7 --. JL; 1€.=.'£‘ ‘ .  i " ( '-_ .-.7’ <_:_1"2_'i"..'_8.:.-f_-‘.3 X LO ;...>:_’- 9..-..‘;,,--.:.'f1{_‘=';. -1,: ‘1.'.1. 1&1. u11€‘ .'...i..* S b
F‘

f_ 4‘ W -. .'. " - ' —— .>..— 1-, .—. ..... -7‘ J-'- ~- - h‘ ' J  r H 

L M4; (1.1, x. \_ I‘ t. 1'. c ”; .«: _;_ ‘,_; a__:_f;;” t_-1* _r_t_ C L,-fif-3 {‘_,C‘-’ 0:, '{'\JC t«:.Ix_}U.8<.:..:-16.
/

(up. ‘ _ H
1 -1. iv: 3. ~.~—. -4 1: «-1 (Jr «
J’ J \ -‘ --. -a... V- --.-_ ‘ — - J(

And inasmuch as several ef tn? Drovisions of said art»

}

F-u

('.

-I

9
no

. _ t 3
uiMdi":e IQ? grplijefejg nni £0? ti: agency; as K611
as pr vidin; the samé’FiiL necessary furniiereg tools,

etco, have not fee been csmplied with} it is hereby
stipulenes that %%:+e shall be aDyY;p iated, to be expended E T the pvrpéee ' en tneeiiied during the

S . .i
first year :;ter the railfieatien hereof, the following

— v -u -1. o

.1 '4-s - - -- .1 \ -.-'-1 '' u 4- 4- .

JEC¢x\ U@~3U4ng“QGu%CS an; phe necessary

9 . - an . C no - o - O %

s‘Z"l'c‘.‘..¥.’-'.’. {‘.—'§.3i.‘sU'».)._‘..-Z? bi} 1)‘: i.'U.'.lU.L.{U L:‘.‘.U. U11 Lri.-’.?'.'.’». IE1*'.:2'.l}.L-U:2’..LKr ‘
I

V
S
labor svsiem as war as prnetieasle.

theeaené sellers for the erection of she
P

Seccnd¢ TwelTe hundred 50113:: f r the erection of the
hOSpi%al, ené previd’ng the necessary £nrn‘tnre f r the same.

are for the erection of a lecku
eted at Kemiey to ai in the completion
3 at ‘he agency, and to purchase the necesn, steel, eteo; an§ to keep the same in repair
oexea with neeesgary seals and materials, there

A‘ _- ‘X
1 G. r
Snell be epnr.pr1ate£ ihereefier, in: the flfteen years next
SuCC€C3iag, tle sin of five hundred dollars each year.

5'} _ _ _'_“.__ __ -q \ '
ihT$$ eJOU&aHC QOllaFS for a
9:9 1 \ 0 I
eMP¢0VG{~;3; ?gT11TS Hf mills shave, em”
  _
{

nee esery furniture. tools‘ . »
P039, lné to preeur from veer in year he nee ssary articles-‘ 1

\

e
tuai 13 so say; S:?”j3rSS nii“e; glass, erdvere, etc.--there
shall be app: Lrieizé tTere°fter, for *he twelve years next

3380 ilng, the :"h of fro '.:ue2n£ éellars cash year; and
f ? the n~:3 tiree <aars, ca; tnen:;:§ collems each veer.

'\ . . .. ,‘
Axe W; “C *'v *’* ~:v-rA *}-z who %«4+r= ¢=:*—e shell
-4- -1. .-— L . K4» -.. q.-K.‘ L.v—.LC..a. KJ 'IJ3..\../ d.¢n.L/\.. ..l. ‘-u _ .n.\ -I-ah.-I U C.»
'I'''--'''‘‘'--. . - -u - '
-pi .‘h_._!- '1‘ - -‘s.r J-aup-as - 1-. 4 ‘ a r‘ . \,-- :- jnunrrtc ’-{.11. ~-...- .-‘pa.-. -5 ’‘-‘-\l. t...‘ :1.‘ g-3.-5-1 
*- C } "“"' ‘ "‘ ‘- "-" "‘- "- ‘ -- -- ‘— -r.._- -.--—--'.-A.; J ...v¢.- L 1 -4 . -1-Id. C--I-v {/9 J -I.
P‘. Q . _
" ‘I -- -x .. ' . " "; " ' ‘ _:h-:3 z-J":-1 r 1 “ ‘I ‘ - _ ----.-‘ rap 4-.-3-v_4-.‘ 4- -. .- ~‘_- vs ‘rar’ g-.1;-‘a-In*y-ucgrfn
-—- .. .. .. ‘v’ --u.r I _, . L». .. - - _ .. um... .. a4C1...'. L .
H: V -. ' '
of -;.-L-- C...‘ .. . _- .,'_. ,..." I. ..--,.; ,..:.‘ L .- ..f , . .,, ..... fa... ..‘..,-‘- . \.... "" Ar ' . --. ' . _
~ .. x... ._ _ -.- -.~’\,...i....'3 Li C-.-.a....-o .'‘~--. I.‘ 4: ma; - a 5 O ‘C Cs-4.1, «.4. ’
one eo~«-~<-~ ~ 4 »-» —=1=~wp
-"" ff-.2‘... -»- - -...- I. 'f\, ..‘___.____.__,  ‘:'lg

26

I

».J

8 Ind. C1. Com. 220

All the expenditures and expenses contemplated in this
treaty, and not otherwise provided for, shall be defrayed
by the United States.

39. (a) The General Accounting Office Report (Statement No. 1, p. 17)
discloses that a total sum of $l7b,365.2? can be identified as having been
disbursed under the provisions of Article h of the Treaty of June 9,

1863, on behalf of the Nez Perce Tribe. Included within this total

sum of $l?h,365.2? are two items (a) $55,556.05 for disbursements

made in the removal of Indians and (b) $hl7.8h for transportation, etc.
of supplies to the inclusion of which petitioner objects in determining
the consideration. The cost of removal was part of the consideration
to be given under Article h (see Finding 37(c)) and disbursements made
atherefor are payments on the claim. The disbursements made for transportation of supplies, etc., provided for by said Article h are payments

gon the claim. The sum of $l7h,365.27 is properly part of the consideration.

(b) The G. A. 0. Report (Statement No. l, p. 1?) lists a number of
items_totaling $107,881.59 as having been expended for the benefit of the
Nez Perce Indians under the provisions of Article 5 of the 1863 treaty.

Of the items there listed the following are payments on the claim under

Article 5:

Salary of Sub-Chief $11,116.66
Pay of Matrons 12,367.65
Buildings for Chiefs 2,h70-00
Pay of Mechanics 253736.07
Pay of Farmers. 8,861.92
Pay of Misc. Employees l8,595.b9

Total $79,lh7.79

26

v n......u..a-.....-..........-n -u-an-up... -n 1 under the 1353 treaty,

Ir‘ .
I315

iechanics, Farmers and cellaneous Employees

to l903 inclusive (G¢A°0o Disbursement

2, which covers a period when the obligation under

treaty cc for 20 years the employees provided

for_therein had eroired.

l?8.hO disbursed for “Education” and charged to

C“
«.2

i properly a payment on the

claim under Article Ey Article h (Fourth) of

itself to expend $S0,000°OO

said 1863 treaty the United States obligated

over a 16 year period for tie boarding and clothing of children who
attended the schools erected on the reservation. No expenditures for

this purpose are shown by the G. A. 0. list of Article IV disbursements

The broad designation "Education" would cover

' the provisions of Article h (Fourth) of the l853 treaty. Article 5 of

the 1563 treaty includes no provisions for Education that sould be

obligations assumed by the l8o3 treaty. The $263l?8.bO is payment on
the claim under Article h of the l863 treaty.

The following items charged as disbursements under Article 5 of the

1853 treaty do not come within the obligations assumed by said Article 5

but are actually disbhreem th

ants made according to e provisions of

L

Article 5 of the 1855 treaty and are not payments on the claim for the

7
J. "‘ to
1803 treat}:
-2 rsrw ~-3° *.: ...... 1 :>,._.. :. I -o ’
‘b"-h3-‘e"J“"":-.3’ B‘-'--1-1-CE--3-D"J\D  -LL.":_3a.-L3.a-.13 ounce oooc o c not SE‘ 
1*‘ .~ «.; """.-/
 000000uccec-nooonooc-ot\::ccc*coccocoa: 
‘T ‘O T O Q ? O W ‘
erecoion and sggipment of dcc_ita uoccnooc 3?n.Sl

266

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 220

 

(c) Recapitulation - Article h and Article 5, Payments on the
Claim for the 1863 treaty:
Article h ............................ $l7h,355»27
Article h ........................... 26,178.h0
Article 5 ............................ 79.1h7.79


ho.

According to the General Accounting Office there were certain

disbursements made under the treaties of 1855 and 1863 for which it was

1found impracticable to render an accounting under one treaty separately

from the other. 1

These mixed disbursements are shown in Statement No.
of the G. A. 0. Report at page 18, as $13,032.37 disbursed under Article u,
$lh3,hhO.26 under Article 5, and $137,577.98 under Articles h and S.

(a) Article u - $13,032.37. This sum is divided on a 50-50 ratio

between the two treaties and the amount of $6,516.18 is consideration

I under the 1863 treaty.7

(b) Article 5 - $lh3,hhO.26. The items makingiuathis total sum

includes among others:

Erection and equipment of hospital ............... $ 3,139.10
Agency buildings and repairs ..................... l6,07h.hh
Erection and equipment of shops .................. ll,70h.SO

These items are not provided for by Article 5 of the 1863 treaty but are
expenditures which.uould meet obligations set up by the 1855 treaty.
These items therefore are not part of the consideration for the 1863
treaty. Only part of the total sum expended for the remaining Article 5
items, i.e., pay of mechanics, miscellaneous employees and farmers which

total $112,522.22 is to be included as consideration. The Commission

267

\\_r"L
{J
FL’
f\)
R)
P3
("F(3
U
"1
{.11
e;
Ci‘
O
or?”
:3‘
(D
:3
E
'0‘
(I)
*1

of €mPl0Y995 PTO?ld:§ for within the two treot‘e» resoectivelv the

. In.

I.‘ . ' F‘ . ‘. A . '1 _ ru 1 4 V __ °
commission lines c;2,lu}o2O o; inc total sum expended ior pay of mechanics,

farmers and miscellaneous erplovees to have been consideration for the

2.

l863 treatyo

(C) Article h and S — These mixed expenditures totaling $137,557.98

were disbursed as follows:

Saw and grist mills ooooocaooooccoooaaooo $ 30’llhoS9
Education nononoooocaooooopaooooooooococc 102,597.29
Hardware ooococooccooooooocooooocuooooooo b,h33¢lO
Fuel ...o.0.c..°.....a..°...,°..t.......¢ h33.00

The 1355 treaty (Article 5) provided for the erection of one saw-mill
and one flouring mill, keeping the same in repair, and furnished with

‘he necessary tools and fixtures. The “Third” part of Article h of

mthe 1853 treaty provided for the expenditure of $10,000.00 for erecting

a saw and flouring mill at Kamia. The sum of $103000 only is consideration
under the l863 treaty and the remaining $20,llh,S9 *as expended under the
1855 treaty.

of the $lO23S9?e29 of the mixed disbursements for Education only

$23:82lo60 may be taken as consideration under the lo63 treatvo The

8 Ind. C1. Coma 220

mixed Article IV and V total sum is to be considered part of the 1863
consideration in order to comply with the $50,000°OO provided for in
Article h (Fourth) of the 1863 treaty.

The sum of $h33°OO mixed disbursement for fuel should properly
be an Article h expenditure and onetmQJ7of this sum, or $216.50 is
found to be part of the 1863 treaty consideration. The mixed expenditures for Hardware appear to have been more of an Article 5 obligation
under the 1855 treaty and the sum of $h,h33.lO is not included as 1863
consideration.

(d) Recapitulation - The amounts found to be consideration where
mixed disbursements occurred are as follows:

Article b

Provisions, etc. ........

........ $ 6,516.18

    ooooooooeocooc 
Education ..................e.... 23,821.60
 ODIOIOO0oOIOOOoOO¢OOoOOoo§9¢ 
$h0,SSh.28
Article 5

Pay of Mechanics, Farmers and
H180.  cgioocooeooeoo 
Total Article h and 5 $72,703.h8

hl,F§The Commission finds that the consideration paid by the United
States to the Nez Perce Indians under the provisions of the Treaty of
June 9, 1863, amounted to a total sum of $352,39h.9h.

he. The Commission finds that the consideration paid by the United
States in the amount of $352,39h.9h for the cession by the Nos Perce

Tribe of 6,932,270 acres, which is found to have had a fair market

'3

C

69

.5-1 1:‘  I’-Jr.  F a-~ -.4. r}/ ‘‘.-I . " e-\ n''\
Va;U9 0; oh,CDJ,bu;.OQ es of A; :1 17, loo?, was gross”; lnooequste and

-3 -..--. 1-. 37"‘ . .,—..,.-'...'-—-‘._ . .‘ . " KN " .. .3.’ "p ‘ J -1‘ ‘
unoonso; ¢3ul€. ;n; p:L;o_Oh€I LS tnerelore €hL;iieO DO recover O; toe

ere.ee oetween the consideration rtid and the value
found for said lands, or So from which will be ‘eductod the

offsets, if any, hereinafter to be determined in accordance with the

Rules of this Comxission.

 b

Geicf ommissioner

     

Wm. H. Holt

 ja

Associate Commissioner

 

