6 658

BEFORE TI-E II‘3DIAI~I CL1‘».D{S COMIISSION

THE CITIZEN am; or PCI‘.éE.-L&.TOE~s'l
INDIANS or OKLAH 2.2: ,

Petitioner,

Docket No. "96
vs. '

THE UNITED STATES or ax-ERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: September 18, 1958

-' ‘an 1

Appearances :

Howard D. Moses , with whom
was Edward I. Devlin and
Louis L. Rochmes ,
Attorneys" for Petitioner.

William 0. Chatterton, with
whom was Mr. Assistant

Attorney General Perry W.
Morton, Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF TE COIMISSION

 

Witt. Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the _Commission.
The Citizen Band of Potawatomi Indians have filed "five causes
of action" in their petition, all based upon their alleged rights and inter€‘3t in and to the "Oklahoma Reservation." The first three
causes of action respectively claim additional compensation, first,
for the whole of the Oklahoma Reservation; secondly, for that portion
of the Oklahoma Reservationnorth of Little River; and thirdly, for
the area of unallotted lands in the Oklahoma Reservation. The fourth
and fifth causes merely allege different alternative bases for relief

“P011 the land claims previously alleged.

Defendant and petitioner stipulated prior to the hearing of
the evidence now being considered that the issues to be determined
are (a) whether petitioner ever acquired any interest in the "Oklahoma
Reservation," and if so, (b) the nature and quality of same, am (to)

the area to which petitioner is entitled to claim additional compen...

sation. (Finding 2)
The defendant alleges that petitioner was never granted a
patent to the "Oklahoma Reservation,“ and has, in fact, never paid

the agreed consideration for such reservation lands to the Government,

_ and consequently has never owned or held a compensable right or interest in the sane. Defendant further maintains that all members of
petitioner tribe became citizens of the United States, and there was
no Potawatomi Nation in existence to accept a patent to such lands
from the defendant and therefore the treaty obligation to issue such
patent expired. In 1891 the Government granted individual allotments in the Cklahoma Reservation lands to members of petitioner and
paid petitioner $160,000 for the surplus lands (Finding 12); but
defendant contends that such payment and allotments were considered
mere]-Y as a gratuity and cannot be considered as any recognition by
the Government of petitioner‘ s ownership interest in such lands. The
Commission is of the opinion that the agreement of l867, if not a
grant of title, was a contract to gent title to the Citizen Band

or to its members.

The defendant also contends that because the Absentee Shawnee

were in possession of certain northern portions of this Oklahoma

6 659

. .._..,......,..,,.._............._....-._.................._... .-a

"""%v-t-u--u-hr-u-no-u-uh-nu-nun.-n-uuuuooow at w - no

tract for about thirty years (since the 181-:»O‘s) before the Citizen
Band came to Oklahoma that such possessory rights of the Absentee
Shawnee constituted notice of their prior rights superior to the
Potawatomi, to that portion of the Oklahoma Reservation which was
occupied by Absentee Shes-rnees. (Def. Bra, p. 11)

Defendant also contends that because the Treaty of _l867i
itself provided that the reservation area to be selected "should
not interfere with locations made i‘ or other Indians" that such
selection in Oklahoma although approved by the Secretary of the

Interior, as well as the Citizen Band, interfered with the prior

possessory rights of the Absentee Shawnee and therefore the Citizen

Band was barred from selecting a reservation which included the lands

occupied by the Absentee Shavmees.

The issue first to be decided is whether or not the petitioner

acquired any corrrpensable right or interest in and to lands, or any
portion thereof, involved herein and is dependent primarily upon
the performance and conduct of the respective parties, the Citizen
Band and the Government, in carrying out the ea-qnress provisions’ of
Article I of the 1867 treaty (15 Stat. 531) that "the said tract
shall be patented to the Potawatomi N ation. " C

This treaty did not contain present words of grant nor a
description by metes and bounds of land in the Indian country. In
these respects it can be distinguished from the case cited by

petitioner, New York Indims v. United States, (170 U.S. l) where

6650 __

the United States Supreme Court held a treaty toconstitute an in
praesente grant” of__reservation lands. (Pet. Br. ,_ p. 38)

However, such treaty did contain a clear and unequivocal
promise to issue a patent to the petitioner to a home in the Indian
country of an area not exceeding thirty miles ‘square upon certain
conditions expressly stated therein. The l867 treaty was an agreement "to issue a patent to a tract of land thirty miles square,"

* * * ‘to be set apart for the exclusive use and occupancy“ of
petitioner in the Indian country south of Kansas. This treaty was
duly ratified by the United ‘States Senate and proclaimed by the
President (15 Stat. 531;, 535). we construe this treaty agreement to
issue petitioner tribe such patent as a contract to convey land and
that it created certain legal and equitable rights and duties upon the
parties _pwho_signed it.

The Citi2_.en Band and a Government commission pursuant  the
terms of the treaty selected the _  jdoeservation and the
Secretar5_r of the Interior approved their selection. The Government
th€I'911P0I1 purchased this Oklahoma tract corwrising some 575,877 acres’
for the Citizen Band. (Finding 7) and in reliance upon the Government‘s
good faith, the Citizen Band departed from their home in Kansas and
moved to this new home in the Indian country. (Findings 7 and 8)

We have made no finding as to whether or not the Indians paid

the Government for the land involved, We do not find it necessary ’

to make a finding on this issue in order to decide the stipulated

66

Q

l

6 6,62 __

issues and we leave this issue of payment, or not, open for future
hearings incident to valuation and offsets.

However, we thw such payment or non-payment a matter wholly
within the control and supervision of defendant. Article II of the
1857 treaty, as amended, provided:

* * *_ and the sum to be paid by the tribe for said

reservation shall be taken from the amount which may

be received for the lands which were offered for sale

to the Leavenworth, Pawnee, and Western Railroad Company, under the treaty dated November fifteen, eighteen

hundred and sixty-one, which amouht shall be the cozmnon

property of the tribe , except the Prairie Band, who shall
have no interest in said reservation * * *. And provided further * * * the said purcha.se-znonev sha.l'| be paid
(by the railroad for Potawatomi Kansas lands) to the Secretglgz of the Interior in trust for said Indians within five
years from the date of such purchase * * *. (Finding 6; l5

stato 531. 535, 536, underscoring supplied)

Thus, the Secretary of the Interior was made trustee of the
Citizens Band's funds which he received from the sales of their
Kansas lands. When this reservation was duly selected, approved,
S11I'V93’eC1 and possession transferred (Findings 7, 8, and 9), it
then became the Secretary‘s duty “to take from tribal funds“ the
consideration agreed to be paid the Government for such reservation.
The Citizen Band had signified to him their approval of the Oklahoma
Reservation selected for them (Finding 7) and the failure of the
Secretarf to perform his emress duty as trustee of the Citizen
Ba-Ed's funds (if he did fail) cannot be charged to the Indians,

We conclude that the failure to pay the consideration, in the
9V€1'1t it be determined that it was not paid, was a failure of the

Government to make the necessary and authorized transfer of tribal

fundsbelonging to the Citizens Band and in the possession of and
in the control of the Government, and was not a default of the
Citizen Band.

In regard to the contention that the defendant makes as- an
excuse for -not issuing a patent to the ‘Citizen Band for the lands
involved, that same was not done because members of the said band
had become citizens and there was no longer a tribe to receive said
patent , the Commission thinlcs same not well founded. on Certainly‘ the
members of said band constituted an identifiable group and could
have been as such a grantee in an instrument of patent; or the lands
could have been granted to the individual members who by reason of
such membership had become the owners of the property of the previous
entity--if same can be construed as having become extinguished. In
this connection, however, it might be noted that some twenty years
later (in the 1890' s) the Government found no difficulty in accepting
a conveyance from the Citizen Band as an entity of the unallotted
lands constituting a part of the Oklahoma Reservation tract involved

herein. We cannot reconcile the acceptance of said group of 
by the Government as a qualified grantor of a tract of land with the
GoVernment‘s contention that the same group could not have been the
grantee of a cession. (Finding 12; 26 Stat. 101)

The defendant contends that the Citizen Band never became
entitled to that portion of the Oklahoma Reservation occupied by
the Absentee Shawnee In£ans, and it contends that the Citizen Band,
in fact, consented and agreed that the Shawnees should rezrxain on

the land undisturbed. We do not find any evidence in the record

6 663

of any consent or waiver on the part of the Citizen Band to a tract
of land containing less than 900 square miles. That the Citizen
Band did not waive its ‘claim of ownership of the lands occupied by
the Shawnee is evidenced by the Band's w:LLlingness to have their
west boundary extended sufficiently to add an equivalent area of
land to that occupied by the Shawnees within the 900 square mile
tract that had been approved for the Citizen Band by the Government,

if the Government desired to let the Shawnee remain permanently on

the Oklahoma Reservation tract. (Finding 9)

It is undisputed that the Absentee Shawnee's possession of
such Oklahoma lands were not “locations made for them" by the Govern.ment. They were, as defendant states, "in the nature of squatters"
(Def. Br., 13. 9) whose possession was neither from xtime‘ immemorial
nor was their possession of lands within the Oklahoma Reservation
obtained under any color of title or recognition of ownership by
the Congress or the exclusive branch of the Government or by the
Citizen Band. (Finding 8)

The agreement of June 26, l890 (26 Stat. lOl9) wherein the
Absentee Shawnees ceded the entire Oklahoma Reservation for a consideration of $65,000 and confirmation of their allotments cannot be
construed as a ratification of a “reservation title" or of a use and
occupancy title from time immemorial. Their possessory right was
in the nature of a tenancy at will; they were in "peaceable possession" after the arrival of the‘Citizen Band only because the Citizen

Band expressed a willingness not to disturb them provided the

6661':

6 665

Government extended the Citizen Band‘ s reservation to include an

equivalent area westward. (Finding 8)

The ancient m2.§m of equity that "equity looks upon that as
done which ought to have been done,“ (1 Story Eq. Jul‘. 53-13)
applies in this case.

We hold that the Citizen Band covenanted with the Government
in the Treaty of 1867 to select, approve, purchase and move to a
new home in the Indian country; which new home in the amount of 900
square miles the Government agreed to secure and grant to it._ The
Citizen Band in all things complied with its part of the agreement.
we h,e"la that petitioner has established a compensable right and

interest to the extent of full ownership in and to the 575,877 acres

of land known as t@ Oklahoma Reservation; and that petitioner is
1’ 9
entitled to claim additional. compensation for 362,833. 22 acres of sand

Oklahoma Reservatim land, being the excess over allotments to
petitioner members.
An Interlocutow Order will be entered in keeping with this

opinion and the  of fact this day made.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring :

Louis J. O‘l"Iarr

Associate Conmlissiozaer

Wm. M. Holt

Associate Com-1j_ssj gner

