BEFORE THE INOIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

Tm: Koorm-.I TRIBE or-3 E3.:f;I~ID or
I1\l3IA1-IS or THE STATE or ID. ao,

Petitioner,
Docket No. lSh

V0

THE UNITED STATES or AI-IERICA ,

Defendant.

Decided: April 25, l96O

  -FINDINGS or FACT as T0 PROPOSED
SETTl.EMENT or CLAIM

 

The Commission in this case previously determined (5 Ind. Cl,
Comm. I456-M7) that petitioner, The Kootenai Trina or Band of Indians
of the state. of Idaho, aboriginaily had Indian title to certain lands
(described in.Finding 8 therein and containing about 1,160,000 acres)
in the northeastern part of what is now the State of Idaho and the
northwestern part of what is now the State of Montana; that the United
States.extinguished the lndian title to said lands on March 8, 1859;

and that_petitioner or the ancestors of its members had never been.compen  sated for the value of said lands (Finding 9 and 10 therein). «The Commission now makes the following additional findings of fact which are
supplemental to Findings of Fact 1 to 10 inclusive, hereinbefore made:

- 11. On March Zh, 1960, the parties herein filed with the Commission
a Joint Motion.for Entry of Final Judgment, based upon a Stipulation for
Entry of Final Judgment, made and executed by Robert w. Barker, Attorney
of Record for Petitioner, Perry'W} Morton, Aseieta t Attorney General,

and John D. Sullivan, Attorney for Defendant, which provides as follows:

50h

,3 Ind. Cls. Com. 5011

It is hereby stipulated between counsel for the parties
that the above—entitled case shall be settled and finally

disposed of by entry of final judgment, as follows:

1. There shall be entered in the above—entitled case,
after all allowable deductions, credits and offsets, a net judgment of su25,ooo.oo.

2. Entry of final judgment in said amount shall finally
dispose of all rights, claims or demands which petitioner
has asserted, or could have asserted, with respect to the subject
matter of this claim, and petitioner shall be barred thereby
from asserting'any such right, claim or demand against defendant
in any future action.

3. Entry of final judgment in the aforesaid amount shall
finally dispose of all rights, claims, demands, payments on the
claim,'counterclaims or offsets which the defendant has asserted,
or could have asserted against the petitioner under the provisions
of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (e. 9h9, 60 Stat.
lOh9), and defendant shall be barred thereby from asserting any
such rights, claims, demands, payments on the claims, counterclaims or offsets for the period March 8, 1859 through June 30,
1951, against petitioner in any future action. It is understood
and agreed that the United States shall not be barred by this
stipulation or by an judgment pursuant thereto from claiming
in any future litigation offsets arising prior to March 8, 1859,
or accruing subsequent to June 30, 1951.

h. The final judgment, entered pursuant to this stipulation
shall be by way of compromise and settlement and shall not be
construed as an admission of either party, for the purposes of

precedent or argument, in any other case.

5. The final judgment of the Indian Claims Commission _
pursuant to this stipulation shall constiute a final determination of the case by the Commission, and shall become final on
the day it is entered, both parties hereby waiving any and all
rights to appeal from or otherwise seek review of such final
determination. '

6. Counsel for the parties agree to execute and file with
the Commission a joint motion for entry of final judgment pursuant
to this stipulation, submitting a proposed form of final order
£0? the approval of the Commission.

7. Attached to this stipulation and incorporated herein
FY reference are (a) a resolution of ‘he Tribal Council of the
Kootenai Tribe or Band of the State of Idaho authorizing counsel
f9? petitioner to enter into this stipulation on the basis outllned in paragraphs one through five, hereof, and (b) an

505

8 Ind. C1: Comm. 

indication of approval of the terms of the settlement by the
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

12. At a hearing before the Commission on April 18, 1960, documentary
evidence, satisfactorily certified and authenticated, was received showing
approval of the stipulation and proposed compromise by the petitioner,
the Solicitor of .the Department of the Interior, and the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs.

‘A resolution approving the proposed compromise, which appears to
have been unanimously agreed to, was adopted at a general. meeting oi‘
petitioner tribe at Bonners Fer:-y, Idaho, on February 11, 1960, called
by the Superintendent of the Northern Idaho Agency of the Bureau of
Indian.Affairs, (Exhibits e and I). The tribal council of the Kootenai
Tribe or Band of Indians of the State of Idaho, shown by the Constitution
and By-laws (Exhibit K) to be the governing body of this group, also
passed a resolution unanimouslyepproving the proposedicompromise (Exhibit
B.)  

13. The stipulation was signed for the law firm of Wilkinson,
Cragun, and Barker (formerly Wilkinson, Boyden and Cragun), contract
attorneys in Docket No. 1514 ,__.by the attorney of record‘. The stipulation
was also signed by the living heirs ‘of Kenneth R. L‘. Simmons, Esquire
(deceased), and by the Executor of the estate of Hazel Day Simmons, heir
of said Kenneth R. L. Simmons (Exhibit A) with the authorization ‘and
approval of Judge Charles B. Sande oi’ the District Court of the Thirteenth
Judicial District of the State of Montana in and for the County of

Yellowstone (Exhibit D). t

506

5 Ind. (315. Comm. 50}; 507

lb. The Contract between petitioner and Kenneth R. L. Simmons,
deceased, which contract the firm of Wilkinson, Cragun and Barker (formerly
wilkinson, Boydcn and Cragun) through assignment succeeded to, provides
that the contract attorney shall be subject to the supervision and direction
of the Kootenai Tribal Council of the Kootenai Tribe of Idaho, and shall
not make any compromise, settlement, or other adjustment of the matters
in controversy unless with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs and the Kootenai Tribal Council of the Kootenai Tribe of Idaho.
Such approval of the proposed conpromise herein is contained in a letter
(Exhibit E) dated Me‘ch 18, 1960, from George W, Abbott, Solicitor of
the Department of the Interior of the United States, to the law firm of
Wilkinson, Cragun, and Barker. The letter reviews the steps taken to
effect a compromise settlement of the claim for the not sum of $h2S,000.00,
and concludes as follows:

Upon full consideration of the information made available to this office and in light of the approvals given the

proposed compromise by the Indians and the Commissioner of

Indian.Affairs, we hereby approve on behalf of the Secretary

of the Interior the settlement of the case entitled Keotenai
Tribe or Band of Indians of the State of Idaho v. United

 D3cEET'I$7 "l§1f,“"‘oE'f3r'é" '*C.3"ei""I}TiJ7i'i'a'1'i'" Ci’; :1  °(3E§£rTzi:ésion a s
proposed in your letter of January 6, 1960, to the Assistant Attorney

General and his acceptance of February 3, l960. '

 

15. Since petitioner was without funds to provide for the appearance
‘”'the Tribal Chairman and Tribal Secretary, this Commission submitted
‘aiiten interrogatories to these officials which were answered under
“Uh on the 6th day of April, 1960.

Simon Francis stated that he see Chairman of the Koetenai Tribe of

hhho and a full blood Kootenai Indian. Mr. Francis, who is 68 years old,

‘of CO0 projects and school bus driver.

8 Ind. Cl. Comm._ 5011

has been chairman for 12 years. Although he left school while in the
second grade he speaks English as well as the native tongue.
has been employed as an official interpreter, Indian policeman, foreman
He is now a farmer. Mr. Francis
replies state that the proposed compromise was fully ‘explained to the
adult members of the tribe attending the general meeting, using both

the English and Indian languages; that the Indians participated in
discussing the Settlement by asking questions and expressing their

views; , and that he was satisfied thelndians understood the proposed
compromise.  Francis believed the settlement is fair and reasonable
and stated that the Indians in giving tls ir consent were "not under any
particular “pressure of any kind.

In answer to the interrogatories Noses Isadore, tribal secretary,
age he, stated under oath that he was a full blood Kootenai Indian and
had been tribal council secretary for 12 years". ' Mr. Isadore graduated
from the eighth grade of an Indian Mission school and is employed as
a.1‘arm laborer. The triballppsecretary knew oi‘ ‘no members oi‘ the tribe
who opposed the settlement”.  Isadore beliexfed the proposed settlement was fully explained at the general‘ membership and tribal council
meetings and stated he believed the settlement to be fair and reasonable.
Mr. Isadore asserted. that the" minutes of the general membership meeting I
and the tribal council meeting, at which the proposed compromise was
approved, adequately and accurately report the essence of.‘ these meetings.

16. Mr. Robert W. Barker, attorney of record for petitioner, was
present at the general membership meeting and the tr;':.bal council meeting

‘of petitioner tribe on February 11, 1960, at which the proposed settleThe chairman

S08

8 Ind. Cl. Conan. S011

mont was explained and discussed. Hr. Barker's law firm also submitted
a‘ memorandum regarding the proposed compromise to the Kootenai Tribe and
Tribal Council. This memorandum was also furnished to the Department

of the Interior of the United States for consideration of that office but
was not submitted as an.cxhibit.

(17. At the hearing of April 18, 1960, the attorneys for petitioner
and defendant expressed their opinions that the proposed settlement was
fair to both the parties. In reaching this conclusion the attorneys
indicated they had considered the remote location of the lands, the early
date the lands were to be valued, and prior valuation decisions in the
region of the country in which the lands were situated. T

18. The Commission, takinvi into consideration the foregoing
findings of fact and the-record as a whole} finds that the compromise
agreement as set out in the Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment
has been carefully and thoroeghly presented to the Indians of petitioner
tribe and has been freely, voluntarily and formally approved by them,

and that said compromise agreement under all the circumstances is fair

and just to the petitioner and defendant.

Edgar E. Witt

-I no». ..- .- -1'-Iv»-tun:-rt-a -IjI—¢~_  IZ-jun

Chief Commissioner

 

wm . N . Ilolt

Cur-I#u¢ -—.n.~ * 0-3:-'-nu.-s -r---:1...-.4-v--an.‘

Associatenbeimissiener

 

AI"th‘»3I‘ V. W:>.tk:':,n'5

H-A-Q g v¢...i- I—o—.I' b.pu-1‘..g.» C I.- - nu‘ . ,

Associate Uonmissfener

can

 

S09

