""~’t.'e.§i.:"?"'

1-!» ‘ __'-"I-'5 ---~. -I-_-- -' “'1: .I""V" """ 
E;EC..3 '2:-~..~«. w~*Wa*~= c * «vs W».-—s<=s.=.o.\:

' 3
..u.1¢J_I.n...4~l LL:-ls.-I-a -4-I ‘-JK.-"urn -nu. Quirk’

THE UINTAH UTE INUIANS OF UTAH,

Plaintiffs,
v. Doéket No. hh
THE U§1.ED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

N...-/K...J"~..."-.../\_./\~....J\....-"~».J'\..-v"

Decided: February 21, 1957

Appearances:

Ernest L.'Wilkinson, wit whom
"were Glen A. Wilkinson, John W.
Cragun, Robert'EL Barker, Carl
S. Hawkins, and Donald C. Gormleyy
Attorneys for Plaintiffs
Leland L. Iost, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General '
Perry W} Morton,

ttorneys for Defendant

OPIE-IION pg  core ..SSION

'W'tt, Chief Commissioner, delivered.the opinion of the Commission.

The plaintiffs herein.are known as the Uintah Ute Indians of Utah
and are a constituent part of the Ute Indian.Tribe of the Uintah and

Ouray Reservation in the State of Utah. They are represented before

41

this Commission under a du_y executed and.approved contract witn the

Ute Indian Tribe of the Uintah;and Ouray Reservation for and on behalf

0 1

of its constituent members, tee Jint H Band o? Ute Zndians.

C)

tends and add the fifth band known as the Seuvaritso The plaintiffs now
311939 that the present Uintah Band is composed of the descendants of the
Uintah, Timpanoag, Pahvant, Sampitch, and Seuvarit Bands of Ute Indians
who were an aboriginal entity and who exclusively used and occupied a
definable area of land within what is now the State of Ttah. They further
allege that the defendant deprived the ancestors of plaintiffs of their
Indian title to the land without the payment of just compensation and

they assert their claim therefor under section 2(3), (H), and (5) of the
Indian Claitns Commissihn Act (60 Stat. 1019, 25 U.s.C., sec. 70a).

1

The principal issues raised by the pleadings and the evidence in
this case are: (l)'What area or areas, if any, were occupied by the
ancestors of plaintiffs? (2)'Eere the ancestors of plaintiffs such an
aboriginal entity as to enable them to hold Indian title to these lands?
(3) Are plaintiffs the descendants or successors in interest of the
original owners of these lands? Ch) Did the ancestors of plaintiffs
divest themselves of whatever interest they may have had in the claimed

area by being parties to any treaties or agreements? (5) Have plaintiffs

1

been estopped to assert'tneir alleged claims either by administrative
ruling, prior litigation, or their conduct in accepting a share of th

proceeds of various treaties and agreements? (6)'¥hat were the boundaries

of the lands allegedly occupied by the ancestors of plaintiffs? (7)‘hhat

was the date of taking of the land, i. nay? These questions will be discussed in the same order as set out ahcve.

The area for which plaintiffs are clainina is described in paraFreph eight of their anencec petition, as follows:

I
‘-I '_ _ .e. .:_‘-r
**-we-‘.w‘

C

Commencing on the northeast at the headwaters of Pot
Creek in the Uintah hountains; thence down the Pot Creek
to its juncture with the Green R ver; thence down the Green
River in a southerly direction to its juncture with th San
Rafael River; thence in a westerly direction from th juncture of the Green River and San nafael River to the southernmost point of the House Hountains; thence north along the
summit of the House hountains to Notch Peak; thence in a
northeasterly direction from Eotch Peak to the southernmost
point of tne Oquirrh Mountains; thence north along the summit
Of the Cquirrh Mountains to the Putteriield Peaks; thence
east from the Butterfield Peaks along the summit of the
mountain range separating the drainage area of the Utah and
Great Salt Lakes to the summit of the Uintah Mountains; thence
east along the summit of th ’intah Kountains to the point of
beginning.

*J.

The above desoription.runs very slightly into northwestern Colorado
and.includes the small area between the Colorado-Utah border and the

juncture of Pot Creek and Green River. The balance df the land described

-5‘!

includes nearly all of eastern and central Utah. The presently evisti 9
—. 1.. " "‘ "' "'1" """"""~'.3

\

Uintah and Ouray Reservation is included-within this description. However, the claim.of plaintiffs for compensation for a portion of that
reservation is brought under Docket E0. b5 which was consolidated with
this case for the purposes of trial. The total.area claimed in this case,
as described above, is approximateky ll,OO0,000 acres, which does not
include the ’intah and Curay Reservation area.

The evidence in this case, as Wibh most of these cases, is voluminous and yet leaves much to be desired at certain points. The degree

-1‘

O; proof necessary to sustain a claim of Indian title .as been discussed

F

‘I

Former na_heur Reservation in Cregon v. The United States," l2S C. Cls. 241,

‘ 3 '9

I‘ I 0 5 no . 9 Q Cu 0 an
and does not neeo.fur*ner discussion here oevonc the reminder of the

inherent difficulty involved in the undertaking: from the viewpoints of

both plaintiffs and defendant.

As indicated in the findings made heret-ith the occupancy of a major
portion of the claimed area is adequatel, established by the record.
...here can be no doubt that the Timpanoag, ‘Pahvant, and Sampitch Utes
exclusively used and occupied the central portion of Utah to the west
of the Wasatch Mountains, and the defendant adrrdts the occupancy although
questioning the definability of the area. The fact of the occupancy
of the claimed portion to the east of the Kasatch Mountains by the
Seuvarits is not thought sustained. when the Seuvarits were first mentioned ‘cy Brigham Young and agent Day early in the l8SO’s they were said
to be a rovinef band who roamed through the other nations- when Chief‘
Valker of the Seuvarits ‘was met by Ashley on or near the Sevier Ftiver in
the l8LLO‘s, he was on his way to meet the California caravan and levy

tribute. Nearly all of the evidence indicates that Tfallcer’-'3 band were

‘primarily raiders and apparently drei-2 followers from throughout the other

bands as testi_ied to 'uring th trial. all of the early mention of the

(D

Seuvarits places them to the west of.‘ the E-fasatch 1'-. untains and indicates

that they were probably younger Endians from th other bands who 3 ined

‘:l"al..er for the purpose of raiding. Beginning»; in about the 1860's the

fl 9
‘Q
n

... .:.L “' 1 o 1 u o «In a_:_s 1 9 4- _:_ A
oeuvarlts oegan to be ioent:._.1eo 7.-.-':...n the southeastern part of Utah and

9'1 .ESPECL?-112-’ So then Black t.-.a'..-'1-: becaztze chief and the Black  '=.«-:'1< war began.

‘V ‘ ‘ no . 9 o w 9
7--alxer had ozten fled across the "5 raids on the

in
U)
[H
(‘I
0
I3‘
6+
3-73
1;!
C!‘
9}
Ho
:25
(H
(‘J
I4)
cl’
(0
rs
I )
[J
U}

C

2".or:'::ons and Black 53".»:-'k continued this method of t-.==r- -ere. It __...'<= plain

f\)

M)

.._... 

1

part of Utah as a retreat. Even so, there is insufficient proof that the
area used was within the area claimed. On the contrary, Superintendent
tHead reported in l866 that Black Hawk and his band wintered near where
the Grand and Green Rivers unite to form the Colorado, which is outside
‘of the area claimed. He also confirmed the idea of this as a group of
raiders made up of anybody who wanted to fight when he reported that
Black:Hawk’s band consisted of about hal’ Havajoes from New Mexico.

There are also some contemporaneous reports which might indicate that
the Seuvarits did live within the area claimed, east of the Wasatch
Mountains.

The Powell and Ingalls report of 1873 mentions the Seuvarits. They

stated that upon meetin? some l lodres of them on.the Sevier River west
.. ...: 0 . 5

V

of the Wasatch Mountains, they claimed to live east of the'Easatch he°:’l . 
qlav;.4.:P

tween the San Pete and Sevier valleys on the west and the Green and
Colorado Rivers on the east. They also reported that the Seuvarits were
breaking up and joining four different groups of Indians. Hodge, in the.
Handbook of American Indians, B.A.E. 30, pt. 2, p. Slh, locates them in
the Castle valley country in w. [§ig7 central Utah. Hodge also equates
the Seuvarits'with'Elk Hountain'Ute and Fish Ute. Dr. Swanton in B.A.E.
1E5, P. 373 in speakirg of the subdivisions of the ’te says that the
Seuvarits or Sheberetch lived in the Castle valley country and on the
headwaters of the Son R~fael River in east ce.tral Utah. He also places

the Yampah Ute on and about the Green and Colorado Rivers in eastern

"A" . . an - -u. - - o _g_ - Q '_‘;_ ;_
Utan. Dr. uulian _. Steward, ce1enaant's u"tness, wrote in 193p that the

U1

\’ V

mountains was held hy Ute Indians within.historic times, and that the
region of Utah Lake, Sevier Lake, and central and eastern Utah was unquestionably te.

He also stated.that the portion of southern Utah

l'ing east of the mountains consisted lorgely of arid mesas and almost

7

impassable canyons and.that it probabl"supported a small be population
which had little or no contact with their kin either to the east or west.
In the map accompanying his publication he shoes the Yampah Ute south of
the Uintah.Valley and.the Sheberetch (i.e. Seuvarits) Ute south of the
San Rafael River in a position which would place them within the claimed
area, east of the Wasatch. Despite the above writings none of the contemporaneous writings of the early settlers and officials place the
Seuvarits anywhere but west of the U*satch.Eountains, It may be said
that this is so because the settlers themselves were all west of the
mountains during this period. On the other hand, if the Seuvarits had
a.pernanent home on.the eastern gide of the mountains they certainly
didn't spend.much time there. ‘When settlement caused a scarcity of land
and game and.friction between the Indians and settlers became more

serious, you find more and more mention of the Seuvarits beina in the

an

southeastern part of Uta.. These reports, however, are never quite
clear as to whether they refer to the 5euvar'ts, fish Utes or Elk:
Mountain Ute. Mcr are they consistent in their location of he groups
referred.to. As noted.hefore, Hodge equates the three groups and

Swonton places the Yanpah Ute in eastern ’tah. In addition to those
facts, the country in southeastern Utah within.the claimed area would

8P9ear to be a hiahlf cuesticnable area.lor subsistence purposes. “he

‘itch’
J

5 25

Seuvarits did use the southeastern part of Utah but just where in the
southeastern part remains a question. It is highly possible that they
used the portion around the 1a.Sal Mountains which is outside of the

area claimed. In fact, the evidence indicates that they did use the

area beyond where the Grand and Green Rivers meet.. This use of the southeastern part of Utah partakes more of the nature of a guerilla retreat
than a primary subsistence area. ‘When conditions in the settled area
became too dangerous as a result of the raids, then the Seuvarits retreated east across the Wasatch to safety. The Powell and Ingalls report
Of 1873 is not to be disregarded as absolutely incorrect, but it does notcontain an inherent guarantee of e:§:clus:Z.ve aboriginal use and occupancy

of the area east of the ‘s'«'asatch :9 rt‘! :'.zj_rr:»'—"-=5 bv the $eu1=3'z*':2:s, ...

T .-..-.4.

-L '
0 C‘
6 if t¢9i VJ

\

supported.by'sufficient background evidence to justify its acceptance as
clear and adequate proof of exclusive aboriginal occupancy. The other
references appear to be too‘ confusedas to band affiliation and location
between the Seuvarits and Elk Hountain Ute.

It is not the desire of this Commission to ignore the recognized
authorities in.th field of ethnology. However, in considering the
exhibits and testimony introduced in this case, we are unable to conclude
.that the plaintiffs have carried the burden.of proof necessary to establish

.

exclusive aboriginal use and occupancy of a deiinable area east of the

‘Wasatch Mountains as claimed for the Seuvarits.

(D
O4
(D
I ')
3
(L
fl
I I
I‘
O.
(D
.3
'Jo
I
U}
ciLi‘
(D
O
O
0
$3
*0
P.)
L!
C)
b4
0
' F’
cl1-1
(D
(--I
‘J;
Li
I
[11
:3
“in
}..J
|.J
(D
«:1
9:
(
( I‘
(D

Indians in aboriainal times. This denial seens'&o be based solely on

'5'" '.“ -3-’ .. " ‘ ""‘ ; ...... *.:.. -' .L~ .1. ~ :
....e :?...'1.:. C3717"-.3. ‘-..'.]_C'."?. 5."r.I""._.'J:Jj._'.'_9‘C1. 5”.’ -'."—:ECc:...."'1- £17-.oEo T. '.-."€--.':I', lo St:"EITiS L-Hap CE.’.'.OI°e

.3. - II 1 \ g g-. "'o 01 90 - 1 V E‘
the Coznmancne could have pushed the Ute out of tne ‘ll’l‘i}a_-"1 ‘valo ley the

Ute would have to be in there. Thev were discovered there by Ashley

in 1825, and remained in that area from that time on. Undoubtedly,

the Shoshoni (Comnanche) did raid the Ute country. There is evidence
of such a raid by the Arapahoe into th Middle Park in Colorado in the

late l860‘s. However, that does not alter the fact that it was Ute
country and the Ute remained there or reentered the area and held it.

We feel that the evidence supports the claim of occupancy of the Uintah

Valley by the Ute Indians who came to be known as _Uintahs.

Another allegction of defendant goes to the lack of an aboriginal
entity which was capable of holding Indian title to the area claimed.
Of course, this must necessarily go back beyond the period of white
settlement to where" the info -..-ation 'oecomes extremely scarce. Since

'5.

there is so little i-.:f.’ormation available then it becomes necessary to

a1-«re the situation as it existed “t the time the reports start and make

whatever inferences seem justified thereby. In mahng those inferences

it is necessary to bear in mind the various factors, economic, social,
and political, which go to n-“Ice up the cultural. pattern of the occupants
of any given area. In other words, the criteria must be reasonably

adapted toythe situation which exists in the per‘ i ular area under conThe evidence, as en‘ cdied in the findings, indicates thot there was
a certain amount of cohesion a-nor-.:=' the five groups which eventually

‘-int-:-:_. reservation, and whose de4

went in whole or in part, on to the

4'5 1 Q

scendants are plaintifls herein. Ear...y in the settlement period it was

U1

[*3

Du

indicated that the Provo River area was the great sprinc gathering place
of the Ute Indians in the area and the names of chiefs who were prcminen.

throughout the territory were mentioned as being there. Sowiette, who

was called chief of the Uintahs, apoears to have exercised control-over

the various bands. He is credited with stopping Chief walker from attempting to drive th Mormons from the country when they first settled there.

At the time of the Spanish Fork Treaty in 1865, Kan-csh referred to Sowiette

as "* * * the father of all the Utes, Sow-e-ett. He used to be the great

chief and father of us all, but now he is very old. * * * we want Sow—e-ett

to talk and all to listen, both Utes and'Whites." This is certainly a

good indication that there was an overall organization even prior to

white settlement. also. in 1851. the reports referred to Yalker as the

war chief of the various bands and said that all the groups appeared to
show deference to him, but that Sowiette's word prevailed over Halker's.
Hhen Sowiette became too old to continue as chief, about the time of the

principal movement to the reservation, ?%&&§'replaced him as chief. It

'as reported that while some individual tribal organization was maintained,
Tabby was still recognized as chi f by the other bands.

The evidence with reference to the.distinction between the Ute and

Southern ?aiute is both length’ and involved. Eowever. that may be, it

‘<‘

would appear that the most telling ar~ument against the defendant's

rt

contention th t there is no distinction is the in the past the separate

.3: H4‘: '‘ ‘ on R -94--' .- ° an. 0-\ ‘ I
classification 0: the te and Taidte seems to have been accepted by nearly

N)

(D

U1
R:
‘O

9

The testimony of the ethnologists and their previous studies of the

(D

’te and Southern Paiute apparentl led them to distinguish between thes

«two groups. hhether that distinction was the result of aocuisition of the

horse or what does not seem to be important. Escalante noted a difference

in the dialect of what he called Parusis as opposed to that of the Timpanoags to the north. Early travelers when they crossed "the rim" going

south noted a difference in the Indians on the south side. when Powell
and Ingalls discussed the placing of the Paiute on the Uintah Reservation, they concluded that it would be necessary to use force to get them
there because of their fear and dislike of the Ute. This is the same Ute
with whom the Seuvarits and Sampitches merged. There are several instances of Utes capturing Paiute children and selling them into slavery

‘I

to the nexicans. Kith regard to the question as to when the Utes acquired
horses and thereafter plains Indian traits, it does not appear to make

any difference. So far as the evidence shows these Indians, whatever they
were called, had been in this area since time immemorial. If at some
indeterminable period prior to the coming of the white man, certain of
them acquired horses and thereby changed their mode of living so as to

make them a distinct group and that group, with whatever component parts

it might have, exclusively used and occupied a definable area of land,

0

then they are entitled to pursue their claim before this Commission and.t

‘
-.

recover thereon if they present the proper proof to sustain their allegations

A:

':"“ "" '. an . . uh oh -- 4-. ‘
with regard to the aboriginal area Cl:lE-Go

1

The question of the eventual cialganation or coalescence of the

five groups of Indians of the Uintah Reservation is one covering a

. .
"_ . _.:'vr
'--:.I:I¢v*’

kn
W

‘re-5

' ‘ Q ' ,_ ' 9 an -9-‘ . I '&‘ q . ‘ ‘
long period of time. nnen the reservation t-s iirst estaolisned bv

Executive Order in ldél there was no serious attempt to remove the

ilndians to it. It was established for the purpose of keeping the

Mormons out of the Uintah Valley. after the war between the States,
when the westward expansion began in earnest, there was considerable
demand for the extinguishment of Indian title in Utah as well as elsewhere. In Utah this demand culminated in the Act of Congress (l3 Stat.
432 , authorizing the negotiation of the Spanish Fork Treaty of June 8,
1865. Under the terms of that treaty the Indians who were parties thereto gave up a defined area which included the land presently claimed and
much_more that is not involved in this case; Utah Territory then being
considerably bigger than the present State. In return the Uintah Valley
neservation previously established by Executive Order and confirmed by
Congress in the a¢t_of hay 5, 1865 (13 Stat. 63) was again reserved to the
Indians who were parties to the treatr.

Beginning after the signing of the treaty there was an effort made
to establish a reservation headquarters at Uintah Valley. The reports
of the Superintendent of Indian affairs and agents for the next ten
to fifteen years deal with the efforts to get the Indians throughout the
Utah area concentrated on the reservation. It ‘as very much of a see-sow
affair. Indians came and went whenever they saw fit and at one period

nearly all of them left the reservation and it took considerable effort

to get then back without a fight. -These conditions existed because of

1. ., 4 \ 1. -'5 J_" """ "5
the failure of defendant to adecuately_or vide for the needs oi the lndians

,_ ., nu guy‘ 9 ho _- -I :\“'l .;_
once they had been placed on the reservation. xhe findings herein reflect

the problems facing the agents in their attempt to maintain the Indians
at Uintah Reservation. The Uintah Valley did not afford sufficient
natural resources to permit the Indians to maintain themselves and when
the agents had nothing to supply them they broke up into small groups
and left the reservation to avoid starving.

The number of Indians and their normal tribal affiliations is not
always too clear. The reports of the agent at Uintah show a variance at
nearly every report. Powell and Ingalls reported 556 Indians on the
reservation in l873, and Agent Critchlow said that while that might be
the maximum at a given time it was not the total number served. He
estimated 800 as the number who made the agency their headquarters. The
more important question, however, is, which Indians eventually did make
the reservation their home and whether or not those Indians were the

1

ancestors of the ones knot. today as the Uintah Utes, plaintiffs herein.
It is not claimed.by plaintiffs that all members of the five groups
ever went to the reservation. The evidence shows that Kan-osh and his
Pahvants apparently had not gone on the reservation as late as l877. and
Captain Joe’s band of some ?5 Sampitches were off the reservation after
having been on at one tin . Apparently, the Hormone exerted considerable

influence on some of these Indians to persua‘e them to remain away from

the reservation. A ent Critchlow reported in 1378 that about 75 or lCO

0‘)

Indians and left ard taken uo land in Sen Pete County after professing

5 3

‘°..;'cj.f,1;r_;;-' ’

are all a part of the #35 Indians called Uintahs in the census.

V1

.. . _ ‘ ‘.5 I . rw

é": A. ‘ ’ as .g'. 5.4.. at". E.‘-. 9 Q‘ 9 I-.4-In . ?0Pul%~$Cn O: the uincan xeservation was made up C; oeuvazits, unD*§ltS,

TEEELD

W
'0
C)
H
N
('f'
m
I...)
v:

None of the groups mentioned by Powell and Ingalls are repor*ed s

F 3"
m
H
rt‘
IT
(I)
W

J

in the census of_l99O except the Uintah, and it may be presumed t
In 1985.

it was reported that the population of the Uintah Reservation was made up

of Pavant, Uinta, Yampa, Grand River, and'White River Utes. It will be

noted that the Pavantsare included. The census of 1990 states that the

larger number of Pavant had been on the reservation for many years and had

not been reported separately. There were still Pahvant Indians off the

reservation and on February ll, 1929, Congress established a reservation of

1 *92O acres of land in hillard County, Utah for tne Kanosh Band of Indians.

In l9@5, there were some 2l *tes at Kanosh Reservation.

There isn’t much doubt but that virtually all ancestors of the Indians

who are plaintiffs herein were eventually removed to the Uintah Reservation and consolidated under the name of the Uintah Utes. In 1881, the

White River Utes had been placed on the Uintah Reservation under the ac:
05 June 15. 1890 (21 Stat. l99), which approved the agreement under which

they had ceded the remainder of their reservation in Colorado. at the

the Uintahs,'Hhite ivers and Unconpahcre are all occupants

(.5
Hrs ‘ OLIVIH-‘I p a-.4-'.-K an -7. -§ci---C. 4. <=-_, 485%..‘ U C: plan , :13 .1. ~..

"""' --' ‘... : " ... - ' .. .. .....*. .:.: .0
£38 EvlQ:nCE Indicates that vnile some of the members c: plalnclfls‘

-3original bands did not stay on the reservation, or did no. go on oriElmally. there were sufficient nenoers who did so teat said

K,-)

1

f".‘E3I‘€.‘..I“. ,

are the descendants of
and Seuvariti Indi*ds who
ahoriginally used and occupied certain lands in what is now the State
The fact that there may have been a few Indians who were not

members of those original bands but who went on the Uintah Reservation

does not appear to the Commission to be sufficient reason to deny a

recovery to those who presently reside there and whose ancestors were

members of the original bands.
Defendant contends that the Uintah Band of Ute Indians were parties

to the treaty of March 2, l858 (I5 Stat. 619), entered into at Washington

D.

I-JO

between defendant and the Eghegauche, Muache, Capote,'Weeminuche,
Yanpa, Grand River, and Uinta Bfnds of Ute Indians. Plaintiff contends
the Uintah Band of Indians in Colorado was no part of the Utah

tah had nothing to do with the Treaty

Indians and that the Uintah Band of

of Earch 2, 1858.
There is a lot of evidence concerning the various agreements

into with the Utes of Colorado. To attempt to discuss every phase

in this opinion would he too much of an undertaking to justify the resul‘.

It is the opinion of the Commission that the Uintah Band of Ute Indians

E

in Utah were not oarties to the Treaty of Harch 2,rl868, and that they were

a separate and distinct group from the Indians of Colorado who came to be

as the Grand River, Yan_ah, and Uintah Bands, and eventually as the

‘There is naturally some confusion heteeen these Indians

+‘-~.o~r -- -nc, were all Utes and orior to the conina of the white men there was

‘U1

«,1
L0

no reason for them to avoid Contact and also they were probably common

victims of the raids by the Shoshonies to the north.

In other words,

there was a common plane

of interest upon which they undoubtedly met.

!'l"'|
I

however, with he establishment of Utah .erritory in 1850, and Colorado

4.- vi.‘

in 1861, there came a definite division be een the two groups as a

of the establishment of two superintendencies for the two groups of Indians.

we do not mean to say that there was not a separation prior to that time

but rather that such separation became a matter of record through the
reports of the respective suoerintendencies.

Utah Territory included all of the present State: of Colorado west of

the Rocky Hountains when it was established in l85l. Brigham Young then

D
J.

had in his charg- a portion of what later became Indians o the Colorado

f""\

Superintendent in l86l. anen Simeon

hhitely was appointed agent for the
Utes in Colorado in 1862, he took over these Indians living in the Park
area of Colorado and up to what is now the present border between Utah

and Colorado. A certain degree of confusion resulted from this artificial

division because of lack of knowledge on the part of Ehitely. Ehitely

P Q

and Curtis reported that the Colorado Indians claimed a large area of land

and that only about one-thrid of it lay in Colorado. Curtis was familiar

with these Indians and the only explanation for his report as to the area

claimed is that Curtis, who had found the Indians near Spanish Fork in

'tah, was talking about the Uintars of Utah, who were being visited by the

Grand River U‘.s or Colorado.

Indians he was bringin had cone into U

5

received presents at Spanish Fork. This seems to

Kn

trpioal situation wh re in later years the Indians from both Superintendencies visited back and forth whenever presents were being distributed.

One of the confusing points about the distinction between the Indians
of Utah and Colorado is the presence in Colorado of certain Indians who

were indentified more with the Utah groups. Antero, or Anthro, and

Douglass were both pretty much identified with tah Utes, particularly

tero. Antero was in Colorado in 1855 at Empire where there was a distribution of presents. In 186?, Antero

and several subshiefs of the

Grand River and Uintah Bands came in to Denver and told Governor Hunt

that because they were afraid of being drawn into the war between their
relations and the Eormons in the Great Basin they had decided to come

east of the Rockies. In August of that year, Douglass came to Denver for

the same reason to join his brother, hevara, CH'hevava. hevara.was

definitely a Colorado Ute and Douglass stayed in Colorado and became a

3‘

part 01

the h.ite River Utes.

'When the Commissioner of Indian Affairs authorized the bringing of a

9

delegation of Tabegauches, Uintahs, Grand Rivers, and Yampahs to'Kashin ton

for the purpose of negotiations, nothing was said about tah Indians. The

authorization was addressed to Governor.Hunt of Colorado. The Treaty of

grew out of these negotiations and none of the Indians who

9

designated as Uintahs of either Colorado or Utah. The Senate

reaty and made certain amendments which necessitated the

,...‘-L
an\a

signatures of tne‘Indians. Governor Hunt we out to get these signatures

2"‘-.35

and among others, got the signatu of five Indians designated as "Uintahs."

K0

'.-‘I; (K

Antero is the only one of the five who is identified as a Utah Ute.
Three of the five are not otherwise identified. The fifth one, Yahm3h~m9. is always called a Denver Ute or Khite River *te. he is last
identified as a suh~chief in Douglass‘ band of White River 'tes. Of
course, Douglass apparently had been at one time in Utah. He is mentioned as being chief of a group of 21 lodges of "Salt Lake Utes" by
Governor Hunt in 1867, t is possible to surmise that the Uintahs who
signed the amendment were all at one time Utah Utes, but those with
Douglass had abandoned Utah for Colorado and stayed there. Antero did
not remain in Colorado, but went back to Utah where he was reported on
the Uintah Reservation by Powell and Ingalls in 1873. Antero had long
been a Sub-chief in Utah but had never had the power to speak for the
Utes of tah. his signature on the treaty anendments in l9€8 could not
deprive the Utes of Utah of their lands any more than that of any other
one of many sub-chiefs could have done.

The Commissioner of Indian affairs urged in the same report for
1868 in which he reported the negotiation of the Treaty of March 2,
1858, that the Spanish Fork Treat: with the Utes of Utah be ratified or
a new treaty held with them. This indibates that the Utes of C lorado
and those of Utah were considred as separate entities and that the ones

in Utah were not considered to he parties to the reaty O1 march 2, l868.

On Karch 13, l868 the Commissioner wrote to the Secretary of the Interior

that the Treaty of Aurust 29, 1865, with the Uintah and Yamoah or Grand

River hands of Ute Indians which was still before the Senate need not

be ratified if the Treaty of Karen 2, lF68 was ratified, since the
parties were the same in both treaties. Governor Hunt wrote in 1868
that there were 900 Uintahs under a separate agent in Uintah Valley and
that those in Colorado were simply an offshoot of the Uintahs in ta. and
had decided to attach themselves to the Colorado Superintendency. The
whole tenor of the correspondence throughout the history of Indian Affairs
in Colorado and Utah indicates that the Indians therein were considered
and handled as separate groups and that the Uintahs of Utah had no part

in the Treatg of March 2, l868, and that the Colorado Utes had no part in
the Spanish Fork Treaty of June 8, l365.

The same situation as outlined above prevailed with regard to the
was negotiated under.the not of Congress
of April 23, 1872 (l? Stat. 55). The act limited the negotiatidns to th
Indians of Colorado and the cost of the negotiations w*s charged to the
Indians of Colorado. The preamble of the Brunot agreement mentions the
Uintah ?and along with the other bands of Colorado and refers to them as

the “confederated bands of the Ute Nation." The whole subject of the

Brunet Agreement dealt with Colorado land and Colorado lndians under the
lE68 treaty and the Utes of Utah had nothing to do with it, nor were they
consulted about it as they would have had to be if the terms of the l868
treaty were to be complied with insofar as the number of signatures required'under article 15 were concerned. Brunet himself stated in his.
report that he had dealt with Colorado Utes.

The one time that the Uintan Utes of Utah or cintah Valley neserI
A4 - . «L .. ‘* . .:. 4. .. - - ..': - 4."
Va.-. C101”; ‘u-.~ E".-‘I"'..=.‘ C‘.'..‘I‘.S‘-.;l L:C: 5. Cal ‘. cI".‘:'E.I'..: E.-‘Clil-35.5 I'..l"‘. ‘$03..-C.I'E.-....;O Cc":I"..‘E? ':.§".E‘-.'I'l Lite

"'«lsa.:;j*:-'*-4""

C

agreement of 18?8 with the Huache, Capote, and Heeminuche
negotiated, and they relinquished their interest in the 1958 treaty
reservation. There was apparently an attempt to follow the terms of
Article 16 of the 1858 treaty which required the signature of threefourths of the male Indians occupying or interested in the reservation

created thereunder. The Uintah Utes of the Uintah Valley Reservation

‘signed a "release" which consented to the action of the residents of the

reservation in Colorado in ceding their interest therei-. The Uintahs

‘I

were looking forward hopefully to sharing in the money to be paid the

three‘bands€2u~their cession. This does not anneal to the Comrission

as adequate proof that the Uintahs were a party to the treaty of 1868

or to the Erunot agreenent of 1873. The only explanation for obtaining

the signature of the Uintahs is the continued mixup between these bands

because of the note. This agreement of 1878 was never ratified.

Finally, when the settlers‘ demands for land became too great, the
defendant entered into an agreement with the Utes in Colorado, known as

the confederated bands of the Ute nation. This agreement of 1880 (21

Stat. 199) ceded the remainder of the Colorado Reservation created by the
I 3

Treat‘ of 1868 and stipulated as to the olacement of the Indi*ns who we~e

residing thereon.

5
51*
h
('31
I J
.*‘.
:4‘
B)
13‘
OI‘
(D
U)
(D
'1
I

The unite River Utes were placed o
vation. The C mmission created to carry out this agreement had its

chairman, George'E. Hanypenny. He assumed that the Uintah Utes of Utah

:1
na
( I"
rt
|-‘J
(D
[J
‘1
U)
‘.1
(I1
L‘!
[11
cf‘
9:
"i
(D
to
_ 0'!

If!‘
Q
g.
I
D.
U‘
(D

I.‘ I‘
KO

In ‘*1 -H 0 L9 9 4- ‘I..
tnereoy making their signatures on

rt‘
73'‘
(9

ir final report in l88l, the Commission
repeated these statements and mentioned the signing of the release under
the unratified agreement of l878 where the Uintahs of Utah had agreed to

the disposal of a part of the Colorado Reservation by the Huache, Capote,

and'¥eeminuche Bands.

In august 1881, the movement of the White River Utes to the Uintah

Reservation.was begun. This whole transaction had taken place without

the knowledge or consent of the Uintah ‘tee. The records indicate that

't}‘-£E!_'_V <'3i.Sar'>m'-over‘? nf nl ::r_~,f:_n the  ‘E63. Fj_1.r9~_r~ Utes cm ‘the T7-‘~'-v-tnh ‘-3- cm“

--no 6-O it-_a--v 9‘-n.—¢ c.c-;’ I-I-nut-1

0‘)

'\
0

vation n_thout consulting them or paying for the land given tle White

Rivers. The

white River Utes had just recently been involved in the
Meeker massacre and yet were still receiving annuities under the several

agreements with defendant while th’ ’intah Utes were getting only a small

gratuity each year.

This was cause for concern to the agent and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The findings indicates the background 0’ this

situation and the events which led to the ruling of Secretary of the
Interior Teller in July 1882 that the Uintah Utes of Utah had participated

Treaty of l8E8 and the Erunot Agreement of l873. He stated that

tneless entitled to share in th proceeds of that agreezen In accordance
with the ruling he directed that the Uirtan's share of the annual disKn

\C)

. ,-'

Kn
C.)

Uintahs. he stated that it was not necessary to make up any back payments
and cautioned the agents not to make the decision known to the Indians.

In 1397. the whole record was reviewed by the Commissioner of Indian
Affairs at the request of the Office of the Secreta_y of the Interior.

The Commissioner came to the conclusion that the previous ruling had been
wrong and that, in fact, the Uihtah ULQS of Utah had not participated in
the Treaty of l868 or the Brunet Agreement, but had always been a separate
and distinct group from those of Colorado.

This Commission feels that the decision of 1897 was the correct-one
and that the ruling of Secretary Teller in 1882 was simply a necessary
expedient to the maintenance oi friendly relations among the Indians on
the Uintah Reservation and the ultimate protection of the white people
in the area. This being so, then the Uintah Utes of Utah have not ceded
their aboriginal-title to the lands used and occupied by them in Utah and
the defendant has never compensated them or taken a cession from them in any
manner other than by the unratified Spanish Fork Treaty of 1865, and conseouentli, without the consent of the ancestors of plaintiffs.

This Commission feels no reluctance in denying the correctness of the
administrative ruling of Secretary Teller. The ruling was purely an
ex-parte decision of which the Indians were not told and does not confo m.with
any of the ideas of administrative procedure so as to give us pause in

V

setting it aside. Keither do we feel that the acceptance by the Uintan Utes

O

can now be used by the defenda.t as a

weapon. The Indians were oerfectly justified in accepting these benefits

2
‘J
(‘l
I!‘
O
C3
<1‘
‘Jo
:5
.0
I23
P.
w
‘JO
{:1
U‘)
Q}
U}
(*9
O
r*‘
~r
rn
‘Jo
H
(_)
H
‘J
In]
',J
U
0
U}
14:
, I
I...)
|...J

They’had previously been getting a

$ ‘t

gratuity each year and the fact that it was increased to more nearly what
the White River Utes were getting undoubtedly appealed to the sense of

' L

the Uintahs who had been peaceable while the Shite Rivershad

C...»
E1
U?
(‘
‘J:
0
(D
O
l "

been engaged in the Kseker massacre and other trouble.
The case of "Blackfeet Nation V. United States,“ 81 C. Cls. lOl,

is applicable to the situation now before us. In that case the Court of

Claims said:

* * * The Court would hesitate to apply the doctrine of
estoppel to tribal Indians, in the absence of positive proof
that the tribe as such comprehended its rights and was
accepting benefits from the government with full knowledge
of and in pursuance of rights created by treaties between

the parties.

The Ute Indians have been engaged in extensive litigation in the
Court of Claims under special jurisdictional acts in past yearsi In
IE97. when an attorney was hired to press their claims before Congress
and the courts, the Uintah.Utes who are plaintiffs herein signed an
agreement with the attorney wherein they asserted that they were parties
to the Treaty of 1858 and the agreements of 1873 and l880. The White
River Utes did the same. Out of this contract came the case of "The
Ute Indians v. The United States," #5 C, Cls. 440. In this case and the

jurisdictional act naking it possible, the referencesare all to the Utes

of Colorado. The only evidence of the Uintahs of Utah being included is

To

in the census figures where the bintah tes are listed as having 427

'0

1TiE.‘iT‘.D€'I"S .

' vvo

The figure is undoubtedly that of the uintahs of ‘tah because
it coincides reasonably with other census figures. The next reference

to the tribal affiliations in the same finding in that case refers to th

. . ,
 __.',._.:;3r
'5*'I‘ti:;,_x;:;w'

group as Utes of Colorado and says that they are also known as Hhite
River Utes, Southern Utes and Unconpahgre Utes. The Uintahs of Utah

have always been separate from these three groups who are unquestionably

Colorado Utes. It is the same confusion that has been evident throughout

the history of the Utes of Colorado and those of Utah. The fact that the
Utes of Utah compounded this confusion with their Resolutaion of 1897 does
not alter their present right to prosecute this suit. The original confusion came through Secretary Teller’s ruling in 1882 and the position

of the Uintah Utes of Utah has not ch nged since that time. The defendant

has suffered no loss that it would not have suffered as a result of
Teller‘s ruling and to hold now that because the Uintah Utes continued a
practice est*hlished by defendant they are to be penalized by not hein
permitted to assert a valid claim to compensation for their lands would
not be commensurate with the purpose of the Indian Claims Commission not

nor with justice. '

It is to be noted that when the facts concerning the true situation

‘began to come to light as the result of the litigation of later vears,

0}

the Uintah Utes of Utah disclaimed.any interest in the recoveries under
1910 case were
"The

litigated again in l943 and final judalent was had in Confederated

(11
III
S
Q.
U)
O
*5
CL‘
H‘
{D
i-~|
C1
(1.
‘.1.
E?
U}
<1
* 3
CT‘
(D
(“J
F3
'.Jn
1 ‘I
(D
0.

States," ll? C. Cls. 433 in 1950,

the Uintah Utes filed disclaimers in all dockets in which recoveries were

had. Also, in these later cases the error of the description, if such it
WES. which aooeared to irclude the Uintah Utes of Utah in the l9lC case,

D93

has corrected.

\n

(U

‘Q

?he intertribal agreement oetween the Uintah Utes, White River Utes,
and Uncompahgre Utes of the Uintah and Ouray Reservation whereby each
tribe agrees to share any recoveries had, including th two cases before
this Commission, is of no interest herein. The fact that they will share
the proceeds does not detract from the merits of their respective cases.

The description of the definable area which the evidence substantiates
as having been used and occupied by the ancestors of plaintiffs from time
immemorial is set out in Finding No. 3 made herewith. The boundaries as
found by this Commission are very similar to the boundaries set out by
plaintiffs so far as the northern, western, and part of the southern
boundaries are concerned, and they-differ only so far as the eastern and
part of the sontharn line are noncernnd- The description of the area as
set out in Finding R . 3 does not include the Uintah Valley Reser'ation
since that area is considered in Docket No. #5.

Plaintiffs‘ contention with regard to the eastern boundary cannot
be accepted by the Commission in view of the fact that there was not
established a definable area used and occupied in the usual Indian
manner within the south-central and southeastern part of Utah. The Green
River is undoubtedly a natural boundary because of the roughness of the
terrain, but ‘he fact that it is such a natural boundary doesn't lessen the
requirement that the land within it be used and occupied by the Indians

‘I

claiming it. See the Quapaw Trioe.of Indians v. The United States, l28

F9‘! ‘L -5 I. .. —‘ ‘_ . g L o L . ‘L
lhe northern bounca-y O; the Uint c Utes, starting at the northeast
% " nu ‘ r - ‘K _. . ‘ ‘ L -5 L‘ ?— -A ‘
correr o: uin-=n Valley reservation, is forrec oy a par. o- tne L_:tan

Mountains. The boundary on the n rth as found by the Commission starts
at the northwestern corner of the reservation and follows the crest
of the Uintah Mountains to the south of the town of Oakley and continues to the Eutterfield Peaks in the Oquirrh Hountains.

As it proceeds southwesterli, the co =lle_ ‘ there is no

C1
£3
£1"
'3.
O
'0
{D
13
U}
S
'0
I...)
‘J
(-4O
F‘
r
‘<1
(I)
0

natural barrier. Hoaever, the location of the Shoshcni to the east of
Great Salt La.e and around present Salt Lake City as opposed to the loca«
tion of the Ute to the south around Utah Lake and Provo seems to indicate
a sufficiently definite boundary to justify the division line being placed
where it is. In other‘w0rds, the evidence indicates a boundary but the
placement thereof becomes a matter of some speculation. as feel that the
placement made is logical.

The western boundary can he called a nature carrier in that it

Q

follows the peaks of the mountains and the edge of the Sgvier desert
to Kotch Peak in the House Range of Mountains and along the crest of
those mountains to the south end of Sevier Lake.

The Southern line running from the south end of Sevier Lake to Rt.
Terrel in the Easatch hountains is not a natural barrier. The evidence
indicates a distinction between the people on the two sides of the line
but the breaking point is nothing more than a drainage area divide. The
people WLO traveled through the country reported that after crossing
“the rim? as it was called, they r t Paiute Indians. The placement

‘ \ ‘.3 _. I ‘I 0
problem here is the same as it was to the north in Provo and American

allcrs. There is a division of peoples “ere out the line can be placed

+ QDM -‘I .. . ' ‘I. ._
at oillerent points. the Commission that the

line as found herein is

he cannot refuse to place a

boundary because it is possible that it might vary a

few miles one way

7’ W
It would seen that

H.-.
C1

or another. reasonably definable boundary" would
not be defeated by a relatively small variance in one direction or another
so long as the evidence justifies a boundary within that area.

The eastern boundary is again a relatively natural barrier running
from Mt. Terrel to ':r.'asatch Peak and to Seeley Iviountain through the Wasatch
Plateau and on in a northeesterly direction along the summit of the
eastern range of the Kasatch Mountains to where it intersects with the

-1 ‘T

line of Uintah

From there it iollows the western line of the reservation to the point of

‘N

beginning.

according to the allegations of the petition and statements of

+9

plainti fs‘ counsel (Trans. p. 30?) liability of the defendant is based

‘O

ne Indians were removed from

(F

upon alternative theories. One is that

their aboriginal lands as a result of the 1865 unratified treaty and
placed upon the Uintah Reservation.
The other thecry'is that the Indians were deprived of their lands

when the defendant disposed of oart to settlers and others under the

C1

5 ' ‘ ‘ 0 I Q 9 o -I ‘I A ‘l
puolic land laws of the 'nitec states and converted parts oi the area to

its can use. Such deorivation necessarilv extended over a period of

Q to ‘Q o ‘.' . a _.._ A ‘I
many years and tne plaintiffs at the hearing were not prepared

to show all disoosition of lands hv defendant but did show disnosi+4

}...J

'5 ‘an H - 1 j‘ Q9 \‘ -I 
a suostantia described in sinoing no. 3 and it

Reservation near lndian head Summit at its southwest corner.

" '. .'
~*~E:~:;*;-'_;.'_,=.-.2.“

'1

as the interlocutory determination of liability was concerned, the
showing of such disposition y plaintiff ‘as sufficient, leaving to

1‘ " ‘

4-‘ " ‘ -5-'4" ' :-... ,.. .-. .-.
the plaintil-s tne rirht to offer proof a a later hearin

E:

position of lands within the area described in Finding No. should the

\.-)

Commission hold defendant liable.

we, therefore, are of the opinion, and so hold, that the defendant
is liable to plaintiffs for the value of such part of the lands within
the area described in Finding No. 3 as the plaintiffs may hereafter
prove to have been disposed of or converted to its own use by defendant,
the time of such deprivation to be determined.when the proof thereof has
been submitted. Inasmuch as the disposition of said lands or the taking

thereof byddefendant are undoubtedly matters of record, it is su

01}

O‘!
m
(l0
Q\

that counsel make a serious effort to agree upon the acreage of tne lands
disposed of by defendant and those retained by it and also agree upon an
average value to avoid burdensome detailed ccmnutation of value as of

Q

the date of disposal of each separate tract. See Creek Ration v. United

States. 302 U.S. 620, 522.

 

Concurring:

 
 

