1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 _ . . 562

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE CHOCTAW NATION,

Petitioner,
vs Docket No. 55

mm UNITED STATES or m.1mIcA.,

Defendant.

&m113%1
ornuon _o_r_ ;_r.§1_s_ com-nssxon

Hitt, Chief Commissioner, delitered the opinion of the Commission:
This’ suit is to recover a total o-.e.$753,7o1.l+1 (corrected t_o_

$753,609ohl, See Finding No; 2) alleged to be the aggregate of adminis-*

'trative and agenoy expenses incurred by the defendant,'and improperly

charged to petitioner, in.carrying~out the provisions of what are known

as the Atoka Agreement (30 Stat. #95) and the Supplemental Agreement

(32 Stats 61+1) entered into by‘ the Dawes Commission with, the Choctaw
Nation, the first on.April 23, 1897, and the latter on September 25,
1902, and subsequently properly ratified and approved by the Choctaw
Nation and.by'the Congress of the United States.

Petitioneris complaint is that to induce and persuade petitioner
and its membership to enter into the aforesaid Agreements, the defendant
represented to petitioner and its members throughout the negotiations
that resnlted.in the adoption and ratification of said Agreements, that
said.Agreements contemplated.and provided for the payment of the expenses

herein sued.for by the defendant, and that same were thereafter by the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 554 . , F 553 _

.:_.2 1

defendant improperly taken from petitioner‘s funds, and that the
said tribe should be reimbursed therefor. t

The defendant urged in a motion for su.mm.ry judgment in the
instant case that a previous decision (91 Ct. 01s. 3220) was res
Judicata of the instant case. The Commission overnzled this motion,
but same is ‘being urged in the defendant*s answer to the merits as a
defense to the action, A

In petitioner's response to defendant‘s motion for summary Judgment
it is _stated with reference to the decision relied upon by the defendant
as being resjudicata "that the-‘parties (in the former and -in the instant
cases) are thejsame and the subject. matter is__._the same; since petitioner
is again seeking restitution of its funds spent by thepdefendant for the
purposes alleged in this case,” which. are;-~the same as in the former case;
and upon the trial on the merits petitioner offered in_ evidence the items
of alleged wrmful expenditures from petitioner*s funds constituting the
total of $753,6O9.1#l, and stated that all of same were sued for in the
former case. It was pointed out_that additional amounts aggregating
$265,6O5993 were also sued for in the former case but were omitted in
the instant case.

Petitionermalces the contention that provisions (3) and (5) of
Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act creates’ in petitioner a

new cause of action which did not exist at the time of the previous

_ litigation and that therefore the decision in the previous litigation

is not res judioata of the instant case.

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 .,--i 3 -- 564

4 For the reasons hereafter stated, we are of the opinion that the p
previous decision is res judicata of the_instant case and that we have
no jurisdiction to hear and determine the claims herein asserted.
That the defense of res judicata is available, where applicable,
has previously been held by this Comission and by the Court of Claims
in the cases of Western (Old Settler) Cherokee Indians and the Eastern
(Emigrant) Cherokee Indians vs. United States, Dockets Nos. 3 and 5 of
this Commission, an Appeals Dockets Nos.-2 and 3eof the Court of Claims.
lln the instant case petitioner sued, as hereinbefore set out, for
the same items of expense.as sued for in the previous case, alleging same

had been improperly charged to it and should be refunded, as alleged in

..the_previous case. tPetitioner'based its claim upon the same allegations

as to representations and preliminary proposals made by the Dawes Commission as inducing the petitioner to believe that the expenses as sued
for would be borne by the defendant, as in the previous case; and that
but for such representations and such understanding of the meaning of the
provisions oi the Agreements, the petitioner,would not have entered into
such Agreements.

The trial record in the Court of Claims case shows that the propositions submitted by the Danes Commission, as introduced in evidence in
the instant case, were called to the attention of that Court, and the
Court's attention was directed to the negotiations leading up to the

treaties.

The representations of the Danes Commission were urged in the Motion

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 553 565

for How Trial filed in the Court of ‘claims, and of the provisions in
the Agreements as to expenses, and of petitioner's lulderstandingof
same.

Notwithstanding the aforesaid pleadings, evidence, argument in
original briefs’ and in‘ Motion for Rehearing, the court, in’ its decision;

held that defendant was not obligated to bear the elzpenditures in question.

I

The decision of the Court of Claims denying the right of the pe;

‘titioner to recover in a slit for the‘ sameitems that are urged in‘ the

instant case, and based on the same contentions as are urged in the

"instant case, show that the Court recognized that the language used in’

the Agreements as to expenses was not entirely clear and certain--that
the intentions of the parties to these Agreements could not be determined
solely from the language used therein—--but that extraneous matters had to
be taken into consideration, and were taken into consideration, "in determining the meaning of the contract provisionss

‘It is unnecessary to cite authority, for the principle of law is well recognized, that in considering plea of; res-"judicata the petitioner
will not be permitted to relitigate issues in order to secu.re.consideration of evidence that could have been introduced in a prior lawsuit.
It" would seem that under the pleadings in the prior case, and the view--*
jpointiof the Court withreference to the need to give consideration to '
evidence other than the language of the Agreements themselves in order
to determine its meaning, that all the evidence introduced inthe instant

case could have been introduced in the prior litigation. (12 Amer. Juris.1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 s- - - 566

f...5...

rcontracts,-‘Pars. 21+2,7'21l'{, 21+9).,

"From theabove,.:t.it seems clear that the claims as'asseIi'ted. in
the instant case have been previously considered and adjudicated on?
their merits, and that-the petitioner.is not in position to contend
that it  a new cause of actionor has not had its day in Court on
the same canse, (Western and Eastern Cherokee vs. U, S." oases, Court

. {W

of Claims Appeals Dockets Nos. 2 and 3).,

.?:3ut evenif petitioner is not precluded by the former adjudication,
we are nevertheless of opinion- thatit is not entitled to recovernpon

the merits as presented in the_ instant case.,

It is petitioner's contention that the provision in the Atoka
Agreement to the effect that ‘all the lands” would be allotted so as
to give each member a fair and equitable share therein and that the
United States should put each allottee in possession of his allotment
and remove all persons therefrom objectionable to the allottee, had
the effect, when by the Supplemental Agreement all the land of the

Indians {was not allotted,---bu_t only a portion--of obligating the dean

 

fondant to put allottees in possession of all their “estate, '9 both as

to lands allotted and otherwise, without expense to them. _The only

 j-1

 

provision with reference to expenses to be assumed by defendant is
the one in the Atokn Agreement, and neither in that Agreement, nor in
the Supplemental Agreement, was there any specific agreement to the
effect that the defendant would assume and pay the expenses incident

to the management, control," and disposition of the unallotted lands,

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 557

7_“6 _

which by the terms of the Agreements were not to be allotted.
Petitioner, in its Reply Brief, pp. 2 and 3, in making objection
ate the Defendant's Requested Finding No. 10, says:

_ .‘Petitioner does not, and has not, claimed there
is anything in the agreements that contemplates that
defendant'would place the tribal membership in.pose
session of the respective interests in the estate with»
ont_cost to them."

And the petitioner continues:

fihat contention was disposed of once and for all _
by the Court of Claims in K-260 (91 Ct. Cls. 320). * * *
We do not seek to relitigate that issue.” But, “We say
that when the tribes and their memberships entered into‘
the agreements, they believed them 33 contain such pro-_

gisionso“ CUnderscoring supplied.)

 

The oral evidence does not, in the opinion of this Commission,
support petitioner's contention that the Choctaw people, at the time
‘of making these.Agreements, had held out to them.as inducement for the
making of said Agreements, or that they had reason to believe as to
expenses, anything other than that they would be put in possession of
their allotments free of expenses to themselves,

.A witness whose testimony is contended as indioating.a belief at
the time these treaties were executed that the Government was obligating
itself to hear the expenses complained about, was Ben E. COlDU£u, a
Chickasaw Indian, who was one of the representatives of that Nation in
negotiating its treaty. He testified.

“It is my understanding the Government would take
care of all the expense in surveying the land, making

the rolls, and allotting the lands, and putting the
pallottees in peaceahle possession of their property."

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 553

.7.

“7The witness quoted no promise of the defendant inducing such

belief. i

Ehereafter, he was questionedvmore in detail.with reference to‘
the cost of putting Indians in possession of their allotments, and:1
stated that .sametuou.ld have been so expensive'thatit couldn't have
been done eipgpt by the Government;- (Mcd. R. p; 29). I

ems witness admitted (page 32) that there was he discussion of

pexpense in connection.with the negotiations of the Supplemental.Agreement; and also, that at the time this Agreement was negotiated, the‘
Indians had their own attorney present.

The witness Wright, for the petitioner; said about the mtter of

expenses:
“I can only state my impression. iAnd the impression‘
I gathered from the general opinions, and that was that
we were to be at no expense at allo“
i’The witness quoted no promise of the defendant inducing*suck.e

belief.

He later admitted that he had gone all later years without knowledge
that the Government had not borne all expenses until he was called as a
witness in this case. (McA. 3. pp. 39-H1).

.A witness, D. C. M Curtain, was a man 77 years of age, a son of
Green.McCurtain (who waslthe Chief of the Choctaws rrom 1896 to 1898;
and from 1902 until 1910 or 1911) and a nephew of Jack Mccurtain and of
Edwin Mccurtain, (also Chiefs of the Choctaws) a graduate of Kemper

Military Academy of Booneville, Missouri, and a former student of

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 G I ' G 569'
- _ 8 _

Roanoke College at_Salem,_Virginia, and of the University;of‘Missouri, and also of George Washington'University of Washington,jD,G.g
a former County Attorney, County Judge,_and District Judge,private
isecretary for his father from 1898 to l900, and in the office of
the attorney for_the Choctaw Nation in l90O and 1901, and a delegate
of the tribe to Washington.inncompany'with the Commissioners representing the tribe at the time of the negotiation of the Supplemental
Mmagreement. This witness was asked the.question as to what uas his‘,
“understanding and the understanding of those there'at that time as.
to the provisions of that ngreement_with respect to-the costs of
';p1acing individual allottees in,possession of their allotments."
The witness answered: “It was the understanding by everybody, both,
the representatives of the Government and of the tribe, that the
provisions in the Atoka Agreement to the effect that those expenses
should.be borne by the Governments; That was accepted and understood
with the Government and by everybody.”

“Q, You are speaking specifically of the expenses
concerning allotments?“ e

“As I think it also covered the expenses of sale I
2 of town lotso“

”Qp As to the matter of costs, when you say placing
the individual allottees in possession of his
.allotment, do you include the entire allotment
program?”

FA. Yes, sir.”

“cu The entire expenses of the Government program
proposed to the Indians by the Dawes Commission
was to be borne by the_Federal Government?“

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 553 g i 570

“A. Yes, sir.“

Ehen asked as to what he and the other members of the tribe
understood by that provision of the Agreement providing that the
United States would bear "the expenses of surveying and plotting
the lands and town sites, or for grading, appraising and allotting
the lands, or.:for appraising and disposing of the town’ lots, as
herein provided," the witness answered: -“I don't think I could‘
amplify on the language itself, that they should bear’ en the expenses of allotment, survey and appraisement, etc." (Mad. 3. PP. 5.
6977): '

Ehe witness said there was no discussion of expenses in connection with the submission of the Supplemental Agreement. The
witness testified that the best minds of the two tribes were
actively engaged in the campaign dealing with the Supplemental
Agreement, the real issue being whether the tribes would ‘accept
the Government's proposal to put the members on allotted tracts
or whether they should continue communal ownership--the mattereof
expenses not being discussed, The witness testified that the atoka

Agreement, when submitted to the popular vote of the Choctawvlndians,

was overwhelmingly adopted.

As a final question, the witness was asked if he understood the "

provisions with reference to expenses herein previously quoted as
including ‘the clerical hire and administrative help and all of the

million duties in administering the estate of the volume of these

1 Ind. Cl. comm. 553 A 571

..'..._10...

two tribes." He said "Yes."

Other witnesses gave-substantially the same‘ testimony as the
ones quoted. alt is significant that not.-a_:.witness testified toss."
statement of any representative of the Government in reference to
the matter of expenses. The strongest that any witne-sswould say
was whathis understanding was-of what .the defendant would do in
the way of ‘bearing expenses.

It is not thought by the Commission that the testimony of the
witnesses shows any sufficient basis for the belief oftthe Indians,
or such of them as may have  that belief, that the defendant was
promising, or by thesngreement entered, was agreeing to bear the
expenses sued for; certainly, _it his not sufficient to discharge the
‘burden assumed by petitioner necessary to vary the written Agreements as already construed by-the previous litigation.

The only item sued for which suggests the possibility of having
been incurred in. connection with the allotments is the item forpay
of Indian police in the amount of, $8,591.?’-}..; However, there is
nothing in the record to show that this expense was incurred_ in

connection with the placing -‘oi allottees in possession of their

allotments and their protection in such possession,--which is

certainly the burden of the petitioner to establish if it is contended.

that this was an expense incurred in connection with saidallotments.
Moreover, the Findings of Fact as to such item by the Court of Claims

(Finding No. 10) found that these expenses were incurred in the years

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 553 _ ‘572

1910 to 1913, inclusive, presumably long after allottees had been
put in.possession.

Another item for the expenses of sale of town.lots in the amount
of $15,U57.32'uas found by the Court of Claims in the previous litigation to have been expenses incurred as to town lots not referred to
in the.Atoka Agreement, and therefore, the provision of that Agreement
is not applicable thereto and same was denied and the defendant.held
not liable therefor. (Deft's. Ex. No. 4, pp. 59, 60, 61.)

In.any event, the petitioner has not shown that the above items,
or any other items sued for, were incurred in connection with any
matters, the expenses of‘whidh were assumed by the defendant;1mmn has
petitioner shown any representations on the part of the defendant that
it would.bear‘any of the expenses for which suit is brought, nor has
petitioner shown.any reasonable basis for it, or any of its members
believing, if they did, that the defendant was to bear the expenses
complained of.

From whatihas been said, it follows that the petition must be
dismissed. t

It is so ordered.

-Commissioners 0'Marr and Holt concur in the above opinion.

June 11, 1951.

