.. .-_  ... . --.-..  ..._.  ...-..._.............'....._.

1 Ind. c1. Comm; 358  L V ‘ 358

BEFORE ran Itnxnn ClAIMS commission

01333 F. THCMPSOE, HILLIAH FULLER,
Hraarar A. EELLAS, £3333 rznnzl,
MnnUrL coaaovs, nsozzr notsrnrnr,
BOYD sinarrsror, SaT¥E3 re 3. GALAC,
W. G. WALKER, Litazror 352031;“
iniirlr M*GE3EEAD ans inraea assess,

_Petitioners, ,
vs. Docket No. 31

TEE UNITED STATES OF EEERICR,

F4
5?}
U
I""'|
E:
I"!
U

E}
C7
tr—
t-I
F-'1
lnj
E5
.231
3*! c‘
:;‘'n

I‘

\./Kn/Nu/\../\u—’\-/‘-/‘nu/N./\../\H/Nu/\~/\../\../\—#

Ernest L, Wilkinson and John W; Preston,
with whom were Erancis M. Gooéwin,
Freéeric A. Baker, Sam Clammer, Paul M.
Niebell and John W. Preston, Jr.,
Attorneys for petitioners.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom Was.A. Devitt
Vanech, Assistant Attorney General,

' .Attorneys forégefendant.
t:C

}--I

’) U1
------8
(.0
()1
CD

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact in the aboveentitlei cause:
1. Jurisdiction is claimed for the cause of action asserteé

under the provisions of section 2 or tne Indian Claims Commission

not, wnicn said section reads as follows:

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 353 C’ ’ 359

_ 2 ’Sec, 2. The Commission shall hear and determine the
following claims against the'United States on behalf of
any'Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of
American Indians residing-uithin the territorial.limits
of the United States or ;lasha:j(l) claims in law or _
,equity arising under the Constitution, laws, treaties of
the United States, and Executive orders of the President;
(2) all other claims in law or equity, including those
sounding in tort, with respect to which the claimant would
have been entitled to sue in a court of the United States
if the United States was subject to suit; (3) claims which
would result if the treaties, contracts, and agreements
between the claimant and the United States were revised on
the ground of fraud, duress, unconscionable consideration,
mutual or unilateral mistake, whether of law or fact, or

’ any other ground cognizable by a court of equity; (E) claims
arising from the taking by the United States, whether as the

result of a treaty of cession or otherwise, of lands owned
3:  -.-..-3 g-V1, Kw; -I-1n(3  1-r~ri+"Inr'\'.*1+ +Tv1C) -uh-tn-nC:nv\+' -pr'\'rV 0110}!

‘L}...L\..t~..... I.-J ‘paw l....4.—.‘.\.I In u...-\..:uA.-.0 U4-.---I -£J1_;.t_.....a.u-+-u ... -1.... u.;\..-sap...
.6.

lands of compensation agreed to by the claimant; and (5)
claims based upon fair and honorable dealings that are not
recognized by any existing rule of law or equity, No claim
accruing after the date of the approval of this Act shall be
considered by the Commission.

‘2. The claim is filed by individuals "as.members of, and as
representativog of, and on relation of the Indians of California,
Petitioners.“ The Indians of California are alleged to be an identi-r
fiable group of Indians composed of all Indians who were residing in
the State of California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants now
living, as set forth by the act of hay 18, 1928 (35 Stat, 602), and as
thereafter amended.

3. The claim asserted is based on the alleged ownership of

lands owned, used, occugied and possessed, in the accustomed Indian

manner, by the Indians of California and (1) taken and sold for

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 358“ ' 350

....3....
defendantis own account and (2) taken and appropriated for defend»
ant‘s_own use without compensation to petitioners therefor,

H. Unless otherwise indicated, the term "California Indians,”
as used in these findings of fact, shall nean these Indians, and.
their descendants, who have inhabited the territory now known as the
State of California from tine imnemerial.

5.- Prior to the treaty of Guadalupe Eidalgo, proclaimed on the
Uth day of July, l8h8, 9 Stat. 922, the California Indians inhabited thé
principal part of the State of California, and during the time that said
area was under the dominion of the Kingdom of Spain and the Republic of
Mexico.

6. That the Ca ifornia Indians during that period and for many
years after July U, l8¥8, comprised a number of tribes, nations, bands,
and rancherias or villages. Each group occupied a definite part of the
area of the state.

7. After the cession of California to the United States hy the
treaty of July M, l8h8, tens of thousands of white people entered the
State, and as a result of this great influx of white people, the Indian

communities were disrupted, many of their memeers killed, and those re—

1

maining, scattered thr uxhout the State, .35 a result of this treatment

-....n

of the California Indians, and the policies of the 7nited_States, grou_

life among them was largelv destroyed, and in some cases, few, if any,

members of the original rrouns survived. The greatest disruption and

C

1 lnd. c1. Comm. 358 361

- h _
‘destruction of group life occurred in the northern area of the State,
However, the influx of white people and governmental policy was felt
throughout the State and had the same effect upon all of the Indian
groups that it had in the northern section.

.8. On September 30, 1850, 9 Stat. Shh, 558, the Congress appropriated the sum of $25,060 “to enable the President to hold treaties
with the various Indian tribes in the State of California." Pursuant
to this.Act the President named three commissioners to negotiate
treaties with said tribes, and as a result of the efforts of the
conmissioners, between the 19th day of March, l85l and the 7th day of

January, 1852, eig_

_teen treaties were consummated between 133 tribes, _
nations, and bands of California Indians, according to the number of
groups indicated in the treaties. It is probable, however, that in

spite of the 139 signatories to these treaties they were not made with
more than about 56 actual tribes, nations, or bands,

By these treaties those Indian groups relinquished and quit—

claimed to the United States all their right, title, claim or interest
they may'haNe had to any lands within the limits of the State of California, but there was set aside or reserved an area of land described in each
treaty, to be held for the permanent occupancy of the tribes, nations

and bands signing the treaty,

These eighteen treaties were submitted to the Senate of the

United Sgetes by the President for ratification on June l, 1852, and

g.‘ ;.‘-.'...‘l4

J. Ind. c1. Comm. 358 ~ 355

_ 5 _

after the submission, the Senate, on the 28th day of June, 1852,
refused to ad?ise and consent to the ratification of each and all of
said treaties, (See IV_Kappler lO8l-1128). Said treaties have’never
been ratified, -' . ? ‘ ‘

9. On Marc}: 3, 1551, 9 Stat. 631«-6313., the Congress passed an not
entitled “an Act to ascertain and settle land claims in the State of
California." By the provisions of this Act every person (and this inr
eluded Indians) claiming lands in California was required to submit
evidence, before a Commission appointed for that purpose, to sustain
his claim, and it was further provided that all lands, the claims to
which shall not have been presented to the commissioners within twee
years after the date of the.£ct, shall be deemed, held and considered
as a part of the public domain of the United States. That none of the
individual California Indians and none of the tribes, nations, bands or
rancherias of California lndians presented or made claims to lands under
the provisions of said not and whatever lands the California Indians were
entitled to became part of the public domain.

‘lOa On hay 18, 1928, 35 Stat. 602, the Congress passed an Act
permitting the "Ind'ans of California" to sue the United States for all

P!

-1 nhatso var nature tne ”lnaians of oalifornia”.may have against

19

O
I...)
(‘J
I»-Ja
U
U}
0

L.)
}—J|
cf0

rd States by reason of lands taken from then by the United states

-1

Without compensation, or :or the failure or refusal of the United States

4. u

b0 compensate them for their interest in lands in said State, which tne

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 358 ' 353

...5...

lUnited States appropriated to its own purposes without the consent of

said Indians,
Said not further provided that “for the purposes of this Act the

Indians of California shall be defined to be all Indians who were residing in the State of California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants
snow living in said State.“ A suit was brought as provided by said not
and resulted in a.judgnent on December 3, lghh, in favor of the "Indians
of California." (102 C. Cls. 837—8).

11. Said Act of'May 18, 1928 contained this provision:

"Sec. 7. For the purpose of determining who are
entitled to be enrolled as Indians of California, as
provided in section 1 hereof, the Secretary of the
Interior, under such rules and regulations as he may
prescribe, shall cause a roll to be made of persons
entitled to enrollment. .$ny person claiming to be
entitled to enrollment may within two years after the
approval of this Act,.nahe an application in writing
to the Secretary of the Interior for enrollment. at
any time within three years of the approval of this
not the Secretary shall have the right to alter and
revise the roll, at the expiration of which time said
roll shall be closed for a1} purposes and thereafter
no additional names shall be added thereto: Provided,
That the Secretary of the Intori r, under uch rules 1
and regulations as he may prescribe, shall also cause
to be made, within the specified time herein, a roll
of all Indians in California other than Indians that
come within the provisions of section 1 of this act.”

Said Section 7 was amended by the Act of April 29, 1930, E6 Stat. 259,
which merely extended the time for making applications for enrollment

to May 18, 1932, and gave the Secretary of the Interior untillhay 18,

1933, within which to alter or revise the roll of the Indians of

California.

1 Ind. 01. Comm. 358 364

- 7 _

Pursuant to the aforesaid provisions of section 7, as amended, a
roll of the Indians of California was prepared containing some 20,000
enrollees and the Sgcretary of the Interior approved said roll on
hay 16, 1933. It was these enrolled Indians for when the judgment
was obtained on December M, lghn, Pursuant to the rules and regulations
of the Secretary of the Interior, the tribal or band origin of each ena
rollee was sh an on such roll.

After said judgment was rendered, and on June 30, l9hS, 62 Stato ll66,
said section 7 was again amended, by which the names of all persons who
had died sinee May 18, 1928, were removed from said roll and there was
added thereto the names of children of enrollees, and the descendants
of such children, lining on June 30, 1938, born since Kay 18, 1928.

And said section, as amended as aforesaid, was further amended on
May'2U, 1950 (chap. 195, Public Law 52h, 81st Cong. 2nd session) by

which the Secretary of the Interior was directed to revise the roll

E‘?
=4
F4
O\
Q
F4
K!)
\_)~1
KN
0'
-C
“
{J
F-14
F:-2.1
‘-10
{Z5
0’?
rt.
:3
( \
u
( J
C?‘
O
:3
C)
..J
('7
U1
0
H:
F"!
33
D4
I.-..-lo
g
U1
:3
0
C1’

approved by him onli

Q

oligiole for enrollment under the former acts, and who were living on
May 21;, 1950, all of v;'no:1 a1:.st be desccsndants of Indians residing in
California a June 1, 1852..

12. Until passage of the said jurisdictional act of l9lS hereinabove referred to, all proposed legislation authorising snit'en behalf

of the California Indians was in behalf of tribes or bands in said

state,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358 ‘ C 365‘

_ g _
13. At the time of the passage of said jurisdictional act of
May 18, 1928, there was not, and there is not now, end never has been,

a nation, tribe or band of Indians known or identified as the "Indians

-of California."”3 ' ‘ ‘ ' ' '

1U. ,at the time of the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, July H, l8MS,

and for many years thereafter, there were uguards of 200 separate tribes,

rbands, nations and rancherias of California Indians located in said State,

!

who used, possessed and occupied definite areas of land therein until disbursed by or through the advent of the white man. The "Indians of Califor'nia" as defined in and named as petitioners in the amended petition herein,

were never, and are not a n, a single group but consist of members, or

descendants of members, of former separate and independent groups, known

gas tribes, nations, bands or rancherias, of California Indians, and have

no common claim,

Petitioners hare never as a single group or entity owned, used and
occupied any definable area of land in said state.

15. The legislative history of the passage of the Indian Claims
Conaission Act does not support the contention that it was knowingly intended to authorize the assertion of a claim Dy the Indians of Califor—

nia as an identifiaole groue having a connon or group claim.

December 15, 1950_

