 

7 Ind, Cl. Com, 721 721

BEFOE TI-IE INDIE} CI.-.5131-ES COE"£'*ESSIO:\.’

P 9 U\.IU-F"'1'F" :Awnnn lNDI$W TRIBE OF OKleH Ma,
consisting of the four confederated bands of Pawnee Indians,
namely: Chaui or Grand Pawnee,

. Kitkehahki_or Republican Pawnee,
Pitahauerat or Tappage Pawnee,
and Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pawnee,

Claimant,

v. Docket No. 10

UNITED stares,

\_,J\_,.I\._/\.../‘~../'\~./\-;./5~_/\.u/\.w/\_./\_./\n./M_/\u'/

Defendant.
Decided: June 26, 1959

OPTNION AS TO ADMISSIBILITY or PETITIONER'S
EXHIBITS 22h, 225, ADD 226 AND AS TO

PETITIONER'S MOTION TO STRIKE FILED MAY 6, 1959

Holt,-Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

_ . ‘ _,_,, i\ _, 2
During the course of the hearings on valuation held in the aboveentitled matter in Omaha, Nebraska, on April 22, 1959, petitioner offered
in evidence two graphs and “an economic analysis" report prepared by’

Mr. JohnR.Houser. The graphs and report were marked petitioner‘s '
exhibits 22h, 225, and 22$, for identification, it the hearing defendant
objeeted to their admission in evidence and the Commission took the
question of the admissibility of petitioner's exhibits 22h, 225, and 226
under advisement with instructions to the parties to brief the questions
involved. 2 2

Petitionerls exhibit 226 is a determination by Hr. John R. Houser

p . V 9 ‘ 0 Q U Q . C
O; the value of the lands in question based on an economic statistical

.....-.--........—

7 Ind. c1. Com. 721 ' i - 722

analysis of certain factual data which had been assembled by two real
estate men, E. B. Horton, Jr., and T. C. Hitchings, Jr. and introduced

into evidence in this case. Mr. Houser's method of determining the land

' values involved was necessary, he stated, because the recognized

approaches of expert land appraisers to the problem of evaluating land
at an early date, where no actual.market existed for the land, are, in
his opinion, unsatisfactory and result merely in an “educated guess“
as to the value.

The Commission has thoroughly examined Mr. Houser’s report (Exhibit
226) and the graphs (Exhibits 22h and 225), which are enlargements of
the two graphs following page 9 of his report, and finds that his novel,!
theoretical method of determining land value is unacceptable as a basis
upon which this Commission could base its conclusions of value of the
lands in question. The defendant's objections to the admissibility of
petitionerls Exhibits 22h, 225 and 226 are sustained, and the exhibits 
will not be admitted in evidence.ii it

This Commission is reluctant to exclude evidence of value presented
by the parties’ experts'nhere, even though the theories upon which their_
conclusions of land value are unacceptable, there is data which can aid
the Commission in reaching its ultimate determination. But in the case
of petitioner‘s exhibits 22h, 225, and 226 there is no factual data which
can be considered in valuing the Pawnee lands. iSuch data is elsewhere
in evidence in various documents including those prepared by petitioner's
witnesses, Messrs. Horton and Hitchings. So the exclusion of exhibits

225; 225 and 226 from evidence will in no way deprive the Commission.of

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 721 . 723

the valuable data assembled by petitioner which bears on the question of
the value of the Pawnee lands.
Hr. Houser's report is merely a series of mathematical and statistical

computations which have no judicially accepted basis for valuing land.

It is, by his own admission, a theoretical approach to the problem by

the application of various economic principles. On its face the report

of Mr. Houser has failed to take into consideration the recognized

factors which bear on market value, as set forth by the courts and this .
Commission. Otoe and Missouria Tribe of Indians v. The United States of

.America, l3l C. Cls. S93; Nooksack Tribe of Indians v. The United States

 

of America, 6 Ind. Cl. Com. 5783 Osage Nation of Indians v; The United

 

States of.America, 3 Ind. Cl. Com. 217.

His strong reliance on U. S. Census figures as to the value of
lands places his entire report on weak ground, and the further application

of factors based on assumption and speculation render his ultimate conclusions valueless in arriving at a determination of the value of the
Pawnee lands. As we stated in The Snake or Piute Indians of the Former I

Malheur Reservation in Oregon v. United States of.America, 7 Ind. Cl.

 

C0m- 526, 569, "such mathematical processes cannot provide a judicially
acceptable basis for arriving at the fair market value . . . ascertainment of value in cases of this type cannot be made by such artificial
rules.i The problem of evaluating land on the frontier of the United

States . . . is not subject to solution by application of formulas and

equations."

. ........g ..u-..—ooau-- n -.

7 End. Cl. Com. 721 V 72h

Petitioner's motion to strike the opinion and report of John
I-iuehl‘oier and iafilliam 3. Murray is denied. While the Commission recognizes that the reports may be deficient in certain respects and
based in part on methods rejected by the courts and this Commission,
it appears that both reports contain much valuable data which the

Commission may properly consider in this case. The Commission will of

course exclude from consideration all objectionable aspects of the

reports.
Wm. M. Holt
—— 
Associate Commissioner

I concur:“ “ '

 E; Witt

 

Chief_Commissioner

