1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358

BE?

‘:“ . .. F. ‘ I 1"” ""1
CLYDE F. TEOMPSCN, ¥ILL?em :ULLn3,
E ”' 133-4: 331.1 Ana B3'.n.|..J:':I.I...S—.  -E-.'.. 
M£KUdn COR30?£. §3CHZE EoVEJEE£E,

'7' "-5 '_‘1 _-D -"' 1 .‘_ '.'I_ " "'7',-"_'d’ —-. . : ' ‘I;
L140 2 I) ..-aé...1?-LE1-:9 L-’L‘.'-‘Q.’ .;.=:.3.‘.'. .'P...-- _-.o e.-. f.u‘.£—.:; U
is Go WALKER, LLTRLECE WCRSELL,
FR£§KI3 MCOREEE§7 ani $33363 “P3?FAi
members, and as to 'regr:sentatires
of, and on the relation of tne
LHDEAES OF CnLIFOEEZi,

Petitioners,
vso
TEE UEITED srsrss OF snrsrnn,
Defendant.
Ernest L,

with whom were Franci
Frederick no Baker,

9

S

3;‘?

A

bf

s.../\..../‘-...-'~.....v' -....o"-..../ \.../ \./ x...-' ‘H...’ \....I \...J'\....,I\...l\.....l\....,I\...../

I
‘I

366

OnE TEE IEDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSiON

Docket No, 31

7'1
‘-3

Niebell and John We Preston, Jr.,
Attorneys for the Petitioners.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
Vanech,.nssistant Attorney General,
n torneys for the Defeniant.

J

43.3

Sam Clammer, Paul ha

Wilkinson and John W. Preston,
Gooeh

\.-ut.s'..

P

Devitt

CPIEIOE OF TEL COHEISSIOQ

 

Witt, Chief Commissioner,
Tne amenied petition in this ca

_e I

members of, and on relation of t

.A motion.of the defendant was filed

l

4.

P

{in

I‘

delivered

“I
_L.

3.

gri :1 .

nu
. .
'N-..-:

_:'I
.:.O

he Indian Claims Commission note

‘L uSCi

und that the plaintiff was not wish an iientifiable

I737,-._

-La;

3.U

ismissal on he
group as was

e Commission

..._ -.. .-——- -1------—  ' "“"'

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 ’   e 357

_ 2 H

overruled said motion on the ground that important issues of fact were
involved in said question which should only be determined when raised
by appropriate pleadings and after hearing upon the issues of fact so
raised.

Thereafter the defendant filed an answer to the amended petition
on the issue of capacity of plaintiffs to maintain the action. Trial
was had on that issue only.

The action is a representative one brought by individual plaintiffs
in their behalf and on behalf of the "Indians of California," who are

alleged to constitute an identifiable group of Indians composed of all

Indians who were residing in the State of California on June 1, l8§2,

and their descendants now living, as set forth by the act of May 18,

1928 (H5 Stat. 602), as amended by the acts of -pril 29, 1930 (M6 Stat.
259), and June 30, igus (Public No. s52, 80th Congress, End sess,).

The petition alleges that said group “includes the descendants of members
of what have sometimes been loosely described as tribes, bands, rancherias, and villages of Indians of California, and other individual
Indians, who resided in California at the time of the promulgation of

the Treaty of Guadalupe Eidalgo in lSM8 (9 Stat. 922s).” Petitioners
also allege that members of the group who were born prior to May 18,

1928, were enrolled as Indians of California by direction of the act

were born subsequent to hay l8, 1923, are to be enrolled by direction

J. Ind. c1. Comm. 358 368 '

-3...

of the act of Congress approved June 30, 19MB, (Public Law No. 852,
End Sess., 80th Congress).

Petitioners further allege that the "Indians of California” have
no tribal organization recognized by the Secretary of the Interior with
authority to represent such identifiable gron 9

Petitioners allege that suit is instituted by virtue of authority
contained in properly executed and approved contracta

Petitioners allege that the "Indians of California" have been known
and recognized as an identifiable group and legal entity by adminis»
trative and legislative action of defendant including; without limit»
atien, the act of May 18, 1928 (145 stat. See), as amended by bhe acts
of April 29, 1930 (#6 stat. 259), April 25, 1915 (59 Stat. 77, 91+),
and by the acts of July 1, 10% (60 ‘Stat. 31%8, 3691), .;tu.;.;,-tst 13, 191:6
(60 Stat. IOH9) conmonly'knoun as the Indian Claims Commission.Act,
and June 30, 19us (Public Law 2352, 2nd Sess., 80th Congress.) That

they constitute an identifiable group, as contemplated by the Indian

Claims Commission.Aot, and as such are authorized to maintain the cause‘

;, of action sued on herein before the Indian Claims Commission,

The defendant in its answer denies the allegations of plaintiffs
as hereinabove set out, and alleges that the “Indians of California"
are not now, nor have they ever been, a "tribe, band, or other identim
fiable group of nnerican Indians” within the meaning and intent of
section 8 of the act of nngzst l3, 1926 (60 Stats lO§9)a

H .C’ 4''‘! 1:‘ V-8 .''v'- .1'vR'- 1-1 -trh .9 v-. ‘
lhe delondant alleres slat iron ilme lmmCaOT_ul tne Indians located
J3

_l°lnd.nCl,'Cpmm;,358sn_.....- ...-..._.g --...4~-no-as-1‘ V‘-5' "“  '

gun“,

in the present State of California have been recognized by the Geverne

‘ ment of the United States and its agents as being composed of separate

and distinct tribes, bands, rancherias, and villages; and that except

‘_fer the purposes authorized by the act of Congress approved May 18,

1928 (35 Stat. 602), and its amendments——subsequent acts of Congress
relating specifically thereto-~the Government of the United States and
its agents have never recognized the "Indians of California" as one

separate and distinct entity, tribe, band, or identifiable group of

*nmerican Indians; that the Indians of California have no common communal

or group claim against the United States which can be compensated for
in one action.undor the act of August 13, 1936; that if the Indians
located within the State of California have any claim or claims against
_the United States under and by virtue of any of the acts of omission or

commission alleged in the amended petition herein, that said claim or

gclaims must be prosecuted by the individual tribes, bands, rancherias,

or other identifiable groups of Indians whose rights have been denied

S-or destroyed,

,ds heretofore determined by this Commission in its Docket he. 1,
styled The Legal Creek Band vs. The United States, and Docket No. 25,
styled The Creek Freedmen Lssociation vs. The United States, a controlling

‘uestien involved in determining whether or not an‘ nlaintiff can maine
5:: L .

tain the.action asserted is "whether the claimant group can be identified

and that it has a common claim,“ In each of these cases the legislative

history Of the Indian Claims Commission act is reviewed and discussed at

C

. .1--.».n...r. 4.‘. I

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358 370

..5..

considerable length, as are the other questions in determining what
was intended by Congress by the phrase "identifiable groups" In
Docket No. l the Commission held that "the association of the words

‘used to describe claimants who are permitted to assert claims against

.the‘United States, indicates very plainly test it is group claims that

the Commission may hear and determine. * * * If such a group can be

identified and it has a common claim it is, in our opinion, an 'identi~
fiable group of'nmerican Indians‘ within the intent of the act." In
Docket Eo° 25 the Commission used this language "the jurisdiction of
the Commission is limited to tribal, band or common group claims in
which the members of the group have a common interest in the subject"
matter."

In the instant case the recovery sought is for “the acreage owned,
fused, occupied and possessed, in the accustomed Indian manner, by the
Indians of California and (1) taken and sold for its the defendant's)
own account and (2) taken and appropriated for its (defendant's) own .
‘use * * *.“ In other words, the suit is based on the alleged aboriginal
possession of lands in California by the Indians of California.

This Commission has heretofore held, in its Docket E00 10, styled
The Pawnee Indians vs. The'ULited tates, tnat under the authority of

Santa Fe nailroad Ce., 31h U985 33,, and Alcoa Band

   

of Tillamooks vso United

 

HO, and others: that “it is well settled that where a claim is b3SCL

on original lndian title, occupancy of tribe to the exclusion

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 371

-5...

of other tribes; necessary to establish aboriginal possessory title,
is a question of fact to be determined as any other fact.“ .After ’
quoting from the cases above cited and others cited in that opinibn,
this Commission held that "it is clear from these decisions that in
order to establish an original-Indian title, the Indians must prove
their exclusive occupancy and use of a definable area of land."

It is admitted by petitioners that “the question is whether they
have a common claim under (on) which they are suinc" (statement of
.Attorney Goodwin, T_anscript, lst Sec., p. 38). Quoting further from

Attorney Goodwin:

"When you come down to proof, a specific tract for
any one particular band even in one of the best of the

Indian cases of aooriginal possession, you are up against
a pretty hard proposition, and in this case you would be
‘up against an insuperabio proposition in my judgment.”
(Transcript, l, p. Uh)
In Cause No, 37, pending before this Commission, (wherein the Indians
of California are plaintiffs) in plaintiffs‘ answer to defendantis
motion to dismiss and brief in support of answer (p. 31), it is admitted that the Indians of California "must establish their rights
today as one group or not at all.“ (Causes he. 37 and 31 were subu
mitted together.)

0!:

It would seem, therefore, that the plaintiffs have, by their
pleadings and argument, admitted that proof of exclusive occupancy of

definite areas by specific tribes or bands is impossible; that their

relief, if any can be r

-ad, is as a group of all the Indians of California;

. ;. ..J.'.;.''...''....:a.a...:.....a.u- --'--' -r’-'-ml‘

Comm. 358

1 Ind. C1.

_ 7 and that the loss of ownership of specific and definable areas of land
by the separate tribes has, because the Indians have been "scattered to
the four winds and that with possibly one exception no tribes or bands
or groups that can be identified as tribes or bands.or eroups” exist
(quoting Attorney Arnold, an-attorney representing plaintiffs in
Cause No. 3?), creates in the Indians of California, as a group,
under the Indian Claims Connission Act, the cause of action asserted.

Until passage of the Jurisdictional act of 1928, hereinafter
discussed, all proposed legislation authorizing suit on behalf of
California Indians was in behalf of tribes or bands in California
(Trbg V01; 29 Pa 5100

Contention is made by briefs and argument that the Jurisdictional
.Act of l928 and its amendments authorizing suit by the Indians of
California, by virtue of which the Court of Claims rendered judgment

(102 Ct. Clms, 837-39) was such a recognition ard designation as con........ 4.5;. '....4.n:..*.-*i-II~=

stituted the Indians of California an identifiable group as contemplated ‘

by the Indian Claims Cosnissien Leta In this connection, attention is

the fact that the Jurisdictional not of 1028 seecificall"
J ._ J’

provides "that for the purposes of this act (italics upplied) the

   

Indians of California shall be defined to be all Indians the were residé
ing in the State of California on June 1, 1852, and their descendants

now living in said State," t could hardly be made more certain that it

was the intention of the legislation that the term "the Indzans of California"
are identified as all the Indians in Cclifernia in 1852 cat their
descendants onlr for the purnoscs of the act: and in th decision of

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 V 373 .

...8...

the Court of Claims, rendered by reason of said Jurisdictional Act,

the court says:

"There was no Ration, band or tribe known or identified
as the ‘Indians of California.‘ as the defendant so aptly
says, it is a term of art. 'But the jurisdictional act
designates the Indians of California as 'all‘Indians who
were residing in the State of California on June 1, l852
and their descendants now living in said State,‘"

Said Jurisdictional lot, as further described by the Court of

Claims (quoting), "does not in any place set out a legal claim. It

bis the recognition of an equitable claim and is repeatedly so referred

to in the jurisdictional act. * * * the Congress not only has recognized
an equitable claim but has gone still further.’ The amount of recovery
has been almost definitely defined“ * * * .This case does not involve
the payment for land of which the Indians had a cession, or use and
occupancy. * * * The amount awarded would only be in full settlement
of a recognized equitable claim which the Congress has ordered the Court
to ascertain, and, after ascertainment, to enter-a decree.“ It is contended that the legislation constituting said jurisdictional act is
still the law. ‘That is, of course, true but it is merely the law
controlling the judgment rendered thereunder and the funds made available to the Indians by reason thereof.

In the 1928 Jurisdictiona not the Congress recognized the loss
to the particular tribes involved by the failure to rati 3 the 18 una
ratified treaties as an equitable claim of all the Indians in California;

Likewise, the Congress could and did_recognise as an equitable

-- - "' - -1-‘-‘.'
n-. n-..-. inn 1.I\|\¥~.I|—|""“-“'4' """‘“ ‘ '

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 374

....9...

claim of all the Indians of California, as a group, the losses of

many bands and tribes, llt could merge the present claims of each

hand all the separate and distinct tribes and bands and create an

Q

_equitable claim in petitieners,-and the Indian Claims Commission
Act must be held to have done just this in order for petitioners to
maintain the claims asserted. This Commission, as hereinafter set
out, cannot agree that the Indian Claims Commission not does thise

The evident purpose of the act creating the Indian Claims Com» _
mission and providing its jnrisdiction was to enable Indians to act
collectively, as tribes, bands or identifiable groups, in presenting
claims, common to the claimant group, against the United States.

It is essential of course that there must have existed such a
group at the time the claim arose and that there are members of that
group, or descendants of such members, living at the time the claim
is submitted for adjudication. It is not necessary for jurisdictional
purposes to determine who are the individual members of the claimant

group, although such a determination might later be necessary in order

to distribute any award that might be made? The act creating the

Indian Claims Commission nowhere authorizes the submission of a claim

otherwise than.by a tribe, band or identifiable group of Indians, or
by a member thereof as the representative of all its nenbersg
But, the petitioners erg; that Congress intendei that the

phrase “identifiable group" hould and does include the petitioners,

They plead that the petitioners, Indians of California, are those

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 375

...]0...

Indians who were residing in the State of California on June 1, 1852,

and their descendants now living, as set forth by the act of May 18,

1928 (M5 Stat. 602}, as amended by the acts of April 29, 1930 (M6 Stat,

259) and June 3C, 19h8 (62 Stat, 1166), In other words, it is those
Indians who were residing in the State of California on June,1,-1852,
and their descendants living in said State on May 18, 1928, and the
children of those who were enrolled under the act of 1928 and their
descendants living on June 30,il9H8 (62 Stat, 1166), The act of 1928,
as amended, was again amended, after the filing of the amended petition
herein, by the act of May 2%, 1950 (ch, 196, Pubs Ls 52%, 81st Cong.,
2nd Sess.) by which additional persons are to be added to the roll of

Indians of California, but sach persons m"st be descendants of Indians

,residing in California on June 1, 1852, and alive on May 2M, 1950,

The above definition.is artificial because it does not include

members of any of the Indian tribes, bands or groups who were not

living in California on June 1, 1852, nor does it include the descendants

of these California Indians who were not alive on June 1, 1852, Surely
there were members of groups of California Indians who were not living
in what is new the State of California on June 1, 1852, and surely
there were descendants of members who were not alive on June 1, 1852,
but whose descendants were alive and living in California at said time¢
Yet they are excluded by the definition,

The above definition originated in the act of May 18, 1928 {M5

tat, 602) and.its aoelication was further restricted by section 7
9 1 .. .

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 375

of that act which required an enrollment of the Indians of California
and provided that those Indians coming within the definition must
apply for enrollment within a fixed time or be barred from enrollmentc
Thus; it will be seen9'those‘eho did not apply for earollmentg although
qualified; were not ineluied as Iniians of Califoraiao

That Congress by special legislation may create a suing entity
and authorize a limited recovery, as it did by the 1928 act, is not
questioned, but we find netting in teat syecial act which makes the
Indians enrolled uric: it, or its amendmentsg an identifiable group
‘under the Indian Claims Commission A399 To ac that, it seems to us,

would require the abrogation of gravy claims- that is. claims 33

{13

bands, or raacherias; ani vest in that rticificial group, Indians of
California, the exclusive power to assert a claim for aboriginal rights
of all California Indiansg It is true, of coarse, that the roll made
‘under the 1928 act includes members of many of the tribes, hands and
rancherias of California Indians ~ the rcll shows that M but that fact
does not make the Indians of California the cxcrisive representatives

of the Indian groups who may have claims based upon aboriginal occupancy,

or deny the right of groups to assert claims far less of land to which

they have ha. orio‘nal Indian titles

......c.> ..

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 358 _ o 377

-5

The definition is restrictive in another respect: It limits

the claims to a specified areaw-the State of California. The treaty

of Guadalupe Hidalgo

9

.;u_1y 1;, 18318, {9 stato 922), ceded to the United
States a vast area of land? including the present State of California,
which was occupied by namcrous Indian groupsg The ceded territory

was not s..1bdi*{rided into distinct areas but apparently included a; joart
of New Eoxico, and all of Arizona, Eevada and California, all as Alta
California“ The Indian groups occupying this vast territory did so

without regard to internal boundaries of the area for there were none

S until it was acquired by the United States and state and territorial

boundaries established” So} limiting the claims and claimants to a

J-‘.-‘.4-nu.-n .-AD o-a~ --In °“" ' -—

particular area and to descendants of residents tnolool was arcitrary
and not in accord with the generally recognized practice of establishu
ing Indian group rights, for Indian groups did not aboriginally occupy
land with respect to state or territorial boundariese

Under the Indian Claims Conmission.Act claims of Indians, based
upon aboriginal occupancy, are not restricted by political boundaries

«pan

or by definition of claimant groups. .aonco, in our judgment, the pen
titionors cannot be considered as an identifiable group under the act
which governs uso
It is argued that the legislative history of the Indian Claims

Commission Act shows that the situation of the Indians of California
was in mind and that Unalangnasc of tho:actxxm;so drafted as to

‘J1-f

bring tncm within its terms as an identifiable groans It is stated

- .- _. _L...-.....: - ...:..=....‘.e.

-__.3.1 .- ..-...:..-...'. .-.'--...». .;.«. :.'-i'§:-‘-1 .Ind..Cl., Comm. 358 i s - ', C    . ~ 378

*3"

history of the bill which ripened into the presont.Act shows that
members of the House and Senate Committees in charge of the bill
actually understood that it comprehended the claim here involved,”

Then, in the brief, it refers to the Indians of California as in con'templatien, and Mr, Collett, representing the Indians, is quoted as

asking this question: “I would like to ascertain whether or not the
non—treaty Indians of California may assert a claim under this bill
or under the amondnont proposed here.“ To which the Chairman replied:

“I see no language in the biil that would exclude thong" Thereafter,

p Mr. Stormont, representing the Department of Justice, said in reply

p to the qnestion as to whether or not the non—treaty Indians would be

excluded from the hill; 31 do not think sea“ There is, of course,
nothing in this colloquy that encompasses all the Indians of California.
The inquiry was limited to the situation of the nonutreaty Indians.
It is further argued that when the legislation was finally being
considered on the floor of the House (Answer to motion to dismiss,‘
pp. 38e39) Chairman Jackson, in charge of the bill, again made it plain

hat the Committee contemplated that the bill would cover every kind of

° Indian claim;. In Chairman Jackson’s statement he concluded by saying

A

that “It was the unanimous opinion of the Committee that the jurise

diction of the Commission ought to be broad enough so that no tribe

(italics supplied) could come back to Congress 10 years from new and
say t.at it had a meritorious claim which the claims commission was not

authorized to consider¢3

A 9.: _ _ .-;¢l'.'\~..I' “'--A---4-' ' 4I3‘|""5-"""*"""4":"""""""“ 

._._...-_ ...-.. - - . _...-,--.—- — ...--...-.t. 4.... -....._....:.~. —-.-....-——.-—-—------u-n---v-~-A-*-""-"4°"";"""""“" "'

1.II_1d.'Cl._COIn:II1.._‘._358'  ’ ‘   --     379» 

ft   - --11;i~ This law suit is not in behalf of a tribe, but it is in behalf
of all the Indians in California enrolled as descendants of Indians
residing in California on June 1, 1852, who, regardless of the number
of tribes from which they descend, sue as a group and assert that their
cause of action is a common or group claim. It is rather far fetched,
it seems to this Commission, to construe the language used with reference te the purpose of this bill and the possible rights of the non»
, treaty'Indians, as having in mind by conscious consideration the potitioners herein.
‘Under the construction heretofore made by this Commission in the
cases cited, a claim must be a group or cemnon claim in order that
this Commission have jurisdiction. As previously stated, the cause
.ef action asscrted_herein is based on the alleged aboriginal ownership
of lands in California by the petitioners. It is not contended however
in petitioners’ allegations, argument or proof, that the lands for which
compensation is sought were owned by the petitioners as a group. The
only evidence introduced is to the contrary. The testimony of C. Bart ‘
Merriam of the Smithsonian Institution,,an aclezot-rledged authority ‘on
the Indians of California, was introduced by both the petitioners and
the defendant. His testimony was given to the Congress when it was
considering legislation 1-Ihich ultimately bee:-..-‘:10 the Jurisdictional
- {Act of 1923, previously referred to herein. Dr. Merriam, in part, says:
“In California the various tribes have definite tracts d

of land, the boundaries of which are as fixed as the beandaries of our States and counties. .An Indian of one tribe

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358

; 15in

would not dare enter the territory of another tribe unless
‘under circumstances of mutual agreement except in pursuit of
a wounded animal, which he was allowed to follow for a corn
tain distance. He would not pick manzanita berries or gather
a basket of acorns, or shoot any deer or rabbit or quail in
the territory of another tribe, nor catch a fish in any of
their waters. The tribal boundaries were definite and theroughly understoode—in former years by every member of the _
tribe, men, women, and children; but nowadays the young people
do not always know the boundaries,“ '

For the claim of petitioners to be considered a common or group
claim it would be necessary to hold that the rights of the descendants
of 8 F tribe, by virtue of the aboriginal ownership of certain acreage
by the tribe from which he descended, inured to the benefit of other
Indians besides those descended from the original tribal owners. The
Commission cannot agree to this contention.

Another difficulty in construing respective tribal rights as being

the property of all the Indians of California, is the fact that claims

380

based on alleged aboriginal ownership of lands have been filed with this

Commission in behalf of seventeen alleged bands of Mission Indians, who
claim that said bands are within the meaning of the Indian Claims Com»
mission Act, and that said bands have their own separate band claims

which they desire to press before this Commission. It is alleged that

these seventeen bands, and each of hem, have entered into contracts

with attorneys which have received the unqualified approval provided

0‘

y the lawn What rights if any these seventeen ands or any other
that might be filed have is not now under consideration, but only the

that separate band and tribal claims are asserted.

a —- -no--n. Ap.au-uII1'nJ-\n.rJ--9-lL.J'.\«';§~| -R

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358 381

n 16 a

It'is difficult to see how all the Indians of California could
be considered as having a common and group claim which would include
the claims of separate and.distinct bands of Indians in California and
would, thereby, absorb the claims of the distinct bands; and it is
equally difficult to see how all the Indians of California could main—
tain a group claim and at the same time permit separate bands to maintain separate band claims.

It might be adnitted that a group whose membership may be determined
by proof of ancestry, enrollment, or geographical location, in a sense,
can be thus identified; however, such a type of identification is more
a matter of description than an indication of common group rights. 4*

.As indicated, it is the opinion of this Commission that the claims

being asserted herein are not common group claims, but that the cause of

action, if any, had by reason of the taking of lands of which Indians had,

aboriginal title are separate tribal or band claims of the several tribes
or bands for the specific lends alleged to have been owned by each, and
hat such several tribal claims cannot be combined under the juris-_
dictional provisions of th Indian Claims Commission not and made the
basis of a common or group claim in behalf of all the Indians of
California.

The above does not leave the California Indians without a remedy
for such groups thereof who have had aboriginal occupancy of land in
the state may still make claim therefor.

Whether such group claims

“L3

are new barred, or if'Rnnrhave inznnrvmy'lost wmxg pmesents a question

. .. ,._ .......:. _-'..€:.:..u..':‘. -.'L 

:.-..n..:.' ' _«_.|IIa-'.ru."o.!-I-it 

71 Ind. Clo. Comm. 358 _ .- 382

\

-17..

on which we intimate no opinion, for such question is not now before
the Commission,

It is ordered that the amended petition be dismisseda

Commissioners O‘Merr and Holt concur in the above opinion,

December 15, 1950

- . :... u.-........-=-..':n Jaw"): ----— -.'...'.-saw...-.....-... -..'...-.. .a;..s..-4......-.-.-.'...;..a.. ...I._ .._.... '... . "

—-..'..i.i...-..-. "a.'+... . .

