BEFORE TEE IEDIAN CLAIH5 COHEISSION

THE SAMISH TRIBE OF IDDIANS,

Petitioner,
vs. :: Docket No. 261
THE UNITED STATES OF AEBRICA, .'
Defendant.
Decided: March 11, 1958
Appearances:

warren J, Gilbert, Frederick
‘W. Pots, Malcolm S. McLeod.
Attorneys for Petitioners

Donald R. Marshall with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry W} Iorton.
Attorney for Defendant.

OPINION or ins COMMISSION

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

Petitioners herein, the Samish Tribe of Indians, assert a claim
against defendant for an undetermined amount of land based upon a claim
of aboriginal possession and "a completely inadequate and unconscionable
consideration" paid by defendant for said land under the terms of the
Point Elliott Treaty of January 22, l855 (12 Stat. 92?, II Kapp 669)
under the provisions of Section II. of the Indian Claims Commission
Act. (60 Stat. long)

The defendant has psssrted a special defense of res judicata to
petitioners‘ claim based on a prior judgment rendered in a previous claim
prosecuted by petitioners. ( Dnwamish, et al vs. U.S. 79 C. Cls. 530,
193“). Consistent with our prior ruling on the identical plea urged by
defendant in Lummi Tribe of Indians vs. the United States, Docket No.

110. 5 Ind- 019- Comm. 533. the defendant‘s plea is overruled,

we permitted defendant to amend its answer and therein to deny
petitioner tribe are "Treaty" Indians, and further, to allege in the
alternative that the "Samish Indians participated in the payment made
thereunder and the other considerations named therein" (in accord with
the terms of the cession of Indian lands contained in the Point Elliott
Treaty).

There is no dispute that the Treaty of Point Elliott, signed on
January 22, l855, included within its cession boundaries the areas the
petitioners assert here to have been exclusiyely'om.ed and occupied by
Samish Indians. Defendant, by an amendment to the original answer,
merely denies that Samish Indians, or their representative, were present and participated in such treaty. In the alternative, defendant
alleges that if petitioner tribe were so represented, then they also
received the agreed consideration. In this regard, it is true that
Samish Indians were not named, as such, in the preamble or as a party
signatory to the Treaty of Point Elliott.

The Court of Claims heard the testimony of l55 witnesses in l934
in the trial of the Duwamish case, which included a claim of this petitioner based upon certain issues not pertinent to the case now before

this Commission. The Court of Claims, after hearing that very lengthy

case, rendered an opinion some eight years after those claims were originally Filed in.l927, holding this petitioner (Samish Indians) was "a party

to the Treaty of Point Elliott." ‘We think that finding was amply justified in the emddence, particularly since some of the witnesses in those
proceedings could recall from memory events contemporany'with the nE£C=

tiation and execution of the Treaty of Point Elliott.

6

170

Even if this Commission were not bound by such holding, the references bv Indian agents and government men in their reports of treaty
times, fragmentary though the information is, nevertheless documents
the identity of a group of "Indians called Samish who lived and occupied an island and river of the same name.“ There can be no reasonable doubt, treaty Indians or not, that Samish Indians occupied some

lands of the Puget Sound area as an identifiable tribe of Indians prior

to white settlement.

Several of the witnesses who appeared before this Commission in
June, 1952, either were related to the witnesses who testified or had
personally testified over twenty years earlier in the Duwamish Case
involving certain claims urged by the Samish Indian Tribe. One of
the petitioner‘s witnesses described her relationship to a signer of
the Treaty of Point Elliott. Dr. Wayne P. Suttles in preparing his
thesis, “Economic Life of the Coast Salish of Hero and Rosario Straits“
treated in part with the Samish Indians. Some of his informants in
that work also appeared as members and witnesses for petitioner in
this case. The reports of Ci bs, Stevens, Fitzhugh, and other government records confirm their tribal identity.

These members of petitioner tribe who testified before us presently reside in various places, some on Swinomish Reservation, some
on Lummi Feservation and a number have removed to nearbv white settlements. The practice of exogamy between ?uget Sound tribes dating from
aboriginal times has resulted in intertribal blood relationships among

the great majority of Indians in this area. This fact is amply shown

in the testimony of Indian witnesses who have appeared before this
Commission to all of the claims of Puget Sound Indians. The succeeding
generation, Indians with blood relationship to aboriginal members

f the Samish Tribe, have continued to perpetuate their identity as

a tribal entity into contemporary times. Missionary Eells discusses
them in 1887. They appeared as a tribe before the Court of Claims in
1927. Some of the first generation descendants of the aboriginal tribe
of Samish Indians have testified before this Commission as well as many
more second generation survivors who are the lineal descendants of this
tribe.

It is our duty to examine the whole record broadly on the issue
of identity of petitioner and with special reference to whether or not
"these Indians were treated as an entity by defendant," and recognized
by Indian agents and other government men even after treaty times and
this is relevant to the issue of identity.

We conclude that petitioner, which alleges it is a tribal organization recognized by the Secretary of Interior of the United States, has
shown itself to be the descendants and successors in interest of the
Samish Indians of aboriginal times.

Turning to the most difficult branch of this case, the matter of
defining the area used and occupied exclusively by the Samish Tribe of
Indians, we are again confronted with the obstacles of incomplete, fI“§?.§;~mentary evidence, of vague and general boundary evidence, and the subsistence areas of subject tribe. Also involved are those areas which

were jointly used by Samish Indians with neighboring tribes, in order

6 172

_ Tribes of the eastern portions of the United States.

to define those areas and delimit the land exclusively_used and occu~
pied bv claimant in aboriginal times.

As this Commission has observed in a number of opinions involving
similar claims of other Indian tribes in the Puget Sound area, the culture and economic life of the tribe must be considered, since the
loose political cohesion of Puget Sound Indians will not permit these
tribes to be fitted into a fixed pattern similar to that of the Indian
The Samish spoke
the same dialect, moved about more or less together in search of fish,

clams, oysters, berries and camas and retained a hold on certain island and peninsula areas of land for their homes and subsistence.

Lane, de Harley and Sterling omit the Samish from their accounts
and listings of population of Puvet Sound Indians. The official reports
of both Dr. Henry E. Schoolcraft and Dr. George Gibbs give the Samish
population as 150. This figure may have been drawn from the report of
territorial Governor Isaac Stevens‘ report of 185M. (Dr. C. L. Riley,
II Tr. l0).

Dr. Curtis in "The North American Indian“ observed that the Lummi

Tribe claimed in addition to the mainland of this area from Chuckanut

Bay to Birch Bay the following: ---Blakely, Lopez (on the North and

S West coast), --- (Lummi Tribe of Indians v. U.S., Docket llO, 5 Ind.

Cls. Comm. 538).
Governor Stevens noted the Samish occupied the southern part of

Bellingham Bayu Dr. C. L. Riley suggests Stevens meant the Samish Bay

6 17

gr.

.5

area since Stevens also mentions the Lummi in the same area. Dr.
Riley's reasoning is supported by the report of Agent Fitzhugh‘s

report of the Bellingham Bay Agency in 1856. (II Tr. 10; Dft. Ex.

66, p. 617).
Missionary Myron Eells, writing in the American Antiquarian in
' 1887, stated:

Indians from nearly all the other tribes on the part of Puget
Sound have either intermarried with those of this (Skokomish)
Reservation, lived here for a time or made visits here * * *

The Samish * * * These Indians lived about the Samish
Fiver, south of the Lummis. They speak the same language,
but are said to be a distinct tribe. There were but two
bands of them; the Samish who lived at the mouth of the riv, --er,“ ‘and ‘the Bista-tlous, 'who."'lived‘-upathezrivér.‘ .(Vol. IX,
pp. 1-9, Dft. Ex. 22a, pp. 1-2);

'/. .

In March 1‘ 1887, Bells wrote L": the same journal:

The Lummi reservation lies at the mouth of the Nook-sack
River, not far from the Northern Boundary of Washington Territory
‘is; ",and compromises 12,312 acres * * * for which the Indians received
patents in 153811». More than half of this land is very valuable
* * * first quality. (Dft. Ex. 22b, pp. 191-103).

The ethnologists whose reports are before us uniformly point out
two propositions: First, that the Samish Indians used and occupied
Samish Island and Guemes Island as their winter home in aboriginal
‘ times. Secondly, and more widely treated, is the proposition that

"Salt-—chuck" or "fish-eating" Indians of Puget Sound area roamed
about in their canoes seasonally through the straits, bays, rivers,
and inlets catching the bountiful supply of shell and fin fish. In
the winter months they returned to the many. fires in their huge cedar
log multiple family lodges and engaged inupotlaches and trading with

their neighboring tribesmen.

617

3:

but

In Lummi Tribe V. United States, 5 Ind. Cls. Comm. 525, Fdg.

l2, this Commission stated in reference to this neighboring tribe

immediately north of petitioner tribe that:

The situation on San Juan Islands, in general, is not
completely clear * * *. The Lummi villagers * * * gathered
seafoods on beaches from Birch Bay to Samish Bay. The northern area they shared.with Semishmoo and Sannish villagers, the
interior with Nooksack and Duwhawha and the Chuckanut and Samish Bays with large numbers of other people.

The Commission stated at page 551 of our opinion in the Lummi

C888 t

The ethnological data indicated that other Indians also
used the various islands, especially San Juan and Lopez * * *.
The non-exclusive use of outlying areas is well illustrated

by the common usage of fishing areas, especially about Point
Whitehorn and Point Roberts. The same pattern is evident on
Lopez and San Juan Islands.

As we have observed in the prior Nooksack case, Docket No. 46;
Lummi case, Docket No. 110; Muckleshoot case, Docket No. 98; and
Skallam case, Docket No. 134, involving fish-eating Indians in near
proximity to the petitioner tribe, there was a natural tendency to
share with their Salishan.speaking neighbors. This does not in the
case at hand.deter us from the conclusion that the Samish Tribe exclusively used.and occupied the land bodies as described in our
Finding No. 12.

It is the opinion of this Commission that the Samish Tribe of
Indians, Petitioners herein, are the descendants and successors in
interest of the Samish Indians who aboriginally and at the time of
the negotiation of the Treaty of Point Elliott on January 22, l855,
exclusively used.and.occupied the tracts of land described in Finding 12, arui that the effective date of

6 176

the cession of said area to defendant was _March 8, 1859, the date
of ratification of the treaty by the Senate.

with reference to petitioner's contention that we should find a
merger of the Samish and I-Ju-wha-ha Indian Tribes, we are unable to so
find from this record. The mere fact the Nu-wha-ha Indians were sometimes called "Stick-Samish“ and that the latter‘s chief signed the
Treaty of Point Elliott as a representative of the Samish does not
show a merger of these tribes. On the contrary, it is well established that the two tribes spoke distinctly different dialects and
hostilities occasionally existed between them. The Samish area was
clearly delineated from them for the most part, especially since the
Samish lands were almost entirely surrounded by natural water boundaries.

Any question of credits or offsets by reason of reservation set
aside by defendant under the treaty and any other lands which might

have been allotted, patented, or otherwise,acquired by petitioners or

— their ancestors shall be the subject of further hearings and evidence,

along with the questions of consideration paid under the terms of the
treaty, value of such lands as of March 8, 1859 and other offsets to

which defendant may show itself entitled under the Indian Claims Com»

mission Act .

Edy ar E. ‘L-Iitt

Chief Commissioner

 

We Concur :

     

0)

{J}

C) it
0

}..|

(1!

(I(I:

0

EC?) .
533

H9

01

U} |
Ho

0

1'3

U)

*1

