8 Ind. Clo Com. 1 1

BEFCRE THE INDZAE CLLIMS CCMKI3SICm

CLYDE F. THOHDSOE, NIL EAH FULLER,
HERBERT.A. BELLaS E;£ZE‘HlLLsR

) 3
MANUEL CORDOVi, AR“E_E HeHHIHHEl}
LLOYD BiRRINGlU§, SATD.¥lNO E.
CALAC, H. G. ULLKER, LAEREDCE
BURCELL, FRANKIE NCCREHEAD and
ARTHUR TREPPA, members, and as the
representatives of, and on the re
lation of the Indians of California,

Petitioners,
Docket No. 31

V’.

THE UNITED STATES OF AHEQICA,

\.!\./&.J\..I\..I\..z\_z\._z\..2\_./\.J\.J\../\..I\./\../\./

Defendant.

and

ERNEST RISLING, PETER.MaSTEN,
M£RY G. DORNBACH, as the representatives df, and on the “olatioo

n
4.‘. J —. .. ....-...

of the Indians of California,
Plaintiffs,
V. Docket No. 37

ms U1\D£TE;D srsims 0:?   '-ERICA,

Decided: July 31, 1959

FINDINGS OF FACT

 

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact:

1. Suits Inst'tuted and Consolidated: Pending litigation in Dockets

on-n-":     

Nos. 31 and 37 was instituted by'timely petitions under the Act of August 13,
l9h5 (50 Stat. l0h9j. The petitions were each duly amended and each amended

petition states identical claims.

8 Indo Cl: COKE: 1 _ 20

The amended petitions in each case were filed by individuals,

"members, and as representative; and on the relation of the Indians

of California." The two proceedings, by order of the Commission dated
November 19, 1953, were "consolidated in their entirety and tried as a
single action.“ The petitioners in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37, by their
respective counsel, stipulated on December 13, 195k, that the cases be
consolidated in.their entirety'and for all purposes and shall be prosecuted as one action.

2. Jurisdiction of Commission: The claimants in each of the two

 

amended petitions in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37 assert jurisdiction in the
Commission under the provisions of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19146, supra, which reads in pgrt as follows:

"Sec. 2. The Commission shall hear and determine _

the following claims against the United States on behalf

of any Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group

of American.Indians residing within the territorial limits
of the‘United States or.Alaska: (1) claims in law or
equity arising under the Constitution, laws, treaties of

the United States, and Executive orders of the President;
(2) all other claims in law or equity, including those
sounding in tort, with respect to which the claimant'would
have been entitled to sue in a court of the United States

if the United States was subject to suit; (3) . claims

which would result if the treaties, contracts, and.agreements
betweén the claimant and the United States were revised on
the ground.of fraud, duress, unconscionable consideration,
mutual or unilateral mistake, whether of law or fact, or any‘;
other ground.cognizable by'a court of equity; (h), claims
arising.from the taking by the United States, whether as the
result of a.treaty of cession or otherwise, of lands owned
0? 00CuPied.by'the claimant without the payment for such
landS.of compensation agreed to by the claimant; and (5)
claims'based.upon fair and honorable dealings that are not
T9°°g3iZed.by'any existing rule of law or equity; . ."

 

3. Individual Petitioners: The amended petitions in Dockets N030 31

and 37 were eaoh.presented to the Commission on behalf of the Indians of

8 Ind, Cl. Com, 1 i 3

California, an unorganized group of California. Sindians, by individual
members thereof, as authorized under the pro'=rision..s of Seotion 10 of
the Indian Claims Cozmaission Act of August 13, 19115, _§>_’1:1_p_§§, which reads
as follows:

“Sec, 10, Any claim within the provisions of this
_Act may be presented to the Commis sion by any member of
an Indian tribe, band, or other identifiable group of
Indians as the representative of all its mernbers; but
wherever any tribal organization exists, recognized by
the Secretary of the Interior as having authority to C
represent such tribe, band, or group, such organization
shall be accorded the exclusive privilege of representing
such Indians, unless fraud, collusion or laches on the
part of such organization be shown to the satisfaction of
the Commission,"  '

he The United States acquired the lands in Caliiornia not covered
by private land grants made by Spain or Mezr-rico prior to May 13, 181:6
(Art. 2d of  Protocol of ha, 26, 18318) by virtue oi" the cession from

the Republic of I-ierico contained in the Treaty Guadalupe Hidalgo dated

  February 2, 18148, and proclaimed July h, 1:-31;8, J (9 Stat. 922).

.At the time of said treaty there existed in California some", 500

separate autonomous groups oi‘ Ar.:ericen Indians I~:i1ic;:=, 1-sore ‘variously know-n 

as tribes, nations, bands, rancherias and ‘villages, These groups had lived,

in more or less distinct Indian fashion forcenturies prior to said ‘cession.
After the cession of California to ldefendant,  great influx":‘ofir:h_ite

people ‘entered California and occupied lands formerly possessed  used

by the Indian groups, killing many of them and driving a great many'more

of them from their places of abode and scattering them throughout the state,
So great was the disruption of comma:-nity life by the whites that with few

exceptions, later referred to, these California Indians never again lived

 

8 Ind. 01. Com. l n h

as separate bands, tribes or rancherias, and because of such destruction
of communal existence and the policies of the United States thereafter
pursued, the tribal or group origin of the Indians was in general lost,
and the remnants of the disrupted groups and their descendants, collectively,
were referred by the administrative officers of the Government, in Congressional Acts and the peopleyof California generally by the appellation:
“Indians of California." That said Indians constitute an identifiable
group of American.Indians under the provisions of Section 2 of the Indian
Claims Commission Act and were authorized to present the instant claim
through its members, as was done here.

While the appellation, "Indians of California," included all California Indians, certain groups thereof retained their tribal identities
sufficiently to enable them to present and prosecute their separate claims

for California lands and such groups are those which, by the order of.

October 6, 1958, were separated from the claimants in Dockets Nos. 31 and

‘37 and permitted to maintain their respective suits for.Area A lands under

their ancient tribal names independently of the claimants in Dockets Nos.
31 and 37. (Opinion.of January 20, l958, 6 Ind. Cls. Com. 86).

I 5. Lands Involved: In their amended petitions the Indians of Cali 

fornia assert a claim for the value of all the lands within the boundaries
of the present State of California.

After the filing of their amended petitions, the attorneys for the
claimants entered into a stipulation,'which was filed herein on June 29,
1955; with the attorneys for the Klamath and Modoc Tribes and Iahooskin

Band of Snake Indians, who had filed a claim, Docket No. lOO, which

8 Ind. Cls. Com. 1 p i 5

included about 15,600,000 acres of lands in California, by which the
Indians of California "disclai_raed any r-i.gInt, title, interest or cla3'_m”
in the California lands inv«:s'.§.vedo in the claim of the Klamath and I-Iodoc
Tribes and the Yahooskin Band as set forth in their petition in said
Docket No. 100.

By the order of October 6, 1958, the lands in California were
divided into t‘-:»:o divisions which were designated in the order as
Areas A and B. 9‘

Area A includes all lands in California for which compensation is
claimed by Indian groups , other than the Indians of California (claimants
in Dockets Nos. 31 and 37% which Indian groups are named and the dockets
in which their respective claims are set forth are shown in said order,
which is herebj referred to for greater certe,izrt:,*,

Area B lands are all the lands in California, except those contained
in Area A, aforesaid. Because of the above, the lands involved  the
claim of the Indians of Califomia have been reduced to the Area B lands.
And, as found l(.FindingilI~Io. 6l)ilat-er, Area B lands have been reducediby
the acreage the confirmed Spanish and Pleaican private  grants and
confirmed grants  California I-Eissions which may be” located in o.
Area B.  E    it  A  ..

i Area B  generally from southern California along the middle
and western part of the state northerly to almost the north section ther eof.
During Spanish and }1e:*ci.car1 sovereignty and long prior thereto the area was
occupied and used by several hundred relair.-ively so-he'll groups of Indians.

These aboriginal groups used and occupied tracts with more or less definite

..An,—_

8 Indo Cls. Com. 1 6

§bounda1*ies which were respected by other Indians and knotzn by the whites

as tribes, bands, rancherias and vil1a.ges. These Indian groups or tribelets,
as the Witness, Dr‘. A. L. Kroeber, called then, developed their systems of
culture and economy and subsisted largely upon the natural resources of the
soil and waters of the area which they oeeupied, used and possessed as the

sole and undisputed pessessors.

snnnsn _A_1x_f_g rzsncm _l._§1‘__I_D_ 
6; During Spanish and Me£can sovereignty, many grants of large
areas of land were made by those governments in the territory ceded by
the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo (l8h8) of which several hundred grants

were for lands within the present boundaries of California.

By Article VIII oi‘ the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, the United States

7'g_L;greed that property of every kind belonging to Mexicans established within

the territory ceded’ by said treaty and the property of every }:‘i.nd belonging
to Mexicans not established in the ceded territory shall be retained by
them and respected by the United States and by the”2d Article of the Protocol of May 26, 18148, which was interpretative of the treaty, the United

S States expressly recognized the land grants and agreed that the U

thereof "may cause their legitimate _[titles7 to be acknoviledgled  the
mnerican tribunals.“ By the second paragraph of that article, the titles
to the grants in Caliibrzia were those that were legitimate under I-Iearicazr
1a"J:1P to Mar 13, 181:6.

In order to carry out the obligations thus assumed, the United States

D3SS§d the Act of March 3, 1851 (9 Sta 9 631), and t-hereby created a Board

8 Indo C18. Com, 1 ' 7

of Land Commissioners to determine the title of the grantees of lands

derived from the Spanish or I-*1eej::::an governments

rsnant to the 1851 not, 553 Sparishuand Mexican grants for lands
in California aggregating 8_.,8S9,l35o6O acres (Transo ppo 1570; 1577)
were valid*ted and patents (Pet. Ex. 6) lissned by the United States [see
Pet; E.":. ALK 13 -- parts 1 and 2, and Defo Eat. 160 -= parts 1 and 2) to
claimants of lands derived from the Spanish or Mexican governments prior
to May 13 , 18116. A check of the land grants listed in the petitioners’
and defendant-‘s exhibits , cited above, enabled us  identify 23 confirmed
grants to California Missions of an aggregate acreage of h2,1L59o73, Which
were included in the 8, 859,135.60 figure set forth above, so we conclude
that the latter figure includes all lands in Ca.lj_fornia granted for all
purposes, ine'J.nding I:E:§.ssion landss by both Spain and I-Eezrlco. That the
title to such lands vested  the grantees as of - the date L of the re- p
spective grants, whiehpwere all made prior to May l_3,18h6, and the title
to none of the lands included in sn-she confirmed grants passed to the

United States under the treaty of Gt;3.a<ia?.np:a Hid..-elgo, nor is the United

States obligated to right_ the wrongs, if any there were, committed upon

S y the indians in making such grants.

'Ihat the Area  lands (Finding N . 5) shall not include any lands to
in said Area B which were granted by Spain or }Ie:ci.co prior to‘May l3,
18h6o    

Section 15 of the  of March 3,, 1851, provi.ded: ". . . any patent
to be issued under this act, shall be conclusive between the United States

and said claimants only, and shall not affect the interests of t.hj.rc1 persons.“

 ' .;§;i

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1 8

Prasarnxrzozz or ermine roe

jIn(w1.:.n..§g-.---ye-III:-o ¢."q*h-.-‘  an-.-an-—v O H’ rain. 0 ---vi

maps 51 :s.*u;n-s IN CAlJ-:={};~;a‘IA

 

 

'o

7. .l1..i‘ter California was admitted to statehood on September 9, 1850,
the Congress passed the Act of ‘Larch 3, 1851, (9 State 631), for the
purpose of quieting the titles to lands derived from the Spanish and
Nescican governments.

Section 8 of the latter Act required "every person claiming lands
in California by nrtue of any right or title derived from the Spanish
or Mezrzican government” to present the same to the board of land commissioners created by the act for the determination of the validity of
the right or title of the claimants under the treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo,
the law of nations, the lass, usages, and customs of the government from
which the claim is derived, the principles of equity, and the decisions
of the Supreme Court of the United States. (Sec. 11).

By the provisions of Section 13801‘ the Act of March 3, 81851,, claims

for the lands in California derived from either Spain or Iviexico to be

I presented to said board of commissioners withi_n two years after the date
of said act, and all lands, the claims to which were not so presented,
became part of the public domain of the United States. , W

The claimants here, ‘the Indians of Califoma, never  a
‘claim for any of the lands, the value of which they now seek recovery.
In Docket No. 31, the petitioners in their petition allege that they
did not present their claims of.‘ ownership of their lands in California

to the commission created by the Act of March 3, .1851.

‘M.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

8. After we acquired California in 18b8, the United States Set
aside therein as reserv tions for Indian use 683,359 acres of land.
Although a large part of this land is nithin Area B, the evidence does
not Show the acreage or location thereof in said Area B, but whatever
further proof shows to be located in said area should not be included
with the lands which we hold the petitioners are entitled to be compensated for. I J .,

UNCOMPENSATED TAKING OF INDIAN LANDS

The Act of March 3, 1851 (9 Stat. 631), contains the following

\

provisions:

"That for the purpose of ascertaining and settling
private land claims in the State of California, a com»
mission . . . is hereby constituted . . .“ (Sec. 1).

, ". . g and it shall be the duty of the commissioners an
. . . to decide the validity of said claim . . ." (Sec. 8).

"That all lands, the claims to which have been finally
rejected'by the commissioners in manner herein provided, org
which shall be finally decided to be invalid by the District
or Supreme Court, and all lands the claims to which shall
not be presented to said commissioners within two years

after the date of this Act, shall be deemed, held andrs
considered as part of the public domain of the United
StateS 0 o 0"   g '

The Commission finds that nothing in said Act required the Indian ‘
inhabitants of California to present their claims for their original
Indian title to California lands; that no such claims were presented,
or presented by the California Indians and rejected.by the Commissioners

or finally decided to be invalid by the District or Supreme Court of the

United States.

8' Ind. (:1. Com. 1 10

The Commission therefore rings that the Indians held original
Indian title to all the lands in Area B, except those Spanish or Mexican
grants mentioned in Finding ho. 6, and that such Indian title to said
lands was extinguished by the United States by virtue of the provisions

of Section l3 of the Act of March.3, 1851, and no compensation was paid

isaid Indians for their original rights therein. As mentioned in Finding

Ho. 8, the acreages of reservations found to be within Area B are to be

excluded from the lands for which the Indians are to be compensated.

Edgar E.‘Hitt

jnrinnu aI 

Chief Commissioner

   

Louis J. 0'Marr

II-.i1II§3—iTj

Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

