THE DEF.-JAE-EISH TRIBE OF Z?~ID'”-NS,
Petitioner,
V.

Docket No. lO9

THE UNITED STATES OF A.ME'..RICA,

VVVVVVVVV

Defendant.
Decided: March 25, 1957

memos 93 FACT

The Commission makes the following findings oi‘ fact:

1. The claim in this case was filed by The Duwamish Tribe, petitioner, alleging that said tribe held, possessed and owned from time
immemorial certain lands within what is now the State of Washington.
The a:-1% zahioh petitioner allegedly held by original Indian title
are a specified portion of a larger area ceded to the United States
under the te 4.14.8 and provisions of the Treaty of January 22, l8SS, l2

tat. 927, commonlypknown as the Pomt Elliott treaty, and a small
area of the lands ceded by the Treaty of.‘ September 26, 18511, 10 Stat.

11.32.

2. The lands w‘ ich petitioner claims to have held by original

Indian title are located in the Puget Sound area of t re State of '
Washington in".-the vicinity of Seattle and the Duwamish River and are

described as follows (Amended Pet. , Par. )4):

Commencing at a point two miles south of the town. of
Des Moines known as E~3asL.ington State Park; thence to the
northwest corner of the town Kent; thence to the town

o
of Kangley; thence to Little Lace
northeast of the town of Grace; tn
thence to ‘he town. of.‘ Ec':':r.o*“r‘=' *3“

4-has 4" ‘uh
U-our ..o\u&.t..r, U? o   

e ce
line of Puget Sound to the point oi‘ b

3. (a) By'Act of august 1L, 18h8 (9 Stat. 323), Congress created

the Territory of Oregon wit-in the area of which livéd Various Indian

tribes and bands, including the Duwamish Indians. The Act made all

land laws of the United States "pplicable to Oregon Territory, and in

Section 1 provided that nothing therein contained "shall be construed

rights of persons or property now pertaining to the

ilndians in said territory so long as such rights remain.unextinguished

by treaty between the United States and such Indians %*%«%."

(b) By an.Act dated June 5, 1850 (9 Stat. h37), Congress authorized the negotiation of treaties with the Indian tribes in the Territory of Oregon for the extinguishing of their claims to lands lying west
of the Cascade Mountains.

(c) By the Act oi'March 2, 1853 (10 Stat. l72), Congress organized the Territory of Washington out of the north half of Oregon Territoryp and by Section 12 of said act provision was made that all laws of
Congress relating to-Oregon.Territory, not inconsistent with said l8S3
act, were continued in force in the newly created‘washington,Territory.
Section 2 of the.Act provided for the appointment of a Governor who was
also to perform the duties of Superintendent of Indian.Affairs in the
Territory. I S
Historical

'h.

 

Apparently the first white contact made with the Indians of wha:
is now the State of washington occurred in 1592 when Juan de Fuca reached
‘the Straits named after him. Captain George Vancouver visited the area
in 1792 and the Hudsons Bay Company and the Northwest Company'soon.became active in the region. The report of Indian agent 3. A. Starling

I...’

CI)

in 1352 aiapears to be the first to mention the Duwamish Ifldiaii 4- The
agent listed them as the "Nee-wam-ish“, located them on the "Nee-wamish river, bay, and vicinity" and estimated their numberlat 60 (Def&. 199). Lieutenant De L. Hoyd in 1853 reported the Duwamish to
number about 60 and located them “on the Duwamish river and vicinity
of the small town of Seattle." Jones also reported the Sah-ma-mish
Tribe numb ering about 100 in the "country bordering on a lake bet.
Nee-wa-mish and Sno-he-mish rivers." (Def. EC. 187).
5. On December 26, 1853, Isaac Stevens, the first Governor and
ex-officio Superintendent of Indian Affairs of Washington Territory,
wrote to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs suggesting the urgent
necessity for making treaties immediately with the Indians west of the
Cascade Mountain. in ’:~.’ash.I..ngton ’1'erritor'*. He pointed out that these
tribes lived on different 'ater courses or bays and inlets of Puget
Sound, and they had selected spots that were their permanent homes

which they wished to reserve, butwould sell the rest of their lands

to the whites.

By’ Act of July 31, 1851.: (l0 Stat. 315,. 330) an appropriation was
made by Congress for expenses of making treaties with the Indians, in
Washington Territory to extingiish their claim to lands. Thereaft r,
on August 30, l8Sh, the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs notified
Governor tevens of his official appointment to negotiate treaties with
all tribes in Washington Territory by which the United States would

extinguish their "claim of title" to all their lands, except such

limited areas as might be assigned them for

ture oc upancy. tevens

was also directed that in naklng the treaties he should endeavor to

unite the "numerous bands and fragments of tribes into tribes," and to
furnish the Commissioner of Indian Affairs a skeleton map of Washington
Territory, showingthe location of the different tribes and bands, and
the boundaries of the regions claimed by each.

In carrying out his duties as Superintendent of Indian Affairs,
Governor Stevens had previously} on.March 22, 185b, appointed Colonel
Simmons as Indian Agent for the Puget Sound District wherein the claimed
lands were located, and directed him to visit the various tribes in his
District, make a census of the tribes and bands, ascertaining as nearly
asfpossible the boundaries of the territory claimed by each, and at the
same time organize the small bands into tribes and appoint chiefs for

each.

6. Dr. George Gibbs who assisted Governor Stevens in arranging
ft‘
treaties with the Indians of’Washington Territory reported on March ll,

185b, that (Def. Ex. 81):

Harch llth the Indians were called together for a talk.

There were present Potkanan with part of the Snoqualmoos

and Seattle with those of the Duwanish in town, also

George Seattle his son who‘is?id$e£§ect;c§ief of the
Suqnamish, his father’s tribe proper %‘% %.”%«e 4 The
following were then recognized as chief and sub chiefs bfi
the Duwamish, Suquamish and other tribes connected with them.
Seattle, head chief; Schwoo-yehim,'or George Seattle; Sgoodahtl or Jake; Nah-wa-chais3'Wil-lak or Jack;~% % %
7. On September 16, 185k, Governor Stevens reported as follows to
the Commissioner of Indian affairs (Def. Ex. llb):

One cause of the ozer-estimate so frequently made of
Indians is their habit of moving about, gathering in bodies-one day at one place, and in another at the next-—th s leaving
.the impression of great numbers in.each.

we-are
Upon Puget‘s sound, and the inlets communicating with it,

Q

_are several small bands, the remnants of once larger tribes, %'¢ %cf

Of these the Squally-ah-mish or Nisqually, its T/he IT10S"?«
numerous, »::-  -::-, To the north (3,_ this group another may be
found of those inhabiting the shores of Admiralty inlet, from
Pu-gal-lup river to Su-o,uamish Head, including V8-Sh0I1’S 8-Ild
Bainbridge’s islands, Port Orchard, Elliott bay, and DTr?<'=‘Is'1iSh
river and Fort Madison. Most of  are nomirrl ly under a
chief named Se-at-tle, belonging to the Lu-qua—nish tribe, but
residing principally with another, the wcamish. This last is
the one called on the charts of Puget‘s sound the No-we-mish;
and it should be mentioned that a very considerable difference
exists in the spelling of almost all the names, arising from
the fact that several letters of their alphabet are convertible,
as D and N, B and M, Q and C-. For instance, the band are indifferently termed N‘wa-mish and Dwa-mish; another clan of the
same tribe, Sa-ma-mish, are also called Sa-ba-bish; and the name
Suqua--mich is frequently changed into Lugaamish. The Dwa-mish
are the best known of this connexion from their neighborhood
to the rising town named after their chief, Se-at-tleg and the
whole generally bare this name, though they are by no means the
most numerous. Their proper seat is the outlet of a large lake
emptying into the Dwamish river, and not on the main branch.
At that place they and some others have small patches of potato
ground, amounting altogether toperhaps thirty acres, where ‘t
is stated they raised, during the last year, about three thousQhd }‘\1‘}f_:]_'u:x-11::  ::'n 3_1n:v~9(_'ra 15-? Ana ‘bus-no-n3-u-¢-3:3 ‘u-nan}-C:lh:  .8-L-A 4--.-.........

I -—c-nu-t D —-no O -avg. I--c i If: \d¢-W --it--nqig ‘Ii &MLhJQ¢ V¢$'f  S; .

Of these they sold a part, reserving the rest for their own
consumption. Each head of a family plants his own,’ the qua tity
being regulated by the number oi‘ his women. Their potatoes are

V91"! fine, though they have used the same seed on the same ground
for a succession of years. -1: 6-‘ -1In this report (pages 1:57-LL58) in his "Estimate of Indian Tribes in Washington Territory west of the Cascade Mountains," he gave the followzring
figures and in-‘Pomation:

1.5-L

Names of tribes

 

: :M: W: :
and bands : Where located :a: o : :

: :1: In: To- :

: :e: e: tal :Total

zs: nzbandsztribes

To-an-hooch. . . . . . . . . . . Hood‘ s Canal 123 ILO9 265
Sho-Komish. . . . . . . . . . . . Hood’ s Canal, "upper end -- ' -- 200

-:1» -::- 4:51-1C.Uc'3--Itlish. . . . . . . . . . . . Peni .sula betvsee ; ’E£ood"s 215 2'?O 1:85’
and Ac‘r.iralty Inlet

3 ‘H0-ma-nish. . . . . . . . Vashon‘ s Island l6 l5 33
w‘ -: ‘ ‘P 1'1 q "R 0 9
.1...-a_;n.:.sn. . . . . . . . . . . . . . Lake :or*::, uu'=.-.»*a:::isn
river ‘ 39 73 162
Sa.-ma-nish. . . .) Duwanish La‘.-=:e, etc. 71 30 1.0.

"" "" -I--0-nu-I-v¢-I

 0 0 0 O
Skope-ah-mish....
 0 0 Q Q o 0

Head of White B. ... ... 8
Head of Green R. ... ... 50
Main White River ... ... 30

351
8.

Pursuant to the Act of July 31, l8Sh, supra, and the instructiais
of the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs, Governor Stevens negotiated the
treaty of January 22, IBSS (12 Stat. 927) between the United States and
twentyatwo named tribes "and other allied and subordinate tribes and
bands of Indians occupying certain lands situated in said Territory of
‘Washington %'%'%." The treaty, commonly referred to as the Point
Elliott Treaty,'was not ratified by the United States Senate until

March 8, 1859, and was proclaimed.April ll, I859. The Dwamish, Sk-tahlmish and Samahnish Indians were named in the treaty preamble as parties

.aA

and one of the signatories are trose o£'the DuyamiSh‘Chief and subichiefs. No one signed as Sk-tahl—nish or Samahmish chiefs or sub—chiefs.

By its terms the said tribes and bands ceded, relinquished.and conveyed
all their right, title and interest in and to a described area of land
in northwest Washington Territory "occupied.by them,".reserving to themselves four smalldbsignated areas as reservation. The area ceded, which
includes the claimed area, is shown as Tract 3h? and the reserved areas
as Tract Nos. 3&8, 3h9, 350 and 351 on Royce‘s Map l of the State of
‘Washington. 5ince.Article l5 of the treaty'provided that the "treaty
shall be obligatory on the contracting parties as soon as the same shall
be ratified.by the President and Senate of'the United States," the treaty
did not become effective until.Harch 8, l8S9, the date the treaty was

See Bush v. The United States and.Klickitat

H
m

tified by the Senate.

Indians, 29 C. Cls. lhh.

Simmons reported 73? Indians of both the Duwamish and Suquamish present

On the 28th inst I arrived at Seattle, at first found a
strong determination among the Indians not to cross over to

their reservation Z§ort hadison/ to receive their goods.
They were arvious to have then at SeattleI informed them

that they must go over or they should receive nothing.i
Finally they obeyed my wishes and those of their head chief.
29th arrived at the Duwamish and Suquamish reservations in
Fort Madison at the entrance to.Agaline Passage. Here I
found a large assemblage of their tribes. Here they have a
large house said to of been put up by Chief Seattle some ho
years ago; it is 525 feet long, 60 feet wide, 18 feet high.
e %-e

with 70 absent.

l0.

l856 (Def. Ex. 80, pp. 86-87):

—’ .
-no-my-/D an up 1-91-vi-i.— I I-lh-5 A-av \-pl-an-II-l"IIDghn-‘¢'|I'l-0-5‘|I-P8-5‘,

On the 7th of November, __
over your signature to act as local Indian agent, to look
after and take charge of the friendly Indians within the i
limits of the county of King, Washington.Territory, embracing the Dwahmish, Gualtshkanam, chief, numbering about 312;
the Tsa-bah-bish, Sahywich-ol-gahdwh, chief, numbering about
6b; the Ska-whanish Chatskanan, chief, numbering 16; and the
Suquamish, numbering about SSO; Seattle, Show-chise, Chil‘whale-ton, and.Tswil-at~sap, chiefs, over whom.Seattle
usually presides as head chief in council; total number under
my charge 952, of which about b3h.were on the east side of
the Sound, and SOB scattered.upon the bays of the west side,-with instructions to gather and rendezvous at the town.of
Seattle all friendly disposed.among than residing on the east
side of the Sound, and there so provide and care for them as
to encourage them to remain neutral, if not really friendly;

'3~"%"2

On the 9th of November I started u the Dwahmish and.Black
Rivers, thence along the east coast of Lake washinvton, among
the.settlements'of'the Skawhahnish and the Tsah-bahbish tribes,
and obtained a promise from Sawichol-gahdnh, the chief of the
Tsah-bahbish, that they would.cone in and rendezvous with the
others in a short time, as soon.as Elk-klah-kum returned from

a visit among the Klikatats, where they said he had gone to get

- 9
=itn a

olankets due him for a horse. I returned on the l th

“O, 1855, Agent M. T. Simmons.reported as follows

Indian.Agent D. S. Maynard.reported as follows on September 17,

|...J

l\')

few families of the Dwahmish tribe, whom I found scattered
on the banks of the Dwahznish and Black rivers. I was soon
afterwards informed by the Indians in camp that Elk-lclah-k1:un
was among the Lake Indians at the time I visited them. I
thereupon returned to them, when they made reply much as at
first, and appeared uneasy about Ell<-I-klah-?.~:mn. 4-" "1' 4'

ll. On September 26, IBS6, Indian Agent G. A. Paige I‘9’P0I'-"ted

(Def. Ex. 80, pp, 82-83):

I have charge over two tribes, ‘viz: the Suquamish or
Seattle Tribe, belonging on the shores of the Sound, numbering
M42, and the Duwamish tribe belonging to the river of the same
name, as small portions of this latter tribe are from the

vicinity of the lakes east of Seattle, and are called among
themselves Tsa-bah-bobs, or Lake Indians.

Paige also reported he had moved the "Dwamish" tribe to the eastern
shore of Bainbridge Island but only after much unwillingness on the

part of the Indians and then to satisfy them he moved them to Holderness Point, on the west side of Elliott bay "this being a favorite fishing ground of.‘ theirs at certain seasons of the year.“ Paige was of the
opinion that "the difficulties heretofore encountered in the management

of this tribe, arise partly from their aversion to removing on to lands
occupied by another tribe."

l2. Indian Agent James H. Gouty reported on November 21, I856, to

Agent Paige as follows (Def. Ex. 202):

Maurer had a long talk with William‘ at his camp on Black
river and he says that he will not come down or will he let
any of his people come back as long as he can stop the.. .

a- 5.1- 6-? He says his people went to the west side of the sound
last fall and they were promised to be feeded and they got
nothing and came near stamp. to death and he has better preparations to live now can get plenty of salmon and can buy flour
and the Snoqualmie Indians will furnish them with a_'!_'L the potatoes they want a- 4- *2. He says that none of the Duwamish tribe
will cross the sound as it is not t air land b othe country on
_ Black river is theirs and they will not sell it but they w uld
live and die on it. %- '31- £- Iiaurer also says there is several
families of the Snoqualnzie tribe stopping at this ca...p of
Williams and they have a good de 7 to say to the Indians to

a...
prevent their coming down here again.

F:

P0

‘1'ns;;;£;§4j:1¥'

Of the band of age Indians he only saw one family
but the other Indians told him that they with some others
were stopping ‘tack on the lake some place. The mlmber Of
the Duwamish tribe that he saw at this camp of Williams
he thinks was about 150.

Indian Agent M. T. Smmons on October '21, l8S6, reported the following

Indian tribes and their numbers under the jurisdiction of the Fort
Ketsap (Madison) reservation: Dwahmish,‘3l2; Tgahbahbish, oh; Skaquahmish, 16; Suquamish, SSO (Def. Ex. 80). I Agent Paige in I857 wrote that
the Du:-Jamish Indians living on and claiming the land on the Duwamish
river were in his charge and he urged a reservation be (set aside for
them on or near the “lake fork of the D”.«§a*nish river." Paige stated,
"This tract of land has been cultivated many years by them, '2 % '1'."
In 1860, Agent Simmons wrote that the Dwamish Indians were living on the
river of that name which is formed by the junction of the white and Black
rivers and he recommended a reservation be set aside for them (lief. Etc.
67). As late as August l86S, Agent 8. D. Howe reported that "A portion
of the Indians belonging to the Port Madison reservation now live on
Black river, which was their place or residence at the time of the making of the treaty" (Def. Ex. 201:). In 1877 Agent Mollett wrote that:
The reservations provided for in the treaty were located

in the vicinity of the most numerous tribes. The Dughdwabsh,

(D‘wamish) tribe, with the subordinate tribes, viz, Swo-Kwabish,

Sk-kabish, S‘tsa-babsh, and Rha-cho-abish; the Etal-c-bush with

its subordinate tribes, viz, S‘yi-lal-kc-absh and St-ka-bish,

were assigned to the Port Madison reservation.
Although the Duwamish were assigned to the Port Madison reservation the
findings previously made sho - that the majority wanted to remain in their
O1-IT! country and today reside throughout the northwest with some descendants still living in the vicinity of their ancestoral lands (Tr.

6-36; Def. Ex. 186).

In
I\)

Ethno lo gical

13.

report on the Puget Sound Indians although his data was o"oviousl.y obtained

during his presence in the Territory of Washington in l8S3-S .

 

Doctor George Gibbs (see Finding 6) in l877 made a comprehensive(Def. Ex. 6, pp. l78—l79) in part as follows:

There remains on these waters what may be termed the Niskwalli nation, which is thus divided, pursuing the geographical

order: --1st. The Skokomish ’.t'- 61- -3.’2d. The bands occupying Puget Sound and the inlets opening

into it as far down as Point Fully. % '31- ‘£a- :1» 4Below these is the division of which the Dwamish and Sukwamish are the principal bands, occupying Elliott Bay, Bainbridge Island, and a portion of the peninsula be ween Hood

Canal and Admiralty Inlet.

88

Ty-sq .

niliott Bay has been named.,

Their head chief is Se-aa-thl, or,
it is usually pronounced, Seattle, from whom the tot‘:-I:-\OI‘1
In-.:_this connection are also the

Samamish, Skopahmish, Sk‘tefa_l:nish, St'kamish, and the other
small bands lying upon the lakes and the branches of Dwa.mish
River, who are claimed by the others as part of their tribe,

but have in reality very little connection with them.

A View

few of these last possess horses, but the majority are river

Indians.
which pmbably falls a little short of the truth.
but slightly from the Hisk.-:alli in language.

The aggregate number of the whole was by census 807 ,
They differ
These tribes were

included with all the others of the eastern shore and the

islands in the treaty of Mukleteoh, or Point Elliott. a.

reserve

of two sections was retained for them at Fort Madison.

He wrote

512

11.1. In his "The North American Indian (l9l3), Doctor Edward 8. Curtis

Elliott B*y" and the "Sababsh (Samamish), the shore of Lake Sanazanish and

the eastern shore of Lake E-.Eashington.“

included under the Puget Sound Tribes the

Ifke ‘:2.-‘ashington, the valley of Duwamish river, and the shore of

Doctors Herman Haeberlin and

Erna Gunther in “The Indians of Puget Sound" (l930) reported:

) .-.3
S€7't'L-4° """”‘ 41" "' r"'°t"‘ 7"‘ .= ‘an "3 "in ,-_-,. -an

l§ EEC

t.vr:1~---:_3 -- '3
vex.-4.. my C. 4. '

t the present site of
from the Iéuclcleshoot lands
'2 in the north. They

The Du*.:a::1ish (Du:;<.udu*.:a'bc liv
'1

Q

{I U1
0 (J

. ' ‘ A _°
.tn to '6?‘-E-. S1lQ_"..1c:1'Ti_'.." .
cal‘ ed '

m C

ienton Indian

O

"Tdwabsh (Dwamish), the southern

A

‘K-J



Doctor Frederica U. Eodge, (gandbook of.A;erican Indians, B.A.3.
Bullet_n 30, Part 2, l9lO) states that the name Duwamisn”being well
known has been 'moroperly applied collectively to-a number of distinct

bands in this neighborhood. Their population about l8Sé is variously
given from 6b to 312. The remn..t is incorporated with the Snohomish
and others under the Tulalip school, N. W} Nash., altogether numbering
h6S in l90h."

lS. In l9hO, Doctor Marian W} Smitr published her work "The
Euyallup-Nisquallyt“ In discussing the Dunamish Doctor Smith in her
publicction notes that most of the material.presented with respect to
these Indians'was collected by Arthur C. Ballard, who appeared before
this Commission as an.expert for petitioner in this case. Doctor Smith
wrote as follows (Def. Ex. 3): 7 ‘

Duwamish. -*% %-The drainage was divided into four sections
each of which was named and each of which included one or more
separate villages: (a) the river from its mouth up to and including the Blach and Cedar Rivers, villages 1-93 (b) from
where the Black River flows into the Dunamish to-the junction
of the White and Green Rivers, villages l0-ll; (c) the Green
River, villages l2-lh (Puyallup-Nisqnally informants, however,
tended to place village 12 Wibh the hhite River people); and.
(d) the White River, village l5. The people of these four
sections are called today the Duwamish. The "real" Duwamish
were those of section (a), the tuduwabc. ‘This name was also
extended to include the people of section Cb) and perhaps also _
those of the entire drainage, in accord with its present usage._
The people of the Green River villages, section (c), were known
collectively as the sqwapabc or Green River people. The Indians
of'Muckleshoot reservation, primarily the people of the white
River, section (d), included also Green River groups and the
South Prairie, Puyallup village. The e seems little doubt that
these represented a distinct division (see page 32). The Lake
‘Washington peoples (16) were separate villages which were
probably considered as distinct.

%-%*% for the sake of convenience,I have described

extended villages as single territorial units: in
these cases it must be understood that each of the

villages listed had its own section of territory.
9 #-e

Duwamish

A. Duwamish or tuduwabc: Duwamish River, up to and
including the Black River, and neighboring beach

B. Katilbabc: Cedar River

C. white River from the mouth of Black
River to its confluence with Green River

D. luwitabcz Eastern Lake Washington

B. ‘Western Lake Washington. These and the
other people of the lake were sometimes called xatcoabc.
“Lake people," a term similar to those of topographical
meaning already listed.

F. Sammamish: Sammamish Lake and River.

lo. ‘Mr. A. C. Ballard, who has studied the Indians in the Puget
Sound area since about 1910, appeared as an expert witness for petitioner. On a map (Pet. Ex. 7) Mr. Ballard.marked some 18 villager
sites which he testified were within the area c1aimed.by petitioner.
The witness stated that a few of them were probably post treaty sites
and that some of the sites were vacant at times. witness Ballard was
in doubt as to whether Sammamish Lake should be included in Duwamish or
Snoqualmie territory but stated he would include the east shore of Lake
Washington (Tr. Uh). He included the Samamish village at the north
end of Lake washington.with the Duwamish as they "definitely had
Duwamish affiliations. They were oriented toward the Duwamish," although he evidently was not sure of this connection and he was uncertain

of Duwamish occupation of the territory between.Lake'Washington and

Lake Sammamish. The witness did not locate any Duwamish villages east

Doctor June I*1cCo:'::1icl:
Col._ins, anthropologist, also appeared as an expert witness for P551"
tioner. Doctor Collins stated that in part her village sites on the
map introduced into evidence (Pet. 3):. 9) are based on i.ILfOI"m8.
received from Mr. Ballard as well as other sources (Tr. 6 ......, Hearing;
_Seattle, Washington, August 12, 1953).  expert witness includes
two villages on the eastern shore of Lake Washington not mentioned by
_}_-Ir. Ballard. Doctor Carroll S.'Riley, defendant's anthropologist, reported (Def. Ex. I, page II-l..) that “it is uncertain as to how many

ges existed at treaty time for the population lists of early writers

ll)

vill

(the Handbook estimates 61; to 312) -suggest that what was called Duwamish

 

may have been one or at most two or three villages of Indians. The

$11?‘ 1"": 0'00-Iguana ‘imam any .n.q.n- -'..-. din...-no -.- "‘ .—— . ‘
5-“’C.--~... . “....g..... noted fun. this area wtsrt: ':.’.LL«£1CI‘ SI‘£1eLJ_L autonomous units

 

which died out or completely lost their identity in post-reservation
times or they represent settlements deserted before the treaty period."
_ 17. In aborigmal tines ‘village autonomy prevailed in the area
claimed by petitioner, and since these Indians obtained a major part of
their subsistence from the bays, streams_.and lass of the area where
they lived, their villages were generally located on the lands adjacent

to theirmain fishing places. These villages were also located to give
the Indians access to other means of support needed to supplement the
food obtained from the waters and large areas awry from the villages
were also utilized by the villagers for gathering of berries and roots

and for fishing and hunting. In each of the several villages in part

\

-3' 0 ‘I g a in q. _
0.; the area cla;-nee were concentrated J..I‘.(1l3.I‘1S, sharing a common culture

F!

and cormon dialect, who were liniced with the ndians of.‘ the other

5 129

villages of that part of the area by means of social andeconomic tics
also. Even prior to the necessity of some semblance of political
organization between these villages to permit them to deal “with the
agents and officers of the United States, they were known collectively

as Duwamish because of the ties between the villages, and as Such W61‘:
an identi:'.'iable group historically. For the same reasons these villagers
shared the gathering, hunting and fishing spots in the outlying contiguous
areas distant from their villages.

t is found, therefore, that petitioner’s ancestors did exclusively use and occupy at least part of the
lands vvithin the area claimed.

l8. That as of the date of the Treaty of January 22, l8SS, there
were a number of autonomous villages of Indians known collectively as
Buwauiish using and occupying land in the vicinity of the Blaci... Rive- a.
the southern end of Lake ‘.-Iashington and on the shores of the Duwaznish
River and Elliott Bay. That although the name Duwamish has been used
at times ethnologically or historically to include other village groups

such as the Samamish, and the zskopamish and Smulkamish (see Muckleshoot

Tribe v. United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 658), the use of the word in

   

such manner has been a geographic term. _ The group of villages that came
to be known as the Duwamish Tribe were those which had their permanent
camps in the vicinity of the lower end of Lake T.-Jashington and on the

There is no substantial evidence to

Black and Cedar Rivers near Renton.
petitioner is the successor in interest to the
claims, if any, of the Samalriish or St-kah-mish Indians.

19. The Commission finds thct the petitioner, The Duwamish Tribe,

is the successor in interest _t-.3‘ those village-tribes which aboriginally

$2:
In
an
(31.
[0

nd occupied lands on the southern end of Lake Fofashington, the Black

S l3Cr

I
‘‘'=z'.-'-;.«.;‘..43-''

\ V 0 I
Cedar and Duncmish river

0!

3 and Elliott Bay; that these village-tribes
comnosed the entity that was a party to the Treaty of January 22, 18553
that this entity was the Duwamish Tribe administered to by agents and
officials of the United States following said treaty; and that descendants of said entity have continued to reside in and near the lands
of their ancestors since said treaty and until the present time. The
Commission finds therefore that petitioner is an identifiable tribe of
American.Indians within the meaning of tie Indian Claims Commission Act
of_August 13, 191:6 (so Stat. 1019), and as such is entitled to maintain

this cause of action.

20. The Commission finally finds that the Duwamish Tribe, Detitioner herein, held original Indian title as of the date of the Treaty

1. 3-J—J

of January 22, iopp, to the lands within the fo_loning tsund ries:
Commencing at Point Fully on Puget Sound; thence north
along the shoreline of said Sound to Fourmile Rock, north
of Elliott Bay; thence in a direct line to the western
shoreline of Lake Washington; thence south along the west
shoreline of said.Lake'Washington to the entrance of'May
Creek on the south-astern side of said Lake‘ thence in a
‘W bum .5. ur .. H 3 a an L
southeastwardly direction to the bend in the Cedar River
Just south of McDonald Lake; thence in a direct line to
the place of beginning at Point Fully.

Edgar E.'Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O*Marr

Associate Commissioner

wm. M. Holt

AssociatevCommissioner

