’_5",:.

'.1'M’."_LIi.é TRIBE OF I‘3'*..3'I_»’-_IxI ,
Petitioners,

vs. Docket No. b?
THE UNITED STETES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

\._..l\....a"‘~.../\....#\..aJ\_.¢'\.....f\_.;’\....a’

Decided: November 29, 1957

Appearances:

Paul M. Hiebell
ttorney for Petitioner

Leland L.'Iost, with whom
was Er. assistant Attorney
General Perry W. Horton,
Attorneys for ‘re Defendant

OPIEION OF THE COKEISSION

 

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered.the opinion of the Commission.

Ey Interlocutory Order of this Commission issued November 6,
1953, th-'3akima.Tribe of Indians were ahthorized to recover from
the defendant the'value of 27,6h7-71 acres of land kncwnzas the
Cedar Valley tracts which are described in Finding of Fact No. 3l(a)
and for Bkéfhh acres of land referred to in our Finding of Fact E0.

28, and for an area identified.as irect C which is described in the

Commission's Finding of Fact R’. 19, all entered Eovember 6, 1953.

5 662

Iniowever, it was the understanding of the parties and this Corr::1issicn that additional evidence would be received as to the acreage in
the northern part of the reservation (Tract C) for which petitioners
were permitted to recover if that acreage was not agreed upon between
the parties; and the parties  been unable to agree upon the loc'tion of the source of the South Fork of Ahtanum Creek, which pohit
is decisive of the acreage of Tract C, additional evidence was received upon that point. Additional evidence was also received as to
the title to the 3Lz6.l;lx acres of land for which recovery was authorized
in GUI‘ Finding of Fact 360. 28.

Accordin3__'l;r the questions to be now determined are: (1) the right

.-.— -p cu. .- 01‘ lack of riaht of the petitioners to recmrer for 'i'.'h¢==. 3.136-151, .-:w:‘r*t=> +.r'::~.r_~+.
(2) the acreage contained in Tract C3 (3) the value ofeach tract at
the date of ta.1<:'Lng; and (14) whether the taidng is of such nature that
petitiomrs are entitled to just conpensation.

THE ACPEAGE IZWOLVED

I. The 3l:.6.1_:h Acre Tract

 

The defendant has not pressed its claim that the patented lands
known as the Cedar Valley tracts, located in the southwest corner of
the reservation, do not actuallr contain 2?,6}_;7.7l acres. It does
deny that it is liable to petitioners for the value of 31v.c’>.h.L acres
of land situated in Section 9, ‘Township ll North, Range 12 East,
which, based upon the evidence then before us, was found by this
Commission to have been patented to the Iiorthern Pac'.f.‘ic 1’?-a3‘:-:a;}'

""' - n ' '- .. .:.~ .-.. ‘ '
Cor-zcanv. Lhe evidence nc-.; 0.1. record c__'rsclc:;,ss may the '7': are":

indemnity selections which were made by the Eorthern Pacific Rai way

Company during 1918 and 1921, covering this land, were never approved

by the General Land Office and.were finally released by the Railway

Company. Thereafter they were duly cancelled of record by the General
Land Office and formal notice of this action was given to the Railway
Company on Kay 21, 191:2.
It is the petitioners’ contention that there has been a Virtual
ta1~::I.ng of this land by reason of these selections and subsequent

nithholdings; of possession. However, we can see little distinction

°bet1».reen this acrea e and the lands lvinv west of the Car.'1nbell-Germond-. e V .. ::> Long: survey line which the Supreme Court on February 22;, 191.3 in its

\

decision in I'IorthernCPac i_f.‘ic P.ai1':-ray Cozrznany vs. United States ,' 227

 

13.8. 355 recognized as constituting a part of the area reserved by
the Yakima Indians in theb-treaty of 1855'.
‘The petitioners have never questioned their continuing right of

occupancy and possession to those lands. W‘ni_'J.e recognition of the

3h6..‘:.h acre tract as a part of the Yazima Indian reservation has been
delayed, still the Indian title has never been extinguished, and physical
possession appears to be subject only to the petitioners‘ desire to exercise their right of it. Under the circumstances we do not believe petitioners have -lost the title to this land, and they are not entitled to

rec over their ef or .

27,El:?.?1 acres 1-:no'-.-tn as the Cedar

her e inaft er descr ibed .

II. Tract C Acreage

 

As recited in our Finding ho. l9, the true northern ’oounda.::'y' line
of the Yalcima Indian reservation follows westwardly from the source of
the South Fork of Ahtanuzn Creek along the divide around the headwaters
of the Klickitat river to 5perx:er's Point. The boundary line as formerly
recognized therefore omitted from the reservation that area south of this
line and north of a straight line drawn mt:-zeen the source of Reservation
Creek and 5pencer’s Point, which E. 0. Barnard of the Geological Survey

in 3.900 reported contained l6,hh8 acres. This area plus the acreage lying

. between the South Fork of Ahtanuzn Creek and Reservation Creek, from their

confluence to their sources, comprises Tract C.

Petitioners say the South Fork of Iehtanum Creek has its source in
a spring near ‘Jessie Corral in Section 5, To:-.-‘nship ll North, Range 1};
East, and that the area which lies between this stream and Reservation
Creek, east of Barnaa'd's line, contains 3,986 acres. This acreage,
plus Barnard‘s'estimate of l6,l;h8 acres mares the total of 20,113}; acres
which petitioners say is the acreage of Tract C. It is def.'endant’s contention that the South Fork of Ahtanum. Creek rises in the northern
part of Section l8, Township ll Eiorth, Rage 11; East, and that the
area between that stream and Reservation Creel-: contains 2,930.77 acres;
that the area reported by B-ar..ard to contain l6,}.L}.L8 acres actuaJ_l3'

measnzres ‘out 35,163.65 acres and that the tot"l acreage within Tract C

is therefore but l8,09h..h2 acres. (Def. E‘.-2:. No. 53)

I =.- ~. '- "J-?.€r'-“
"‘*3r?v'{¢$‘¥~'

Petitioners rely upon the statements of Mr. Joseph C. Thoma, a

I

Cadastral En ineer of Sh years experience, who used a compensating

U1}

polar planirzeter on a Mount Adams Quadrangle map prepared by the
Geological Survey Division, Department of Interior, to determine the
acreage between the two streams and adopted Barnard‘s estimate of
165,111.18 acres for the area 1-:-ithin the balance of Tract C. (Pet. Exs.
78,95). This map was prepared prior to an actual survey of the region

(Defo EX» 5?) and shows the Vessie Corral branch as a permanent stream

approximately’ 1% miles in length before its convergeme in Section 1;

1-r.i_th the branch rising in Section 18 which defendant claims is the

 South Fork of 2’-Lhtanum Creek.

Defendant has s'L:.br:1i'ted the testi-non? o.«.

OQ‘—'

Orv2_.1..~.e L._Shadduc1<;
who for the past 17 years has served as Civil Engineer in the United
States Corps oi‘ Army Engineers. In ascertaining the acreage 

Tract C he used the acreages denoted on General Land Office drawings ,
and when reservation lines cut through section lines he took planimeter readings on photostatic copies of plats preparedby the Surveyor
General, certified by that officer to be in accordance with original
survey notes on file in the office of the United States Surveyor
General in Olympia, Washington, and I-Zetzger conntj; maps or plats
which are prepared ..rom the same source data. A planimeter reading
of the entire area was used as a check on the secticnaj. readings.

"' "hadduck testified these Zéetzg r maps are in general use among
county’ assessors and survejrorsg that planineter readings of photo-L L’

s.a..:;.c copies of original rt}:-s are accepted in the S1‘.‘_‘:“fE}'iIE5__’.j practice

U1

KI‘!

'2,_ with Reservation Creek.

and when due auowance is made for shrinkage such readings within onetenth of one percent accurate. (Trans. pp. 125-11:7)

A photostatic copy of that plat of Township 11 North, Rangge 11;
East beari_n=.r the Surveyor C-ene_ra1‘s acceptance date; of February 12 ,
1921, appears in evidence as Defendant's Exhibit No. 51. This map
shows a strearn rising in the northernmost part of Section 18 , flowing
north into section 7 and northeasterly through Section 8 to its con-vergence in Section 1; with a stream rising in Section 5- These united
streams flow east through Sections 5, 1; and 3 to a junction, in Section
The descriptive data gives its width as 1
link (7.92 inches) wide at the boundary‘ line betw:-zen Sections 18 and 73
15  wide at theihoundary line ‘net:-reen Sections 7 and 8 , and also
Sections 8 and S. It is 18 links 1;-i.de at the boundary between Sections
5 and h. A short distance east of this latter boundary line it receives the flow of a stream less than one mile in length, one link

wide at the section line (Tr. pp. 115-119), which is the vessie Corral
stream pet‘tioners say is the main. South Fork of -‘-'-htarnrsn Creek.

No ‘discharge measurements have been made on the disputed streams
and Hr. Thoma points out that the original field notes on which the
township plat is based do not mention the actual presence of water in
the stream ‘beds. We think, however, that the more accurate ini‘crma¥ticn is that based upon the survey notes, and that the true head of
We believe there

the South Fork of Ahtanum Creek is in Section 18.

is less possibility of.‘ error in actual acreage vixen available S.‘L":“V‘€3"

5

666

-rm:-'

data is used than exists in planhneter readings of Geological maps
prepared before actual survey, and that the area between the South Ford
of Ahtannm Creek and Reservation Creek, east of the Barnard line of
1900, contains 2,930.77 acres.

The same process of reasoning causes us to accept the survey
and planimeter readings of the area north of the straight line between
Reservation Creek and Spencer‘s Point and south of the crest of the

divide extending by way of Darling Mountain from Reservation Creek

around the headwaters of'Klickitat river*to Spencer‘s Point, which show

an area of lS,l68.6S acres, (Def. Exs. Sl through_S6) in preference

to Barnardis estimate in 1900 made without'benefit of survey. .accordingiy,
we find the total acreage within Tract C to be l8,C9h.h2 acres. Of this
acreage, however, only l7,669.lO acres have been patented, and Indian
title has not been extinguished to the remaining h2S.32 acres.

VALUATION
The Supreme Court permitted the use of average dates of‘patent to‘

avoid burdensome computations involving values of'patented lands in Greek

Nation v. United States of America, 302 U.S. 620. i/ ‘we believe this

 

     

“The act of 1e91 did not dispose of the lands. Its erroneous applicaion and the consequent disposals of'the lands to adverse holders constituted the taking by the United States. The petitioner is entitled to the _
present full equivalent of the value of'the lands, without improvements, as
of the dates of th patents of the various parcels, if, as we assume, the
patent in each instance issued promptly after the delivery of the final certificate; but if a substantial interval elapsed between the date of the cer=

}.

tificate arn.patent, then, as of the date of the certificate. .A fair approxir

nation or average of values may be adopted to avoid'burdensc:=

J
3 ‘Crib!
ccnputation of value as of the date of disposal of each sexarate tract."

method would give us a proper date for evaluation of the Cedar Valley

tracts. Both parties seem to have agmed in their briefs that these
tracts should be valued as of December 2l, l9OL:, the date of the passage
of the Congressional Act preserving to all bona fide settlers or purchasers under Public Land Law, any interest acquired in these lands,

and that date is acceptable to this Commission. All evaluation evidence
becomes applicable thereto in view of Mr. Henze‘s statement that he was
unable to ascertain any appreciable difference between 1906 values,

to which he testified, and those of l9O?.L. (Trans. pp. 26, 1L6-8). The
parties have also agreed upon evaluating the Tract C lands as of 1923,

the average date when patents were issued, and this date of evaluation

is acceptable to this Commission.

The petitioners rely upon testimony of Karl D. Henze to establish
the respective values of the Cedar ’alley and Tract C lands. Defendant
relies upon the oral testimony of C. Marc Miller and a detailed evaluation report prepared by him which appears in evidence as Defendant‘ s

ikhibit No. 129, and has been carefu.U.y analyzed.

V

I~Er. Henze testified that since 191:6 he has been a meraber of the

firm of Mason, Bruce and Girard of Portland, Oregon, Consulting Foresters,
functioning as a consulting engineer with emphasis on economics in forestry.
Between 1931 and 191:6 he had been in the employ of the United States Forest

Service with the exception of a three-year period of Array service. He had

access to the acctmulated data of that partnership dating ‘tack to l92l,

and the benefit of consultation with the senior member, I-Er. Mason, who had

T”. c0 C ' "* L
~BTlC$ rorester cf

0-3-nub

J-':...,3

"0--I-I

J.

fomerl:;' served both as ‘Forest Service,

of the Interior, and as Chief. of the 'l‘i.rnb'er Section in. the Bureau of.‘
Internal Revenue.

Mr. Miler is a real estate broker in Seattle, Washington, with
25 years experience in appraisal work, specializing exclusively 
rural and suburban properties, and trained in the science of Forestry‘.
He has owned and sold timberland, has appraised several extremely large
tracts which included tmberlands, for individual clients, the State of
hfashington and the Government, including among them the Yakima Artiuellange for the Am}? and the Hanford area for the Atomic Energy’ Commission. Both men are well qualified appraisers, experienced in timberland

appraisal we r‘:::.

7- Cedar Vallev Tracts (27.6h7.7ll

 

\

The 27,347.71 acres of land within Cedar Valley -to‘ which patents
were validated by the Act of Decerfoer 21, 1901;, lie within a 20-mile
Square area in the southvzest corner of the present Yakima Indian reservation. Some l§,300 acres form a fairly solid within Kliclcitat county
and the remainder are not so compactly blocked in Yakima county. '{.‘hey
are timberlands, and on December 21, l9_03.1, supported an average stand of
13,000 board feet of Ponderosa pine and 3,000 board feet of other m':.«:ed

species tirrfoer per acre,

The evidence of record '.:hich has been detailed in our Fmdir.-gs of

areas of civiJ.ization by virgin timberland. The main Cascade IVEountain

.1

range bounded than on the west, The Klick'j_t“t river ran bet-,:eaen thig

""'-"—'%<'*'1 7-: -'-~r---‘- -‘ G '~ '*....°.-.. - .1.‘ ... L‘ . ° '~ - .-~
4--.-.,--0-- c-.-.. the let:-rooc :I.‘.‘..«.-.uc':.‘-- to the sc“—.r:.-.e t; the Emcee “did

a leg:

0*}

U1

be':«:een it and Goldendale, some 13 miles to the south. White .‘>‘wan,
some 2.; miles to the east, was the nearest town in that direction.
I-‘iiles of unbrolcen timberland stretched way to the north.

The land possesses no known minerals, and there is no evidence

' of scenic views, fish, wild life or recreational usage which would affect

the fair market value of the tracts as of December 21, l90h. The soil
is poor, snow lies on the ground the greater part of the year, frosts
are frequent as late as mid-June, and the growing season is short.
Cattle and sheep are grazed between June 1st and Sap-tanber 31st, but the
forage is pinegrass, which has little nutritious value, bunch grass,
scattered patches of peavine, sunflowers and needs.

The evidence discloses that about 100 people resided in Cedar
Valley in 1902; that its population was densest in l9Ch but dtqrindled
thereafter. By 1903.; these pioneers had built a fee roads and trails
within the valley but only one road connected the area with the outside
world. This was the dirt military’ road built in 1855-56 and unimproved.

until 1909. It extended through the valley from The Dallas on the Columbia

o

river to Fort Simcoe and Yakima. The nearest railroad terminated at Gol<3endale, some 13 miles away. Another railroad ran along the eastern end of
the Yakima reservation, some 30 miles distant. Telephone and telegraph
lines had not reached this primitive country.

t appears the sett..ers were attracted by the wood and water in
this area, and they built several mills in and about the Cedar Valley

tracts. These mills operated only short periods at a tins and no more

4- . ‘ e... .: .. .. 4:... ... .. '- .. - ..
than t.-ro were ever 1:‘. opeset.-_or; at at; one t......e. Some l‘Le_"I?.C:..".2:‘ 1-.-as haul ed

5 671

outside Cedar Valley, but the trips required several days, none of the
streams could be utilized in moving logs, and this was not a general
practice. We think the IT1i..'.l operations in Cedar Valley in 1.901.: must be
considered local in character, producing lumber for local constznption.
There is much evidence regarding the lumb ering activities carried
on by the ‘Iakima Indians upon their reservation. Petitioners call
attention to incidents where lumber was bought and sold by the Indians
or their Agency to neighboring settlers; of complaints that the settlers

were trespassing upon the reserve tion with their herds, and oi‘ frequent

requests that the reservation boundaries be surveyed and mawed as the

‘co ntry was rapdily being settled. There are also reports of pasture

C .

9

O
- c-—--- "“

1"?-m1'..'-z'l.'~= c‘.n1‘_14=.r*.+.¢=:r§ hv ‘the Agencv or ‘i;.he 2'31-"rm-?_ I'£1"1‘_i.-'.->.I'*

The Yakima Agency is some eighty miles long east and west, extending from. the Cascade I-fountains on the west to the Yakima river on the
east. The western portion and the country about the western portion of
that reservation is roughgpnountainous and wooded. The eastern part of
the reservation is agricu tural land and it is bordered in that section
by rich agricultural land which was attractive to the early pioneers.
Settlement in the Yakima river drainage was intensified by the early introduction of irrigation there, and there is some evidence in th record
oi‘ the leasing of lands in the eastern part of the reservation to settlers
within that general region. The pro‘osbilit_t_: that the incidents referred
to have ref.'e_ence to the eastern part of the Yakima reservation rather thm
the Cedar Valley region or its inhabitants is s‘ pported by statements of

Q* 1:.
n

lers r:ithi-. Cedar V:-,=..-._=-e-gr *.:..-.o were personal.‘ :3;

contacted by defendant's witness, Mr. C. Marc Miller, and reported to
him that only a few head of stock were ever raised in Cedar Valley.

We find nothing in the record connecting these incidents to Cedar

. Valley.

In evaluating the Cedar Valley tracts as of.‘ 190}; and also Tract C
as of l923, petitioners rely primarily upon the testimony of their witness Karl I-lenze. Defendant has presented and relies primarily upon the
testimony of C. Marc Killer and a detailed evaluation report prepared
by him. Both these expert witnesses are competent appraisers.

Defendant‘s appraiser reached his estimate of the l90h value of

.these tracts after examining the land and after acquainting himself

with economic conditions prevailire in and about this area at 1-.‘r~.e +.ji_rr'5:_:p

Q9 A
by contacting then residents of the area, e:::a::1ining'cruise records of the

tracts and adjacent areas to ascertain the stand and condition of the

timber, and checking records in Yalgirna and Klickitat counties to ascertain the consideration paid in timberland sales occurring within periods
relatively near the appraisal date, by contacting commercial lumbering
companies to ascertain the prices paid for timberland purchased for
immediate logging about that date and after taking into consideration
climate, soil, location, mineral values and other elanents that attach

to and are entitled to consideration as component paws of the land when

determinin

0'3

its fair market value. It was Mr. I~f.i]_‘Ler's opinion that no
market existed for these lands in l90h3 that the timber was inaccessible

for ‘ant of.‘ roads and transportation facilities 3 that there were *""‘

III-1
--- au4.J..C::)

9381-:

of more accessible and heavier stands between it and ‘—“'*-'- nearest

commercial mills or markets, and it  no value to contribute to the
land itself, which he valued ate nominal 50¢ per acre.

Petitioner‘s appraiser made use of the comparative sales approach
but made no such check into the local economic conditions. he placed
great reliance on both *"i‘:'cnber Ownership and Lu::i‘oer Production in the
Inland E‘:n.pire" by David Townsend Mason and "Stumpage Prices of Privately

u--o

Owned Timber in the United States" by Henrjf . Steer. The inforraation
set out in these pamphlets is based upon statistics gathered in one

instance from the entire Inland Ehzpte country, an area encompassing;

9

eastern Washington and Oregon, parts of Ida". and Montana and, in the

other instance, throughout the entire State of Washington. These give
the overall trends and general market prices within the named areas and
through yet larger areas, but that information needs to be carefully

a__ plied when comparatively small tracts in areas not supporting comamercial lumber operations are under consideration. The value of the
latter document is_materiaJ_'Ly discounted by the fact that no stumpage
sales occurred in Yakima county before 1913 and the first such sale in
These publications do show

Klickitat county was not until 5' years later.

5

(D
M

an increasing interest as of December 21, 1901:, in the timber and tirnb

value increase which a pr O
U}

lands of the Northwest forests, a potential
pective purchaser would take into consideration, but would scarcely
reflect the price a willing purchaser‘;-:ould pay for land containing a

stand admittedly less ‘neawr than surrounding timber, much of it nearer

cor-nxercial mule and more accessible in location.

6

/

3

5 674

Mr. Henge placed an overall value of $30.00 per acre upon the
Cedar Valley tracts as of December 2l, l90!_-, based, he testified, upon
other transactions wherein similar values were accorded the land and
tirfoer on it. We have searched the record in vain for sufficient data
concerning the transactions Hr. Henze considered had comparable aspects
and were indicative of a 1903.: fair market value of the Cedar Valley tracts,
to enable us to consider their comparative features or even, with any
degree of satisfaction, to permit identification of an the transactions
considered by him. His evident unfamiliarity with recorded sales in
Yalrima and Klickitat counties and the status of ccztrnercial lumber operations within the counties on or about the appraisal date could have been
easily overcome by reference to the con. -*.-;r records. Wni._e such sales n'itnin 3 Period not too remotely prior or subsequent to theappraisal date me"
be ‘insufficient in number to reflect the market value of‘ the tracts here
involved, they unquestionably would affect the price a prospective purchaser
would consider paying for this land, and they merit examination and consideration. Eight of the tracts under consideration sold between l902 and
l9l.i for prices ranging from $3.125 to $12.50 per acre. Some 951x119 acres
immediately south of Cedar Valley and within the same township as some oi‘
these tracts sold between 1892 and l90§.; 1”‘ r an average $h.O8 per acre.
-i‘ter the railroad reached Goldendale in that area, the average price per
acre increased to $6.37 for land sold ‘oettreen l90i.: and 3309, inclusive.

These sales should be carefully weighed, however, since it must be
assuztzed that the consideration paid was enha .ced by the presence of the

usual homestead i'r::rove.'::e::ts and a__'?lo::ance r::.ust he  for the closer

-7
3

X.

0.3- ‘at '

5

location to railroad facilities, commercial lumber mills and settlements
supplying a greater market potential, as well as the comparable size of
the tracts and the quantity of the timber stand. These sales evidence a
value for timberlands in this area in excess of'the nominal 50¢ Per acre

fixed byIMr. Miller but we think it falls far short of the $30.00 per acre
valuation by Mr. Henze. A prospective purchaser would have been aware
of these facts, and that no interest was being evidenced in the Cedar

Valley land.by commercial operators; he would have known that timberland

‘was obtainable under the Public Land Laws in areas not to exceed l60 acres
rinse

."\‘* hr’

in size for per acre.

That land within this area did not have a great value at this time

is evidenced by the_sale in 3906 of 2,Sh6 acres about a millsite at the

-an
\

‘mouth of Nasty Creek on.Ahtanum Creek for $1.00 per acre, and'by the fact
that a resident of the valley refused to purchase 320 acres of the best

timberland in.l902 for $1.00 per acre.

‘We are mindful that in the recent case of Yakima Tribe v. United

 

States, Docket No. l62, the present petitioners recovered 53,00 per acre

 

for the'Wentashapam Fishery tract of 23,000 acres as its fair market value

on January 8, 189k. As our Finc'ngs of Fact in that docket will disclose,

that tract was a solid unit on the wentashapan river, 50 miles above the

mouth of the Columbia river, in Chelan county,'hashington.

A transcontiof it aff rding transportation to

facilities. A railroad division town.was 18 miles south, white settlements
were adjacent; a count? road ran tnroach it; there here some wood agricultur

675

5 676

lands along the river within the tract, and valuable salmon fishing rights
were one component element of value.

While a prospective purchaser would have realized the subject lands
had a limited grazing value and were proving agricu turally unsatisfactory, he would have also realized that a potential future market existed
for the timber but that its fruition awaited the harvesting of‘more accessible and heavier tnnber stands between the areas than being out and.
Cedar Valley; that while the tracts were compactly enough situated to be

logged as a unit they were not in fact a solid block and the cost of

logging the timber would be increased due to the necessity of constructing

more than the usual miles of access and feeder roads and possible bridges.

m , '. ‘ O 9 ' 0
racing into cons*-eration.all the elements of value.and the evidence of

record in this case, we think that on December 2l, l9Ch, the Cedar Valley

tracts had a fei1'market.value of not more than $2.50 per acre.

II. Tract C: 172669.10 acres

\

Since the Indian title to h2S.32 acres within Tract C.has never been
extinguished, the defendant is not liable to petitioners for a taking of
MOTS than 17,669.10 acres within this tract. (See Def. Exs. 51 through
56 for exact location).

The ranainder of Tract C is virgin.tinberland, lying high up in the
Cascade Mountains, untouched in l923 by railroads, county'roads or highways, telephone and telegraph lines or other elements common to civilization. There:is no evidence that:minerals, wild life, scenic views or
even watershed use form component parts of its value. t has a light

Tagged stand of timber which is nostly_non-commercial in charact r. In

5 677

1923 part of it was renting at from  to 5;} per acre for use as summer
grazing land in conjunction with adjoining acreages, and as a portion Of
a much larger tract a part of this land was finally" disposed oi’ by the
patentee for $2.00 per acre in 191:2. By the unsatisfactory method of
computing the value of the total board feet of tinber upon it and other
land, assigring a 50¢ per acre value to the entire acreage, and dividing
the net results, Mr. Henze valued this at $6.00 per acre as tmberland.
I-‘Er. Miner assessed its value at $1.00 per acre as grazing land.

We are satisfied that the best use to which this land may be put
is short-term grazing land. We think that a prospective purchaser in

l923 would have considered that the thin, short, rough and unevenly dis"*l“=a.-;r;-‘I

+"V'|":}'W1‘l';'('\fq  (-4- avg:-3 91¢-saw ---I'- -“4"--- ---4----4--"* 3 *5-."" ' "3.’ "’ "
'-'- ---P1---tun-q— -o.._..a..-....,....., ...¢\.-u.-......u.-. Ln.‘-r\.v.n tit, ¢L"--.& L Qonlkl 5' .1.

.. v17: ..'c:...:..L.-.'uc=.d..:» , 116: v lggublc:
streams or roadways, contributed but little to the value of the land. We
are mindful of the sale in 1928 and shortly thereafter of some of this
land for from 50¢ to $2.50 per acre -but the sales were not consummated,
and their ultinate disposition in 191.12 for $2.00 per acre is subject to
discount by reason of.‘ the lands ‘min; included with a much ‘larger tract
supporting a considerable timber stand. ‘

A capitalization of the highest rentals produced would indicate a
value of slightly less than $1.00 per acre; l3'2 F 2:1 699
the valuation for ‘taxation purposes was $1.00 per acre; nearby lands, closer
to settled areas, sold in 13317 for $1.00 per acre. Lands to the north at a

loner altitude sold for more but the comoarative timber stand unor it is

:3
I)
(+
(T
(D
H:
0

*1

(D

:1

I
hi
'1
Q
.11
m
‘ It

cons-de"-ation. of other sales and all of the evidence

the l7,669.lO acres within Tract C had a fair market value of not to
exceed $1.25 per acre.
JUST CCI=1P1‘.1\ESA.TION
There remains the question of whether petitioners may recover an

increment as a part of just compensation. It is established that all

of the land here involved was originally included within the boundaries
of the reservation area which was retained by petitioners in their treaty
of cession on June 9, l8SS, l2 Stat. 9Sl. Subsequently these lands were
omitted fr  the reservation area by erroneous surveys conducted by the
defendant. Interests adverse to petitioners‘ title were recognized under
the Public Land Laws and petitioners’ divestiture of title was made
effective by the issuance of patents- The Congress, ‘.':j'," .’5.::t of Dc-3c-.:-;m‘oe;- El,
l9CL1, 33 Stat. 595', validated this V.’-'ron.gful takirzg, for ‘which petitioners
have never been compensated. Such a taking clearly entitles the petitioners to just compensation. Creekliation vs. United States, 302 U. S.

290, 82 L. Ed. L82 (295 U. s. 105).

The equivalent of just compensation may be determined by taking the
value at the date of taking: plus an increment arrived at by the allowance
of a reasonable rate of interest computed upon that value from such date.
Such reasonable rates of interest are also established by precedent,

Alcea Band of Tillanooks, at al., v. United States, lO3 C. Cls. 1:914. PetiSf .   if-.3-5 '
’_':,:-3. tioners may reco\.'er-~"7.3-2'.‘-:1: .n~'-.%3.- as the fair market value of the Cedar Valley

   

tracts on December 2l, 19014, together with interest computed at 5'}? per annum
from Decernber Zl, l90h to December 21,-, 193.4, and 31353 per ann':....; tnereafter

L 9 C .- 9 I 0 ;I O. 0 ‘_ 0
until entrgr of a final E‘-J.-Ic:I‘L'.‘. nerern, and one further s*.*-3:: of §22,CE=c._;‘.:i

-.."
\er..,_{

12:”-’ i.‘

the fair market value of the Tract C land on January 24, 1923, together

with interest thereon at t.e rate of 5% per annum from January'2h, l923

Fto Jannarv 2L, 193k. and bi per ann*n thereafter until entry of a final
ward herein; said interest representing a measured increment necessary

to the granting of just compensation herein.

Edgar E. Witt

5 679

 

Chief Commissioner

‘We concur:

Louis J. O*Harr
Associate Commissioner

 

r-s°‘.'.
Essociate Commissioner

E
I
F
‘C
n
‘C
t
o

 

