BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE K1owA, COMANCHE and APACHE
TRIBES or INDIANS,

Petitioners,
Docket No. 32
V.

THE UNITED srerss or AMERICA,

Defendant.

Decided: December 13, 1955
.Ap?earances:

W. G. Lewis, J. Roy Thompson, Jr.
and Frank Miskovsky,
Attorneys for Petitioners.

Ralph A. Barney, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION g§_Tss COMMISSION

0'Marr, Associate Commissioner delivered the opinion of the

I

Commission.

The Commission has previously determined in this case that the
petitioners had sustained the issues of feet and law relating to their
right to recover (1 Ind. 01. Comm, 520, 588) and on April 9, 1951
entered an interlocutory order to that effect and ordered the case to

proceed for the purpose of determining the difference, if any, between

the ve1ee of petitioners‘ land as of June 6, 1900, and the purchase

price paid petitioners therefor.

M 111

The lands to be valued were part of a tract set aside as a reservation for petitioner tribes by the Treaty of October 21, 1367, 15 Stat.
581. On October 6, 1892, the petitioners concluded an agreement with
the United States by which petitioners for a consideration of $2,000,000
agreed to cede to the United States their reservation lands, subject,l
however, to the allotment of lands in severalty to the individual members
of the tribes.

The 1892 agreement which was to be effective only when ratified by
Congress was not finally acted upon by Congress until 1900 when Congress
passed the Act of June 6, .1900, (31 Stat. 672) approving the agreement.
This Commission determined, however, (1 Ind. 01. Comm. 520, 527, 528)
that the 1900 Act created no contractual obligations on the part of
petitioners, for Congress had substantially changed the terms and pro—
visions of the 1892 agreement and that by virtue of the Act of June 6,
1900, the Government acquired the land without the consent of the Indians,
upon its own terms and conditions and in disregard of the rights of the
Indians under the Treaty of October 21, 1857.

The lands to be valued are within the lands described in Finding l
(1 Ind. 01. Comm. 505, 506). The Kiowa, Conmanche, Apache Reservation
was located, generally speaking, south and west of Oklahoma City and was
bounded on the east by the 98th Meridian and the lands of the Chickasaw
Nation, on the south by the Red River, on the north by the Washita River
and on the rest by the north fork of the Red River. (Finding 8). The
reservation consisted of 2,991,933 acres.

Of this acreage, 958,350

~acres were reserved by the Indians under the Act of June 6, 1900, for

14 112

allotments, pastures, agencies, schools, etc., and the United States

acquired 2,033,583 acres from the petitioners. (Finding 6).

Oklahoma Territory was organized in 1890. Much of the lands of the

Territory was opened to settlers by "runs" between the years 1889 and

1895. The

population of the Territory increased from 60,Hl7 in 1890 to 396,909 in

The development and settlement of the Territory was rapid.
1900. Of some 20,215,575 acres of lands made available for settlement

during the same period the record shows a total of lh,U8l,OOO acres had
been filed on or reserved. As of June 30, 1900, there were 5,733,385
acres still available for homestead entry in the Territory, with 3,211,931

of these acres being located in Beaver County. (The Governor of the Territory in 1900 reported most of the land remaining open for homesteads as
being broken and rough and unfit for farming. (Findings 9-10).
The ceded lands were in an area characterized as a humid area with

an average annual precipitation from 1891 to 1900 of approximately 30

1£Ch88. The growing season of the area usually lasts from April 1 to

November 1. The elevation of the area is approximately one thousand to

fifteen hundred feet above sea level, with the exception of the Wichita

Mountains in the west central portion. The area is well watered. Although the area is subject to periodic drought years, the climate thereof

is favorable to agricultural uses. (Finding 11).
Although as of June 6, 1900, the ceded area had no railroads through

the area, there were parts thereof so located as to be within reach of

rail transportation. Along the entire eastern boundary of the area a

railroad, the Chicago, Rock Island and Pacific, was offering service. By

M 113

March 31, 1900, the same railroad had constructed a branch line westward
from Chickasha across the entire northern border of the ceded area and
it cut across the northwestern corner of the area into Greer County and
terminated at the town of Magnum. (Finding 13). A small number of trails
and roads also criss—crossed the ceded area. (Finding lh). 0
The reservation itself, as of June 1900, was, generally speaking, in
an undeveloped state. There was some farming, the census (including the
Wichita Reservation) reported 21,763 acres as being improved, and the
Indians were raising crops of corn, wheat, oats, millet and kaffir corn.
The principal use being made of the reservation in June 1900, however,
was for grazing. There were some H0 leases of land covering about
2,130,000 acres, which were made with cattle ranchers for annual rentals
of a sum of $21o,632,6o.

The surrounding areas of land, however, were

generally being utilized for agricultural purposes. Greer County on the

west was reported to have agriculture and stock raising as the principal
occupation of its people and its products included wheat, cotton, corn,
cane, cattle and sheep. In Washita County to the north of the ceded area
the principal occupation of the people was agriculture, and the products,
of the county were cotton, wheat, corn, castor beans, cattle and hogs.
Roger Mills County to the northwest, however, had stock raising as the
Principal occupation of its inhabitants and its products included cattle
To the east of the reservation

and cattle feed, corn, cotton and wheat.

was Indian Territory. The lands of the Chickasaw adjoined the ceded area

on the east. The census reported the Chickasaw Reservation contained
16.37h farms in 1900, with 3,2h6,1s7 acres in these farms, of which

1.111.631 acres were reported to be improved lands.

M 11h

All of the evidence pertaining to the highest and best use of the
ceded area and as to its market value has been thoroughly reviewed and
weighed, but it is necessary in deference to the magnitude and impracticality of discussing all the evidence of such a large and conflicting
record to review only such evidence as is pertinent to the ultimate
conclusions herein.

There is much conflicting evidence pertaining to the question of
the highest and best use of the ceded area and this is undoubtedly the
result of the differences between the cattlemen who hoped to retain their
grazing privileges and the settlers who wanted the land homesteaded. In
the annual report of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for 1900, there
is a report by Indian Agent Randlett in which the agent reported the
reservation lands not to be generally well adapted to agricultural pur"The soil of bottom lands is excellent for

poses. He further stated:

farming purposes, but crops often fail to mature on account of irreguw
larity of rainfall. Ineat on the river bottom lands usually natures,

but often suffers injury by rainfall at harvest time. Indian corn if

planted early generally matures, but if not planted early, is liable to
failure of production on account of the hot winds that usually prevail
from the middle of July to the first of October. These winds dry out
all vegetation except in case of kaffir corn. All vegetable seeds must
be planted early to secure any returns. The country is well adapted to
stock raising, the native grass being abundant and of the class that
withstands drought sell," Agent Randlett was of the opinion that those

who settled the area expecting to profitably farm the surplus land after

1: 115

1: 116

the Indians had taken their allotments would suffer much disappointment.

He based this opinion on the fact that he believed that after the Indians
were given their choice of the best lands which were reasonably suited

to agriculture there would be but a limited amount of desirable land for

homesteaders, (Def. Ex. 16).

As early as 1887, however, the Acting Secretary of the Interior wrote
to the President of the United States that the Kiowa, Comanche reservation
"contains 2,968,893 acres of land, of which 2,65h,OOO acres are estimated
to be tillable. ‘ ° 3" (Pet, Ex. 60). In 1892, the agent in charge in
his annual report stated, "The Lands on the South Side of the Washita
River occupied by the Kiowa, Comanche, and Apache Tribes along the streams
are very fertile and adapted for agriculture pgrsuits, but the larger part
of their lands are best adaptable to stock raising." In January 1900,
Agent Randlett wrote to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs "This is not
300d agricultural country. The soil of the valleys is good generally. but
rainfalls and climate are irregular and so variable that crops are uncertain
even in best locations, with almost certainty of failure if attempted on
uplands." Randlett said the lands were remarkably adapted for stock raising. Others living on, or in the country adjoining, the reservation
heartily disagreed with the view that the lands were not adaptable to agriculture. A large number of affidavits were obtained from people well
acquainted with the reservation lands and the adjoining lands to the effect
that said lands were fine agricultural lands for the most part and these
affidavits were forwarded to Congress. (Pet. Ex. E6). That many others
believed these lands suitable for farming is evident in reading the Report

Of the Governor of Oklahoma Territory for 1900. Although the Governor was

1+ 117

of the opinion that only about onenhalf of the land left for settlers
(after allotment) would be desirable for farming land, he reported

that for years the whites of the Southwest had looked "upon this
beautiful and picturesque reservation ndth longing eyes * * *. The

rich bottom lands of the Washita Valley, producing magnificent crops

of wheat and corn, the fertile lands bordering many other streams, the
beautiful undulating plains stretching away to the Red River on the south
and west, and the magnificent mountain parks indeed offer an inviting
field for the agriculturist; but a thorough inspection of the entire
reservation shows much land is alone suitable for grazing, and much more
that is absolutely waste, while many thousands of acres on the mountains
will be absolutely valueless except for such minerals as may be found
there." (Finding 17).

A careful study of the field notes of survey of the reservation land
made in 1872 and other evidence of record indicates that much of the land
in the ceded area was adaptable to farming. The utilization and adapter
bility of the lands in the surrounding areas for farming also support the
conclusion that the highest and best use for which the lands were adaptable and needed in 1900 was as farm lands with stock husbandry as the
most likely branch of farming to be undertaken. d(Findings 12, 16, 17,
18).

The parties agree that the criterion of value to be applied in this
case is the:market value of the ceded area on June 6, 1900. Market value
is defined in Sacramento V. Heilborn, l56 Cal. U08 (cited by petitioners) as

* * * the highest price estimated in terms of money which
the land will bring if exposed for sale in the open market

with a reasonable time allowed to find a purchaser buying

with knowledge of all uses and purposes for which it is best

adapted and for which it is capable of being used.

In order to determine the market value of the ceded area, the parties
have introduced the written appraisal reports of two recognized and
qualified appraisers of long experience and the Commission has had the
benefit of their testimony. In addition, a number of additional witnesses who nere_living near the area at about the time of the valuation
date and were acquainted with the soil and conditions of the area, also
appeared for both parties.

Mr. W. D. Davis, a recognized appraiser, appeared for petitioners
as an expert witness, The main part of his valuation study is contained
in petitioners‘ exhibits 69 and 70. The Davis report (and the report
submitted by defendant*s appraiser, Ar. Hall) contains a world of data
pertaining to the history, topography, soils, economic and climatic
conditions, etc., of Oklahoma Territory and the ceded area itself. All
of these facts have been carefully analyzed and are bases of many of
the findings of fact made herein.

Mr. Davis placed principal reliance on the "Market Data Approach"
because, he states, "in this approach, the conclusions are found in the
actual market transactions occurring on or somewhat before the time to
which the value pertains."_ Since the market data approach involved an
analysis of sales of small undoubtedly improved tracts of an average
size of 260 acres, the petitioners’ appraiser found it necessary to
adjust the consideration indicated by these sales to properly reflect
the difference in market price that would be paid by a typical purchaser

for a tract of land the size of the ceded area. Mr. Davis was of the

H 118

opinion that what people were paying for land immediately adjacent to
the ceded area was the best guide to the market value of the ceded area.
(Tr. M51).

In order to determine what lands were selling for in the areas
immediately adjacent to the reservation, petitioners‘ appraiser had all
free sales of lands abstracted (Pet. Ex. 71-78) beginning with the first
sales of record in Jackson, Washita, Greer and Beckham Counties, Oklahoma
Territory, but in the Texas counties of Clay, Wichita, and Wilbarger,
the sales were abstracted beginning with the year l89h. (Pet. Ex. 70,
pp. 139—lh2). These sales of small improved tracts for the years 189M
through 1900 numbered 1986 transactions involving 628,5hl acres at an
average sale price per acre of $5.92 (Pet. Ex. 69, p. 35). If the sales
in the Texas counties which had been under development for a longer
period of time are eliminated, then there would be 27? transactions in
Oklahoma Territory alone involving M7,76l acres of land at an average
consideration of $M,92 per acre. Mr. Davis concluded that the average
price of $5.85 (adjusted) per acre paid in the year 1900 in adjacent
counties for lands "in the open market on free transactions averaging

about 260 acres in size was the most reliable indication of the free

market at that time." (Tr. 351-552). The average price per acre
(before adjustment to be discussed shortly) in all adjacent counties
in 1900, was $6.89, while for the Oklahoma counties alone it was $5.62
Per acre. 8
Petitioners‘ appraiser recognized that these were sales of small
improved tracts and therefore adjustments would have to be made for

buildings, other improvements and size. To make the adjustment for

1:. 119

buildings, he utilized the United States Census of 1900 to obtain a.per~
centage relationship figure which could be applied to show the value of
land itself. The census, in other words, gave separate figures for land
and improvements (except buildings) and for buildings. These two figures
were added together to get the total value of land, improvements and
buildings. Then to ascertain what percentage land and improvements,
except buildings, bore to the total of land and improvements, including
buildings, witness Davis divided the latter total into the former. (Tr.
huh-M55). This percentage relationship was applied in each county according to the percentage ascertained for each county to the sales in each
county for the years 189M through 1900. By applying this method to said
sales, petitioners’ appraiser.determined that the average consideration
per acre of $5.92 for the 1,986 sales should he reduced to $5,3h to compensate for any improvements on the lands in the nature of buildings.
For the year 1900 only the average consideration per acre of $6.U9 would
be reduced to $5.85 per acre for the land alone. (Pet. Ex. 70, p. 1H2;
Pet. Ex. 69, p, 35). Petitioners‘ appraiser also pointed out that the
study of the census reports indicated that such improvements as ponds,
wells, plowing and fencing would be included in the estimated and rePorted value of land itself. For this reason he determined a further
adjustment of the average Per acre price was necessary to ascertain the

Value per acre of the raw land. In

(Pet. Ex, 69. p. 35; Tr, MM7, M52).
determining the cost of improvements such as fencing, plowing, wells, etc.,
the petitioners‘ appraiser testified that probably 88 acres of the farms

sold were in cultivation at 50¢ an acre for plowing, that probably only the

M 120

M 121

pasture was fenced, and that probably the cost to fence the entire outside
of the 160-acre pasture would not exceed $80, or approximately 31 cents
per acre, that each farm probably had either a well or some sort of pond
probably costing the farmer about $50.

Based on these calculations, Mr. Davis determined it would be
necessary to deduct about 68 cents an acre for these improvements.
(Tr. M52),

Applying the adjustments to the average of the total sales in 1900
in adjacent counties, petitioners‘ appraiser presented the following

figures: (Pet. Ex. 69, p, 38).

Average price per acre paid for land alone $5.85
Probable cost of fencing 0.31 per acre
Probable cost of well or pond 0.20 ” "
Probable cost of plowing 0.17 " "
Total probable cost of improvements

other than buildings 0.68

Probable actual price paid
for unimproved land
per acre $5.17
Mr. Davis also recognized that a further adjustment would have to be
made because the price paid for a large tract would be less than that
Paid for a small tract. The reduction, he believed, would not exceed
33-1/3 percent, and these adjustments of the average per acre price of
sales in 1900, he found, indicated a market value of the entire ceded
area of approximately $3.h5 per acre in 1900. (Pet. Ex. 69, p. 38).
Defendant objected to the introduction of the appraisal report
(Pet. Exs. 69, 70, 71-78, incl.) prepared by petitioners‘ expert witness,

on several grounds, among which were that the exhibits contained data

relating to events subsequent to the valuation date of June 6, 1900,

and that in so far as the evidence relates to the sale of small tracts
it is not proper evidence to determine the value of a tract consisting
of more than 2,000,000 acres. (Tr. 572~5?7).

The Court of Claims and this Commission have considered the sale
of small tracts in and adjoining an area for which a value must be
determined as a factor to be weighed in establishing the fair market
value.

Alcea Band of Tillamooks v, United States, 115 C. Cls. M63;

Rogue River Tribe v. United States, 116 0, Cls. M55; Seminole Nation v.

 

United States, 102 C. Cls. 565; Pottawatonie Tribe of Indians, et al. v.

United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 10, 59-61; The Quapaw Tribe of Indians

 

v. United States, 1 Ind. Cl. Comm. H69, 502~50h. In the absence of

 

evidence of more probative value with respect to comparability such sales
of small tracts may be the best evidence available to assist the Commission in determining a market value. Cf. Osage Nation of Indians V.

United States, 3 Ind. Cl. Comm. 2l7,_35U, 355. The sale of small tracts

 

in determining value have been carefully weighed, however, especially
where they involve improved lands as compared to raw land, Pottawatomie

Tribe of Indians v. United States, supra, at page 58, and Osage Nation v.

 

 

United States, supra, at pages 337—3h2, and as they differ in comparability because of size, Pottasatomie Tribe of Indians, supra, at pages

60-61.

I

In the Osage case, supra, this Commission was of the opinion that

 

the use of the 1900 census figures to arrive at a percentage of the value
of improvements as compared to the value of raw land was not a proper

method to be followed, for the Census never attempted to separate the

H 122

value of fixed improvements such as ploughing, clearing, fencing, wells,
etc., and since the only separation of realty values that was made by
the Census was between buildings on the one hand and land with iixed
improvements on the other.

As previously pointed out, petitioners’ appraiser in the instant
case recognizes the fact that the land value as found by the Census would
include such improvements and makes an adjustment of 68¢ an acre on the
average price per acre of the sales of small tracts to compensate for
them. The foundation for such a price per acre for improvements on the
lands alone seems to be based mostly on guesswork, however, and is highly
speculative, The appraiser for petitioners assumed that probably only
the pasture of a farm was fenced, that probably each farm had a pond or
well costing $50 per farm, and that in all probability 88 acres of each
farm could be expected to be in cultivation and the plowing of such would
not exceed 50¢ per acre plowed. The farms in the areas adjacent to the
ceded area were in areas, according to petitioners‘ own proof, that were
almost entirely entered or filed on. In the Texas sales, the counties
had long been organized while in Oklahoma Territory the counties had been
in existence in some cases for up to ten years. It seems unreasonable
that the average settler who sold his farm lands would have improved said
lands only to the extent of 68 cents per acre on the average. Even assuming that this belief is erroneous there is another valid reason for reject—
13% the idea that such an adjustment would suffice to show the market value
of raw lands.

In the case of these small sales other factors add to their

Value that do not seem to have been taken into consideration. It should

1+ 123

1+ 121;

be remembered that these sales took place in areas in which most of the
land had been filed on or entered, that settlement of these counties had
developed rapidly bringing with it schools, churches, public improvements
such as roads, bridges, and the like, all of which establish community

life, add to the value of land and establish markets for the settler.

iThese are certainly elements or factors that add to the sales value of

Property within settled areas and would be reflected in the selling price
of these transactions,
A prospective purchaser, as petitioners’ appraiser correctly indicates, would certainly be interested in knowing the status of sales of

lands surrounding an area which he was interested in buying. Such an
analysis of these sales would give him an idea of the market value of

land and an insight into the demand for land. A study of the sales presented
by petitioners, and other evidence of record, indicates that there was not
only a market but also a demand for land in Oklahoma Territory as of the
valuation date. The evidence discloses that a prospective purchaser would
be reasonably sure that there would be a demand for the land at a reasonable
Price and that the price of land would probably continue to increase. The
Prospective purchaser would be aware of the competition offered by the

more than 5,000,000 acres of public lands still available for homesteadiné in Oklahoma Territory and the contemplated opening of the Wichita
Indian lands which immediately adjoined the ceded area on the north, The
Prospective purchaser would be aware of the rapid increase in population

of the Territory between 1890-1900, of the successful farming of the areas

3dJ0ining the ceded area and of the bright outlook for the Territory as a

whole. Such a purchaser would undoubtedly, on the other hand, have known

of the agitation for and the passage of the Free Homestead Act (31 Stat.
179) passed on may 17, 1900, by which settlers already residing on agricultural public lands under existing law could secure patents for the
lands without paying any further sums except the customary fees.
there is no doubt that he would be cognizant of the great desire of the
whites, as related in the Governor of Oklahoma Territory Report for l900,%
to obtain the lands of theldowa, Comanche and Apache for farming purposes;
that the Indians were to first select their allotments and other parts of
the land would be reserved and thus a contiguous body of land would not

be available for purchase; and that portions of the area would be within
reasonable reach of rail transportation.

Defendant‘s expert witness, Mr. Richard Hall, a qualified appraiser,

also prepared a written report (Def. Ex, 7) and testified at length before

the Commission. Mr.

Hall concluded that the highest and best use of the

ceded area as of June 6, 1900, was for grazing purposes. (Tr. 753, 776;
Def. Ex. 7, page 1). Defendant's appraiser concluded that the fair

market value of the ceded area as of June 6, 1900, was 50¢ an acre. In

arriving at this conclusion, he took into consideration the usual factors
Weighed in valuation cases, such as population, climatic and soil conditions, transportation, sales which he thought comparable, markets,

economic conditions and competitive land. In determining the highest and

best use of the land to be for grazing purposes, he considered, among
other factors, the opinions of the Indian agents and Quaker agents and

others who were on the reservation over a period of years prior to 1900,

Finally,

(‘J
U!

she reported for the most part that the land was best adapted for graz(Def. Ex. 7, pages l50~l55). Mr. Hall also considered the surveys

ing.
made of the reservation in 1873 wherein the surveyors classified the

soil of the reservation and made field notes pertaining to the adaptability
of the soil in many instances. These surveys, he believed, "constituted
the most accurate and detached description in existence of the area in
its still undeveloped state as of June 6, 1900, * ° *." On the basis
of his study of the surveyors‘ notes, he estimated that 66.07% of the
ceded lands were 2nd class soils or uplands and generally rolling
terrain, and best adapted for grazing purposes; that lh.60% were 1st
class soil, or alluvial, generally arable by reason of its fertility and
flat character; and 19.33% as 3rd class soil, including mountains, dunes,
etc. (Def. Ex. 7, p. 91). Petitioners’ appraiser, hr. Davis, classified
the soils based upon an unpublished study made by the Soil Conservation
Service in cooperation with the Bureau of Plant Industry and the Oklahoma
Agricultural Experiment Station. In making the study, be divided the
soils into four broad soil classifications. On the basis of his computations, the ceded area contained 5.9% "alluvial" soils which are

generally well adapted to crop production- 32.39% "reddish prairie"

soils, generally adapted to crop production, although some types are
suited only for grazing; h5,hl% "Bolling Plains” soils, generally reasonably well suited for cultivation but many of the soil associations in this

éroup are best suited for pasture and grazing; and 16.3% "Cross Timbers

and Mountains” described as the poorest soils in the ceded area, (Pet.

Ex’ 69! P. 

1: 126

A careful study of the record in this case indicates that the areas
of land adjoining the ceded area were known to be generally productive
as farm lands; that there was a great demand that the ceded area be made
available to settlers for farming purposes; that the branch of farming
which would appear to be most suitable to the area in 1900 would be
stock husbandry; that the Indians in making their allotments would select
8 great quantity of the best aricultural lands; and that in the adjoinr
ing areas there was a market for farm lands,

Having decided that the highest and best use of the ceded area was
for subdivision into farm lands, it is evident that the best guide as to
market value is reflected in the small sales in areas adjoining the
reservation in 1900, and it is not necessary to dwell at any length on
the sales of large tracts of ranch lands adaptable to grazing uses introduced into evidence by defendant's appraiser. The sales of these ranches
were for the most part in the Texas Panhandle to the west of the ceded
tract, in areas devoted primarily to cattle raising, and farther removed
from centers of population and markets. The sales, however, have probative
Value in showing not only a market for large tracts of land but also
indicate the existence of other available lands of which a prospective
purchaser would be aware of at the time.

All facts, such as the types of soil on the ceded area, sales of
adjoining land and the highest and best use to which said lands had been
Put, the availability of markets and transportation, the availability

°f Competitive lands in Oklahoma Territory, and the market and demand for

lands would be known to the prospective purchaser as previously pointed

1: 127

M 128

out. Uppermost in the mind of the prospective purchaser would be several
important factors that would control the price he would pay for the lands.
These factors are (1) the size of the ceded area -- 2,033,583 acres, (3)
the fact that it would not be a contiguous tract, generally speaking,

(3) the sale of small improved tracts in the adjoining counties in 1900,
for an average consideration of $6.h9 per acre, (3) the necessity of paying
taxes on the lands, (5) the expenses involved in selling the lands, (6) the

necessity of dedicating certain portions of the lands for roads and the

building of bridges to make the lands accessible, (7) the risk element,

financially speaking, involved in such a large transaction, and (8) the
need to receive a return on his money and a substantial profit.

A review of the entire record convinces us that the conclusion of
defendant's appraiser that the lands within the ceded area were worth
but 50¢ an acre cannot be supported by the record which indicates a fair
market value of a much higher per acre price. That the demand for this
land was great is shown by the fact that for the 13,000 available homesteads in the two reservations opened for entry, at least three—fourths
of which were Kiowa, Comanche and Apache lands, l6k,hl6 persons registered
for a Chance to secure a homestead and a total of 11,638 homestead entries
were made during the period allowed for making the selections and entries
at $1.25 per acre. These undisputed facts in themselves show a marked
value in excess of the $1.25 per acre fixed by the Congress for the land.
Nor does the record seem to support the conclusion of petitioners‘ appraiser
that the lands had a fair market value of $3.35 per acre, especially when

the size of the tract is taken into consideration and the fact that the

or...-hr: -w- h 129

average consideration of sales of small improved tracts adjoining the area
was $6.39 per acre.

We believe the evidence supports the finding that the land here in
question had a market value of $2.00 per acre, or $3,067,166, when
acquired by defendant and that the petitioners are entitled to recover

from defendant $2,067,166, less offsets hereafter to be determined.

Louis J ‘iarr
Associate Commissioner

We concur in the foregoing
opinion:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

   

o-.—..-.-.-u-.--._.j._—-—-a-—-—

wm. M. Holt

 

Associate Commissioner

