8 Ind. C1. Com. 420

BEFORE THE INDIAN CI_.AII-‘IS COME‘-EESSIOIE

THE CONFEDERATED TRIBE": OF THE COLT/‘IE RESERVATION, )
as the representative of the COLVILLE, LAKE, )
sen POEILS, NESPELEM, ore-moeem, AND METHO1-=3’ )
TRIBES. ' O )

LOUIE CAMILLE AND PETER J. GUNN, as the represent— )
atives of the COLVILLE TRIBE, ’ )

PETE I..EE*IEFCY AND FLORENCE QUILL, as the representw )
atives of the LAKE TRIBE, I )

E ALEX L. COVINGTON AND LE‘.-ES H. RUNNELS, as the repre-)
sentatives of the SAN POEILS TRIBE, i )

EDDIE YERACOSTCHIN AND ED HILAKAHN, as the represent-)

_ atives of the NESPELEM TRIBE, ‘ ‘ )

ALEX NICHOLSON AND NARCISSE BROOKS, as the representu) Docket No. 181

atives of the OKANOGAN TRIBE, )
SAM MILLER AND MICHEL CHARLEY, as the representatives)
)

)

)

)

3

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

of the PIETHOW TRIBE ,

THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE COLVILLE RESERVATION,
as successor to the claims of the COLVILLE,

LAKE, SAN POEILS, NESPELEM, OKANOGAN, AND
METHOW TRIBE,

Petitioners,

‘V.

THE mmzn STATES OF AMERICA

Defendant.

- Decided: March 1, 1960

V memes OF me’: AS TO PROPOSED COI*1PROI~1lSE SETTLE"“""""""""m~:T or OFF_S"E"*I'"“_—S , mm’ '“""';:u»‘z“‘"""""""""’"""""‘"""em3 or an one '5:  . ""

 

I

The Comission has previously in.this docket made and entered Findings of Fact No. lito h2 inclusive on February 29, 1956 (h Ind. C1.
Comm. 151) and No. h3 to 73 inclusive on March 5, 1959 (7 Ind. Cl.

Comm. 187), and now makes_the following additional findings of fact:

£20

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:20 4 4'11

7h. On January 19, 1960 the parties heroin filed with the Commission a Joint Motion for Entry of Final Judgment, based upon a Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment made and executed by I. S. Weissbrodt,
Attorney of Record for Petitioners, Perry W. Morton, Assistant Attorney
General, and John D. Sullivan, Attorney for Defendant, which provides

as followszi

It is hereby stipulated between counsel for the parties
that the aboveeentitled case shall be settled and finally
disposed of by entry of final judgment, as follows:

1. There shall be set off against the interlocutory
judgment entered by the Commission on March 5, 1959, offsets
in the aggregate sum of $61,000.00, said $61,000.00 to be
allocated as hereinafter set forth, and final judgment shall
be entered in favor of the tribes of the Colville Reservation
hereinafter named, in the following net sums:

Colville Tribe, $111,000.00 less the offset of »
$6,h00.00, that is, the net sum of $l0h,600.00;

San Poil~Nespelem Tribe, $h36,000.00 less the
offset of $25,100.00, that is, the not sum
of $h10,90o.o0,

Okanogan Tribe, $237,000.00 less the offset of
$13,600.00, that is, the net sum of
$223,h00.o0; ~r 2

Methow'Tribe, $152,000.00 less the offset of
$8,700.00, that is, the net sum of $lh3,300.00;

Lake rrihe, $125,000.00, less the offset of
$7,200.00, that is, the net sum of $117,800.00

2. Entry of final judgment on this basis shall finally
dispose of all rights, claims or demands which petitioners
have asserted, or could have asserted, with respect to the sub~
ject matter of this case, and petitioners shall be barred
thereby from asserting any such right, claim or demand against
defendant in any future action; ‘

3. Entry of final judgment on this basis shall finally

.“= dispose of all rights, claims, demands, payments on the claim,

8 Ind. Cl. Com, 420

counterclaims or offsets which the defendant has asserted or could
have asserted, against petitioners under the provisions of Section
2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (C. 9h9, 60 State 10h?) for
the period July 2, 1872 to June 30, 1957, inclusive, and defendant
shall be barred thereby from asserting any such rights, claims,
demands, payments on the claim, counterclaims or offsets against
petitioners in any future action. The offsets referred to
specifically include those for the period July 2, 1872 to June 30,
I957, which are directly chargeable to the above listed tribes

and also those portions of disbursements made for the benefit

of Indians of the Celville Agency or of the Colville Reservation
which are allocable to the above listed tribes. The bar against
future claims by the United States for offsets, gratuities and
counterclaims allowable under Section 2 of the Indian Claims
Commission Act shall not apply to those which may have occurred
prior to July 2, l8?2, or to those which may accrue subsequent

to June 30, l95T.

The final judgment, entered pursuant to this stipulation
shall be by way of compromise and settlement and shall not be
construed as an admission of either party, for purposes of precedent or argument, in any other case.

,, 5. The final judgment of the Indian Claims Commission
§ pursuant to this stipulation shall constitute a final determination
*°” of the case by the Commission, and shall become final on the day
it is entered, the parties hereto hereby wai'ing any right to
appeal from.or otherwise seek review of, such determination.

: 6. Counsel for the parties shall execute and file with the
Commission a joint motion for entry of final judgment pursuant
to this stipulation, submitting a proposed form of order of
final judgment for approval by the Commission,

75. .At an open.hearing before the Commission on.February 12,

1960, oral and documentary evidence was received showing approval of

the stipulation and proposed settlement by the petitioners and by the

‘Commissioner of Indian.Aifairs.

Resolutions of the Colville Business Council of the Confederated
Tribes of the Colville Reservation, shown by the Constitution and Bylaws (Exhibit E) to be the governing body of said Confederaced Tribes,

are in evidence as Exhibits F, G and.H, which approve the proposed

.422

8 Ind‘: Cl. Com. £120 £23

settlement of offsets and authorize the Chairman of the Colville Business
Council to execute the stipulation on behalf of the Confederated Tribes
of the Colville Reservation. A duplicate copy of the stipulation signed
by the Chairman is Exhibit F (3). The action of the Business Council
appears to have been unanimous. Their action was authorized by a
unanimous vote of the tribal members present at a general meeting of the
tribes held at the town of Nespelem, Washington on November 7, 1959.
Exhibits M and N certify as to the death of individual petitioners
Peter J. Gunn, Eddie Yeracostchin, Alex Nicholson, Narcisse Brooks and
Sam Miller. Surviving individual petitioners who have signed duplicate
copies of the stipulation are: Louie Camille, as a representative of and
in behalf of all the members of the Colville Tribe (Exhibit 0);, Alex
In Covington, Lewis N. Runnels and Ed Hilakahn, each as a representative
of and in behalf oi‘ all the members of the Sanpoil-Nespelem Tribe (Exhibit

P); Pete Lemery and Florence Quill, each as a representative of and in
behalf of all the members of the Lake Tri:e_(Exhibit H); and Michel
Charley5 as a representative of and in.behalf of all the members of the
Methow Tribe (Exhibit 5) . willie Nicholson, son of Alex Nicholson,
deceased, and.Dick Simon.Brooks, son.of Narcisse Brooks; deceased, Sign
as representatives of and in.behalf of all the members of the Okanogan
Tribe (Exhibit Q).

All the attorneys for the petitioners who have or have had some
interest in the litigation, as shown by the ttorneys' Contract with

amendments (Exhibit T), have either signed the original stipulation.or

duplicate copies thereof. The signed copies are new on file with the

B Ind. Cl. Com._42n 424

Commission as Exhibits J, K and L. ".4
The exhibits have been satisfactorily certified and authenticated.
76. The Attorneys‘ Contract of the petitioners‘ attorneys provides
that said attorneys in the performance of their duties shall be subject
to the supervision and direction of the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs
and the tribes, and shall not make any compromise, Settlement; 0? Other
adjustment of the matters in controversy unless with the approval of
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the tribes. Such approval Of the
proposed settlement herein is contained in a letter (Exhibit D) dated

January 5, 1960 from.Glenn L. Emmons, Commissioner, Bureau of Indian

Affairs, United States Department of the Interior, to Cobb and'Weissbrodt.

Jv$he letter reviews the efforts to effect a settlement of offsets in the

5? .
‘”total sum of $61,000 so as to leave a net judgment of $1,000,000 for

the tribes, and concludes as follows:

‘we have carefully reviewed and considered your statements
contained in.your report of September 16, 1959, to the Confederated Tribes and the resolutions adopted by the Colville
Business Council on.November 20, 1959 and'November 27, 1959,
after the matter was fully discussed in.a mass meeting on November
7, 1959. In view of the statements contained in your comprehensive
report to the tribes and the action of the tribes in approving
the proposed compromise settlement, we hereby give approval to
your entering into a stipulation.with the Department of Justice
to compromise the offsets in Docket No. 181 upon the conditions

outlined in your letter of September ll, 1959, to that Department 0

7?. Harvey Moses, Chairman.of the Cclville Business Council, and
Nellie Rina, Secretary, testi ied at the hearing.
Harvey Moses testified that he is a full blooded Indian, is 39

vears of age, and resides within the Colville reservation at Nespelem,

iaashington. He has a high school education and, in addition to English,

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 49a

understands the native languages of all of the tribes in this docket.

As a rancher, he raises cattle. He is a veteran of the second world
war and a member of the public school board of his district. _During his
six years as a.member of the Council, he has been vice chairman for two
years and chairman for the past three years.
Harvey Moses further testified that he is personally acquainted

with most of the members of the Confederated Tribes; that he presided

at a mass meeting of November 7, 1959, which was well advertised; that

the settlement was fully explained to them, and the Indians and their

* Council members participated in the discussion, using both the English

and Indian langauges; that he also attended a number of informal-and
regional meetings at which the matter was considered; that he understands that this is a final settlement of the claim in this docket; that
he feels the settlement is fair and reasonable; and that the Indians, in
giving their consent and approval, have voluntarily acted without
pressure of an economic or official nature.

' Nellie Rima testified that she is a housewife, one quarter degree
Indian of the Lake Tribe, and.lives on the Colville Reservation. She has
a high school education; operated a grocery store at one time, and has
been on the school board at Nespelem for the past twelve years and clerk

of the board for about fifteen years. This is her fifth year as Secretary

of the Colville Business Council and her sixth year as a member of the

Council.

Nellie Rima further testified that she was present at the mass

meeting and the meetings of the council; that the proceedings were taken

 Ind. 01. Com. 2.20 t 426‘

down.by the clerk; that she has discussed this settlement with the Indians;
that there is a rather general understanding of what is proposed an.;3

all the Indians; that she does not know of any group or faction or anr
individuals who are opposed to the settlement; and that she and the

other Indians are of the opinion that this is a fair and reasonable
settlement.i

78. At said hearing counsel for the petitioners and defendant

expressed their opinions that the proposed settlement was fair to both
the petitioners and defendant. .

At least one of the attorneys for the petitioners was present at
jifgost of the meetings held by the Indians at which the proposed settleiwjhent was explained and discussed. In addition, Cobb-andTWeissbrodt
j made a written report to_the_Confederated Tribes, dated September 16,

1959, containing a comprehensive discussion of the prosecution of the
claim in this docket and the merits of the proposed settlement. The
report is not in evidence'because it is a privileged communication between

attorney and client, but a copy has‘been furnished the Bureau of Indian

Affairs and it is referred to in the Commissioner's letter of January

5, 1960.

In reaching their conclusion that the sum of $6l,0O0.00 is a
reasonable and just settlement of offsets, counsel for the parties have
studied and analyzed statements and information from the General
.Accounting Office showing disbursements by the United.States for the

gpindians of the Colville Reservation between.July 2, 1872 and June 303

1957 in the total amount of $2,39h,87h.oo, in the light of the Statutes

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 62“of the United States and decisions of the Commission and the United
States Court of Claims. The allocation of offsets between the tribes
is based upon a mathematical computation of each tribes‘ share of the
total recovery heroin.

79. From the entire record the Commission_finds that the compromise
agreement as set out in the Stipulation for Entry of Final Judgment has
been carefully and fully presented to the Indians who are petitioners
herein and has been freely and voluntarily approved by them, and that
the said compromise agreement under all the circumstances is fair and
just to the petitioners and defendant.

80. The Commission further finds that Lyle Keith and Patrick H;
‘Winston of Sp0kane,'washington, and Dayid.Cobb, Abe W. Weissbrodt and
I. S.'Weissbrcdt of'Washington, D. 0., are the attorneys who are presently
parties to-the Attorneys‘ Contract with amendments (Exhibit T) with
the Confederated Tribes of the Col1=iID.e Reservation and that James E.
Curry of‘Washington, D. 0., was a party'to the original contract; that
said attorneys have performed legal services for the petitioners in
this litigation for which they are to receive hy the terms of said
contract a fee of ten percent (10%) of the net recovery herein of
$1,000,000.00, being the sum of $100,000.00,  the amount of $30,000.00
which has already been paid to the attorneys under the contract, leaving
a net sum of $70,000.00 payable to the attorneys from the respective

awards herein as follows:

427

If-,‘)_D 174;‘. 

8 Ind. C1. Com.

Colville Tribe $ 7,322.00
San Poi1—Nespe1em Tribe 28,763.00
Okanogan Tribe 15,638.00
Methow Tribe 10 ,031.00
Lake Tribe 8:21J,6.00

Total $70,000.00

which award and division of attorneys‘ fees has been approved by the
Business Council of the Confederated Tribes of the Co1'vi11e Reservation

by resolution of January 111, 1960, a copy of which is atta'ched_to the

Petition of Attorney of Record for Award of Attorneys‘ Fees and is

in evidence as Exhibit U.

Edgar E..Witt
051 f Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

 

Arthur V. Watkins
Associate Commissioner

 

-, . r 9»:-ftifv‘ ‘-'

