BEFORE THE INDIAE CLAIMS CGKKISSIDR

CITIZEE BADD OF POT£W£TOEI IKDIAKS
G? OKLAEOKA, et al.,

- Docket no. 146
Petiti ners,

TEE POTEHITOMIE TRIWE OP INDIAKS,

TEE PR£InIE BAND OF THE POT§KATOREE TRIBE OF INDIANS, et al.,

Docket No. I5-H
Petitioners,

JRHES STRONG, et al., as the Representatives and on behalf of all

members by blood of the CHIPPEWA
TRIBE OF INDIANS,

6

Docket No. 13-M
Plaintiffs,

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
ROBERT DOE-’1II~EIC, et 3.1., as the )
Representatives and on behalf )
:5 .::-.1 mamw-we by b‘o~‘ of +*~ )
D

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

Mo\...aI&.a..l'\.v4- ht -A-1-.l\./\_A .5. V4;

JTTAWA TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Docket Ho. 40-K
Plaintiffs,

EAENAHVILLE INDIAN COMMUNITY,

Eilson, Michigan, FOREST COUNTY

>OT£KATOMI COMMUNITY, Crandon,

Jisconsin, et al.,

Docket No. 29-K

Plaintiffs,
vs.

‘HE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,
Defendant.
‘Decided: June 30th, 1958

Agnearancgg

oward D. Moses, Attorney 0. R. McGuire. Attorney
f Record for Petitioners of Record.for Petitioners
n Docket No. 1&6 in Docket No. I5-M

aes R. Fitsharris,
attorney of Record for
Plaintiffs in Dockets
No. 13-M and No. 40-H

Walter ;. Maloney, Attorney of Record for 1
Plaintiffs in Docket
No. 29-K

Sim T. Carmen, with whom

was Mr. Assistant Attorney General Perry'W. Korton, Attorneys for the

Defendant.

OPINIOR OF THE COMKISSION

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.
Area Involved

An examination of the petitions in Dockets Nos. 146, 15-M, 13-.,
40-K and 29-K, which were consolidated for trial for the purpose of
f ially determining the area claimed and the rights of the respective claimants thereto, will show that the several claims are based
upon the treaty of August 29, 1821, 7 Stat. 218, between the Ottawa,
Chippewa and Pottawatomie Nations of Indians and the United States.
:11 the claimants and the government seem agreed upon this; however;

some of the claimants, particularly those in Dockets 146 and 15-M,

aould include as part of the area ceded a tract of land which two
rears previously had been ceded to defendant by the Chippewa Indians by the Treaty of September 2%, 1819, 7 Stat. 203. This tract
romprises 999,o1u acres (Def. Ex._6h, Docket 146) of the lands_ce{ed by the 1819 treaty and lie therein south and west of the Grand

'iver.

6

has

The defendant by its answer denies that the treaty of 18-1 includes the tract last referred to and in its brief calls attention to
and describes the overlap the petitioners claim as port of the 1821
cession.

Before discussing the treaty description of the eastern boundary
line of the 1821 cession, an understanding of the boundaries of three
cessions made prior to 1821 is necessary. The boundary lines of these
treaties are graphically shown on the Royce Map,.Hichigan 1, Part 2,

as cessions 66, 111 and 88. See also Maps, Def. Ex. 65, Docket 1&6,

and Pet. BX. 112, Docket 13-..

Treaty of September 29, 1812:

23- " ,5

By the Treaty of September 29, 1oi?, 7 5tat..umL Royce 88, seven tribes ceded lands in Ohio and Michigan, the north and part of the
‘western boundaries of which form part of the 1821 cession lines. A‘bout this there is no doubt or that it is the treaty referred to in
the 1821 treaty, or that the eastern part of the line of the 1821 cession begins at the northeast corner of the 1817 tract. CRqyce 88).

Treaty of November 17, 1807:

On November 17, 1807, 7 Stat. 105, four Indian nations ceded lands

 

in southeast Michigan and northwest Ohio, the west line of which conforms to the Michigan Meridian and constitutes the southern end of the
east line of the 1821 cession (Royce 66 and 117). This treaty line
of 1807 is also the one referred to in the 1821 treaty as forming the

south part of the east line of that cession.

6 Ash. __

LT?CtV of Seotember 2A. 1819:

By the treaty of September 2%, 1819, 7 Stat. 203, the Chippewa
éation ceded to the United States a large area of land located in mid~

ile and eastern Michigan. This tract is shown as Royce area 111 and

the south and westerly lines shown by Royce conform to the lines described in the treaty. It is that part of this area lying south and

aesterly of the Grand River in Michigan that the several petitioners

nave included as part of their claim, as being part of the 1821 cession. There are, as shown above, 999,014 acres in this area.

The three treaties described above are important because they
adjoin the 1821 cession on the south and east, were all consummated

prior to 1821, and therefore come within the phrase “former cessions“

sad in the 1821 treaty.

Treaty of August 29, 1821:

The boundaries of the lands ceded by the treaty of August 29, l821,_

7 Stat. 218, are described in Article I as follows:

Beginning at a point on the south bank of the river
St. Joseph of Lake Michigan, near the Parc aux Vaches,
due north from Rum's Village, and running thence south
to a line drawn due east from the southern extreme of
Lake Michigan, thence with the said line east to the
Tract ceded by the Pottawatamies to the United States
by the Treaty of Fort Heigs in 1817, if the said line
should strike the said Tract, but if the said line
should pass north of the said Tract, then such line
shall be continued until it strikes the western boundary of the Tract ceded to the United States by the
Treaty of Detroit in 1807, and from the termination of
the said line, following the boundaries of former cessions to the main branch of the Grand River of Lake
Michigan, should any of the said lines cross the said
River, but if none of the said lines should cross the

6

r-1 d River, then to a point due east of the source
of the said main branch of the said river, and from
h

cipal branch, and from the crossing of the said River, or from the source thereof, as the case may be,

down the said liver, on the north bank thereof, to

the mouth; thence following the shore of Lake Eichigen to the south bank of the said river St. Joseph,

at the mouth thereof, and thence with the said south

bank to the place of beginning.

The south line of the cession strikes the nest line of the 1817

(Ft. Meigs) cession (Royce 88), and extends north to the northwest
corner and east to the northeast corner of the cession where it meets
the west line of the 1807 (Detroit) cession in accordance with the
1821 treaty description of the south line. The northeast corner of
the 1817 cession is referredin in the 1821 treaty as the "termination of said line“. It is the line north from this corner that must

be located in accordance with the calls of the treaty description, but

it is apparent that this line cannot be located from.the treaty descrip-_

tion alone; the topography of the area must be considered in connection

with the treaty calls.

There can be no doubt about the west and southern.boundaries of

the 1821 cessiona The only question that confronts us is the location

0

of the east and.northerly boundary lines of that cession. .It will be

seen that the call governing those lines reads:

* * * from the termination of said line [_the northeast
corner of the 1817 cession, Royce 887, fol1oning‘Uua
‘boundaries of former cessions, to the main branch of
the Grand river of Lake Michigan, should any of said

lines cross said River * * * down the said river,<n1
the north bank thereof, to the mouth * * *.

This language is plain and simply states that'Uu2twundaries of

.,‘-H" "I
r. s‘t“"gl"-.. - ' :

ner cessions to the main branch of the Grand River shall constitute
the boundaries of the 1821 cession if any of the lines of the former
sessions cross said river.

Obviously, to apply the description of the call to the lands, two
things must be shown by evidence: (1) the "main branch“ of the Grand
River, and (2) whether any lines of a former cession cross said river.
The petitioners have offered proof on both matters which consists of
their Map, Ex. ll2, Docket 13-K. This is the only evidence petitioners
have offered on those questions. The defendant‘s map (Def. Ex. 65, Docket No. lué) is to the same effect.

An examination of Exhibit ll2, Docket 13-M, will Shcw thai from it3

mouth on Lake Michigan, the Grand River appears 35 8 large 5*???“ dlmlhr

ing in size after passing Ionia, and after passing through Lansing

it becomes noticeably smaller as it approaches the southeast corner of
the l8l9 cession. Petitioners‘ Exhibit 112 shows a river flowing through
the south line of that cession (Royce 111). but it is mere Conjecture
that it is the Grand, in fact our inquiry of the Bureau of Land Management gave us no satisfactory proof of the source of the Grand River or
that it extends that far south. But however that may be, the map definately shows that, as compared with its tributaries, appearing on the
exhibit, from its mouth to the place where the westerly line of the

1819 cession crosses the Grand River is the widest part of the river,

and because of its size and prominence would be known to the treaty

commissioners and the Indians, while the upper reaches of the river

W

with its diminishing size and uncertain source would be less known;

2; L°.';,in fact, Cass in. l8l9 mentioned "our ignorance of the topography of
the interior of this Territory", (Def. Ex. I-LO, Docket 1&5) referring
to the l8l9 cession, through which the Grand flows for many miles. So
it is reasonable to believe that by mention in the 1821 treaty of the
"nain branch of the Grand river" he and the Indians had in mind the
prominent lower part of it and not its upper reaches. So on the record
we must conclude that the "main branch" of the Grand River meant the
part crossed by the westerly line of the 1819 cession.

with the above facts in mind, it is clear that the line which runs
north from the northeast corner of Royce 88 along the west boundary of
the l807 cession (Royce 66) to a point where the south line of the l8l9
'‘-4=°-°~‘«-*.“-=?'1 011 (Royce lll) intersects the west line of Royce 6-6. thence sixty
miles west, thence northeasterly on the westerly line of the l8l9 cession until it crosses the main branch of the Grand (west of Saranac,
Iéichigan), and from such crossing down the Grand to its mouth, constitutes the easterly and north line of.‘ the l82l cession since it follows
the boundaries of the 1807 and 1819 cessions, both of which were consummated prior to the l82l treaty. That line is in strict conformity
with the treaty call in that it’ follows lines of former cessions _t_9_ the
crossing of the main branch of the Grand and from there to the mouth.
To extend the 1821 cessionto the Grand in the l8l9 area, as petitioners ask, would be to completely ignore the plain treaty requirement

that the l82l boundary lines follow the boundaries of “former cession

* * * should any of said lines cross the said (Grand) river * * *."

In this context, "to the main branch of the Grand River" can only refer

Q
‘ F
L;.L;-.~-s
,_ .

3 a line - the former treaty line of the 78l9 cessicn - which crosses

the main branch of the Gr ad. 34$ net to the area ir the 1819 cession

 

which the petitioners claim. Such unambiguous calls, when read in the

light f the paysical conditions, are not open to interpretation, nor

can they be ignored. Accordingly, there is no overlap and the area of

the 1819 cession included in the petitioners‘ claim must be disallowed.

That Cass intended by the language used to limit the easterly boundary

%J of the 1821 cession to those of the 1819 and 18C? cessions is shown

by this statement made to the assembled Indians when he and Sibley were

I-OOH-I

negotiating for the lands in 1821 (Def. Ex. 53, Docket 1&4, page 26):

The country we propose to purchase of you is this. Beginning at the south end of 1ake.Michigan, at the mouth
of the Missikonomico, pr Grand Konomick and running toto-A--\-J‘ "—-'

waldo sun-rise until; it strikes the lands tha+ +he Po‘towattomies granted to their father at Fort Meigs. From

thence running along the line of Hull's treaty north to
a point directly opposite the mouth of Grand river on

Lake Michigan, and thence due west to the mouth of that
river.

This statement shows unfamiliarity with the location of the upper
reaches of the Grand with respect to former treaty lines and accounts
for the contingency, contained in the signed treaty, that lines of former cessions might not cross the main branch of the Grand; however, he

ended his statement by sayin :

In other words, all the lands between the Grand Konomack
and Grand River * * * extending towards the rising sun
until it meets the old grants.

 

Here is convincing proof that the boundaries of the lands they

were purchasing were not ct overlap those of any previous cession.

This intent is further manifested by this condition contained in the

6 as

«.2

Ii’C'C

l!

tre-a"':. 7 it.se3_f:

3.17}

d*..:=.e east of the source of the said mam b1"anc'Ei': of the

said river, and from such point due west to the source

of the said principal branch * * "‘ to the mouth * "‘ "‘.
The condition plainl; shows unfamiliarity with the location and source
of the Grand and is specifically made inapplicable if any former cession line crosses the main branch of the Grand, thus showing the binding effect of former cession lines on the east line of the 1821 cession.

The area involved in these actions is properly described in our
¥‘inding of Fact No. 10 this day entered of record. It will be hereinafter referred to as Royce ll7.

The proposed findings of fact filed by the several petitioners
aet up claims of interest to the land involved in these consolidated
iockets which are at variance with those plead in their respective peitions. After final argument was heard, and on January 27, 1958, the
ive petitioners filed a joint agreement that their several proposed
indings should be considered amended, the Ottawa and Chippewa now aserting title to all land within Royce ll? lying north of a described
‘ins and the Pota:-:atomi petitioners claiming all land south, of it.
he agreed division line is described as:

Commencing at the mouth of Black River in Lake I:.ichigan; thence east with the middle fork of the Black River to its source; thence in a straight line to the town
of Bloomingdale; thence in a straight line to the center of the city of Kalamazoo; thence up the Kalaxaazooi
River to the center of City of Battle Creek; therlce
northeast along Battle Creek (the stream) to the Michigan ?-ase Line‘ which is also the boundary line dividing Calhoun and Jackson Counties on the south from Ea4-Iton and Ingham Counties on the north; thence east with
that line to the Eiehigan Keridian, which is the eastco —

ern boundary of Cession ::7.

u-5-1-I

we shall first discuss the petitioners’ Joint agreement of January
27. 1958, the identity of the several petitioners and their claim of recongized title.

The Agreement

 j-j

The defendant has objected to the filing of the agreement of January 27. 1958- All pleadings filed with this Commission are subject to
amendment, and provision therefor has been made in Section 13 of the

General Rules of Procedure promulgated by this Commission. ‘we consider

ihey are binding upon the litigants before us. The instrument, however,
is a reqnest for permission to amend the proposed findings submitted in
se consolidated dockets, and, strictly speaking, proposed findings
are not pleadings. They are merely suggested findings submitted for the
aid and assistance of the Commission when preparing its own Findings and
Opinion.
the instrument filed herein can not prejudice the defendant, for it can
only restate the conclusions which the petitioners desire the Commission

draw from the evidence and record before it. This does not relieve the

petitioners from the necessity of establishing each component element of

original Indian title. The ultimate determination of whether this has

been done is a function of the Commission which may not be relegated to

any claimant before it.

As an amendment to the proposed findings or a request to amend,

   
 

 

.’ ' v-~-no-r-s rl. ' "\
C§_Uu8aa Indians £Docket l3~n;

-v--I-1I--j-I-un—-I-I—Z-u—I—-I-1--I--—- —-1-—-1:-up-rau-——--—-—-4‘

 

The Chippewa Indians were an ethnic group consi-ting of a number
of autonomous bands. Former members of the Saginaw Bay, Swan Creek and
Black Rivers bands of Chippewa Indians are no; members of the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe of Michigan, a federal organisation. The petitioners herein are members of that organization. It dces not 3P§€3T fT0m»th9
record that they are members of or successors in interest to members of
either of the named bands. In View of the ultimate conclusion of the
Commission and in the interest of krevity, the right of the numerous petitioners to prosecute the present claim.will not be discussed.
9_t:§«_a‘»5_.a_ I~.I:1.<:_1.i§~_I2§_£1.3.<2.<_:1_<_'~':=-.‘r;_}.*..<.?.-:I§). "

The petitioners in Docket 40-K are identical with those in Docket
40~B, the two separate causes having originally been jointky pleaded in
our Docket No. 40. The Commission found in Docket &O—B that the Ottawa
Indians never formed a tribal entity_but consisted of separate, autonomous groups or bands independently owning and possessing their landed
interests, and the Ottawa Indians who were parties to the treaty of August 29, l82l, were found to be Ottawa Indians of the Grand River as
distinguished from a group of Ottawa Indians of Ohio known as the Ottaw
:a of the Maumee, Blanchard‘s Fork and Roche de Boeuf. Some of the
petitioners in Docket HO-K are successors in interest to the Ottawa In~
dians of the Grand River. They include descendants of an Ottawa band

or group residing along the Grand River in Michigan as well as other

bands or groups of Ottawas residing about L’arbre Cyoche and elsewhere

in northern Michigana

-1 '_-:".i kg:

 

Docket ho. 15 as originally filed with this Commission contained
two separate causes of action which were later docketed as Nos. l5-J
and 15-h. The petitioners in Docket No. lbé were also petitioners in
Docket Ho. 7l-A, which docket was consolidated for trial with 15-J.

The petitioners in Docket No. 29-K filed a motion to intervene in those

consolidated dockets, so all of the present Potawatomi petitioners'were

then before this Commission and their identity was discussed in the disposition of the motion of intervention.

The Commission there found that from 1795 to l833 the Potawatomi
Indians were divided into separate groups called bands or tribes, each
being politically independent; that the more southerly located Potawatomi Indians comprised five organized units, each acting independently and

,parately, and known as: (l) the United Ration, which included federated or allied Indians of Ottawa and Chippewa ancestry and was sometimes
called the Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawatomi Nation, which unit resided
west of Lake Michigan; (2) the Potawatomi of the Prairie and Kankakee;
(3) the Potanatomi of the Wabash; (4) the Potawatomi of St. Joseph, also
called the Potawatomi of Indiana and Michigan, and St. Joseph Band, and
(5) the Potawatomi of the Huron, sometimes called the Potawatomi of the
Huron and Raisen Rivers, or the Huron band of Potawatomi Indians.

The Commission found between l836 and l8#2, having ceded their lands
in the east, the United Nation and the Kankakee Band moved to Iowa and

the Wabash and St. Joseph Bands, with a few Kankakee individuals moved

to Kansas; that these four bands later united to form the United Potawa—

. mi Nation in Kansas, and subsequently divided into the present Citien and Prairie Bands who are the petitioner bands in D0Cket5 145 and
5-H, respectively.

The Commission also found that the unit identity of the Various
ands which migrated west followed them; that according to custom and
suage among the Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawatomi, Indians separating
rom their tribe or band severed their relationship therein and lost
ll right to participate in its assets; The Pokagon band. h0WeV€T»
as a group of the St. Joseph Band which was of the Catholic faith and
or that reason was granted permission to remain in the east but yet
articipate in the assets and annuities of the St. Joseph Band under
rovision therefor agpeariug in the supplementary articles to th= treay of 1833. (4 I.C.C. 473)

It was also found that the Huron Band was not a party to any.0f
he removal treaties and remained in Michigan; that other P0t3W3t0mi
ndians did not move west but remained in northern‘Wisconsin, northern
ichigan or moved to Canada; that some Potawatomi Indians who moved to

ansas later returned to their homeland and can not now be separately

dentified; that the Hannahville Indian Community of Wilson,IMichigan,
nd the Forest County Potawatomi Community of Crandon, Wisconsin, inLude the descendants of the Pokagon and.Huron Bands, those Potawatomi
no remained in the east, exclusive of those moving to Canada, and those
otawatomi who returned from Kansas.

The Hannahville Indian Community of Wilson, Michigan, and the Forst County Pot watomi Community of Crandon,'HiseonSiD. make D0 Claim in

6 45%

their own right but claim to represent Indians whose ancestors were
members of the Potawatomi Ration and owned the land ceded by the treaty of August 29, l82l; "that they are entitled to participate in any
award hereinafter granted based upon that treaty." The individual pe~
titioners Albert Mackety and Michael‘Williams are members of and represent the Potawatomi of the Huron and the Pokagon Band, respectively.
(Der. Req. Fdg. No. 2, p. 12)

It has been determined that any claim for an injury occurring to
an Indian tribe or band prior to a separation within the organized unit
belongs to the descendants of all members of the original unit as that
membership existed at the time of the injury, and whether those individuals remainina apart from the organized unit subsequentlv became sepaV‘!

rately recognized or organized. Mcohee, et als., vs. United States,

122 C, Cls. 380.

It appears that on or about I897 the membership of

 

the Pokagon band was separately identified and found to have numbered
291 souls at the time of its separation from the St. Joseph Band, (E93:
awatomi Indians vs. United States, 27 C. Cls. 403, aff‘d 1&8 U. S. 689,
37 L. ed 613); that by a subsequent enrollment 271 Potawatomi Indians
were added to the list of descendants of said Pokagon band (37 C. C13.
427, aff'd l8? U. S. 307, #7 L. ed 221), and that by a later enrollmenis in 1907-8, the Pot watomi Indians residing in Wisconsin and not
enrolled wi+h any other tribe of Indians, exclusive of those whose ancestors had moved west of the Mississippi or who had resided in southern
(Dkt.

‘hisconsin and Michigan, were enrolled and found to number Q57,

15-J, Fdgs. 56, 57, b 1, C. C, 51o-511)l

It does not appear that there has been a recent identification or
enrollment of the successors tc the several bands or grcups of Potawatoni and Ottawa Indians in existence at the time of the 1821 cession.
However, that is an administrative function outside the jurisdiction of
this Commission, and we think it sufficient at this time to find, as we
do, that all parties necessary to the ultimate disposition of these consolidated dockets are presently represented before this Commission.

Recognized Title

The petitioners assert a claim to the land here involved based upn aboriginal use and possession and upon recognized title. Since the
vidence presented is sufficient to support a finding of original Indin title, it ecomes unnecessary to determine the existence of recogized title.

Indian Title
Anthropologists have identified the Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawato. as Algonquin Indians, having mutually intelligible languages, simizr cultures and social patterns. There are references to an ancient
.liance between groups of the three nationalities; they intermarried

d individuals belonging to one-group or band severed that relationip and affiliated with or were adopted into other bands or groups of
air own or one of the other nationalities. ‘When the white man first
countered them, they lived in permanent villages, raised corn nearoy
i during the winter months hunted and trapped far enough away from

air summer homes for the game to be plentiful,

L‘-¢—¢

The historical period began in this section of our country about
la97 with French traders and trappers coming into the Great Lakes Region. Trading posts were shortly established and military forts erected for their protection. A regular trade route was early established
from Lake Hichigan up the St. Joseph river, across the portage near
South Bend, Indiana. down the Kankakee, Ohio and Mississippi rivers to
the French settlements in Louisiana. A northern route across the southern Michigan peninsula was established by way of the Grand and Maple
rivers from Lake Michigan to Saginaw Bay, and a more southerly route ran
overland from Detroit to the St. Joseph-Kankakee portage. Records and ‘
correspondence of the period provide a detailed account of the early Indian occupancy of the country about the trade routes, but Indian ocenpancy of the northeastern part of the southern Michigan peninsula is not

detailed. It is established, however, that the petitioners were not
the original inhabitants of the peninsula; that with the beginning of

history the Chippewa Indians were residing alorg Lake Huron, and that the

Ottawa Indians were established at Michilimackinac, on the Straits of

9

hackinac; that the Ottawa Indians occasionally wintered as far south as
the Grand river which forms the northern boundary of Royce 117; that they
established a village at L'Arbre Creche in l7b2 and continued hunting in
the south; that gradually some began wintering in the south and eventually a number of Ottawa villages existed along the Huskegon.and Grand
rivers; hat the Ottawa in those villages became known as the Grand River Band of Ottawa as distinguished.from those who resided at L'Arhre
Zroche and Hichilimackinac, and were so referred to upon official records

zf that period.

The Fotawatomi Indians now known as the St. Joseph Rand of Potawa;omi Indians settled in the St. Joseph river country about l?l9, shortl'
aiter its abandonment by its former inhabitants. These earlier people
zed included a group of Potawatomi who had moved to the Huron and Raisen
~‘ver valleys, and became known thereafter as the Potawatomi of the Hu‘on. The new-comers hunted south of Royce ll7, gradually extended their
'i113g9S up the St. Joseph River and at various times shared the resour=95 05 Royce 11? with other bands, groups or tribes of Indians. Occuaancy of the area crystallized about 1785, and the evidence conclusively‘

tstablishes that the Potawatomi of the St‘ Joseph thereafter exclusively

.sed, occupied and possessed the southern portion of Royce ll? until its

With reference to the claim of the Chippewa petitioners, they rely
pon a letter by Treaty Commissioner Sibley wherein he reported that
18,000 was distributed among the Chippewa, Ottawa and Potawatomi Indins attending the 1821 treaty council at Chicago, as evidencing their
nterest in Royce 117. we attach greater weight to the wording of the
reaty which compensates only the Potawatomi and Ottawa Indians for the
eded area, particularly since it is well known that treaty councils
are usually well attended not only by the Indians occupying the land
nder consideration, but by neighboring groups who were interested in

he Qresents which were habitually distributed after negotiations were

he three anthropologists testifying before the Commission each

iggested the Chippewa Indians from the country ab-ut Saginaw Bay had

E

cerest in the country immediately east of Royce ll7, which is the

ruthaest corner of the l8l9 cession and has been referred to as the

vcrlap“ area, but only Dr. Stewart suggested the location of Chippewa
llages within Royce ll7. His location, which was a cartographic desion without evidentiary foundation and tribal indentification rested
on geographical names of payees or their location taken from the 1840
d l85h Indian annuity rolls without any proof of earlier occupancy by
e payees.

While there are several references to Chippewa Indians ang the Grand river, that river extends far east of Royce ll? and none

such references can be said to link the Chippewa Indians to Royce 117.

The speculative evidence before us falls far short of that degree
Dositive or convincing proof of Chippewa use, occupancy and control
possession essential for the existence of Indian title, particularly
;n it is shown an amiable relationship existed between the three narnalities which would have saxnioned the temporary or permissive pre1C8 of one upon lands of the other. Based upon all the evidence be~e us, we find that the Chippewa Indians, petitioners in Docket l3-M,
re failed to establish their claim of interest in and to any part of
’ce 117.

It seems conclusive that the Ottawa of Grand River went as far
:th as the Kalamazoo River in their use of the land, and that the
.awatomi of the St. Joseph journeyed as far north as that river. As
~ly as the Greenville Treaty council in Ohio during I795, the Ottawa,
'ough their chief, Bad Bird, requested that a trader be stationed on

Kalamazoo river for their use, (Def. Ex. l, p. l59, Dkt. 1&6).

I‘ I

There were Potawatomi Indians living along the Kalamazoo river in 1815
(Def. Ex, 1, pg 182, Dkt. lhé), but the l8l° census of the Indians in
the lower Michigan peninsula listed five towns along that river, and
identified all of them as Ottawa. (Def. Ex. 1, p. 184, pm. 146).
Mixed groupings of Potawatomi and Ottawa were found along the Grand
River about the first of the l9th century, and in l8l2 a mixed village
was reported on the Kalamazoo river (Def. Ems. bl, p. 32; l, p. l74,
Dkt. 1&6), but in view of the custom of Ottawa and Potawatomi Indians
for their membership to affiliate or become adopted into other groups

or bands, and their ready intermarriages, we do not think these mixed
groupings can overcome other evidence that the country north of the
Kalamazoo was occupied and controlled by Grand River Bands of Ottawa
Indians, and that the Potawatomi used and controlled the land south of
that river. ‘We find nothing evidencing the presence of groups of solely Potawatomi Indians north of that river, nor of groups of solely Ottawa Indians being within the country south of it.

Furthermore, it appears significant that the Grand River Bands

who were able to withdraw from the ceded area into Ottawa country north
of Grand river, had no reservations set aside for then by the 1821 treaty, whereas of the five reservations created by that treaty four were

at known Potawatomi village sites in southern Michigan, and the fifth
cas at the Potawatomi village just south of the Kalamazoo river, near
;he present city of Kalamazoo, éichigan. Bands of Potawatomi Indians

-ater ceded four of these reservations, although the Rotta-wa—se—pe vil9
"I
*H

.age reservation on the St. Joseph river in admittedly Potaeatomi tar

tory, was ceded by "Chiefs and headmen of the St. Joseph and Notta-wa; pe bands of the United Tribes of Potawatomies, Ottawas and Chippewas."
?here being no evidence before us that Ottawa or Chippewa bands of Iniians ever resided upon any of these five Potawatomi reservations, we
:onclude that these Indians could only have been Potawatomi bands with
.ffiliated or adopted members of Ottawa and Chippewa ancestry as was a
ommon custom among the three nationalities.

Our conclusion that the Kalamazoo river marked the boundary between
he land occupied and controlled by the Ottawa and that occupied and conrolled by the Potazatomi is also supported by the journal of the Reverrd Isaac McCoy who was assigned the task of establishing a blacksmith
tap granted to the Ottanas by the treaty of l82l. He established the
:op on the Kalamazoo river and in several entries in his journal coverar is life in the Indian country, he referred to the shop as being upthe boundary between the-Ottawa and Potawatomi.

The defendant urges that without regard to any evidence of excluve control on the cession date, Indian title can not be said to have
isied On August 29, 1821, since the Indian occupancy existing on that
te had not originated in time immemorial.

Basing Indian title upon immemorial possession is in effect sub_tuting time as a safeguard in lieu of paper evidence of title used

civilized nations. There is no evidence before us that any tribe,
.d or group of other Indians challenged the Ottawa in their use of
country north of the St. Joseph Potawatomi during historic times,

other than a statement by the Miami Chief Little Turtle, made dur33 the council at Greenville in I795, that the Kiaui had once extended
weir lines to include the extreme southern section of Royce ll? within
aeir tribal lands, there is no suggestion that the St. éoseph Potawatoi were ever challenged in their use, occupancy and possession of the
outhern portion of Royce ll? by any other tribe, band or group of Indias after l785. The early breath of history can not alter the fact that
ccupancy, use, possession and control of the southern part of Royce ll?
y the Potawatomi of the St. Joseph River, and of that country lying
orth of them by the Grand River Band of the Ottawa Indians was an esablished fact for many years prior to the Government‘s acquisition of
heir possessory rights. It was precisely this present right of excluive use, occupancy and possession, resting upon more than a century of
ccupancy and more than thirty-five years of exclusive control, which
he Government intended to extinguish and did acquire under the I821
reaty. An additional length of time could not have more completely subected this land to the dominion of the Ottawa and Potauatomi, nor inreased its value to them. Its possession, control and right of occu:ancy was as sacred, as complete, and as valuable to.these-Indians in
.821 as though the date of their original arrival in this country was
.ost behind the veil of antiquity.
we have no difficulty in determining that the petitioners in Doczets Humbers ins, l5-H, 40-K and 29—K have established the existence as
>f August 29, l82l, of a.present right of use, occupancy,,control and
>ossession of the land here involved which is commonly referred to as Iniicu title, insofar as they represent the l92l membership of the St. Joseph Band of Potawatomi Indians and of the Grand River Band of Ottawa Ix»

From the record and the evidence before us, which has been detailed in our Findings of Fact, we find that the Grand River Band of Ottawa
Indians exclusively used, occupied, possessed and controlled all that
tract of land within Royce ll? which is described in our Finding of Fact
ho. 24 this day entered of record, as of the 29th dcy of August, l82l,
and that upon said date the St. Joseph Band of Potawatomi Indians exclusively used, occupied, possessed and controlled all that tract of land
which is described in our Finding of Fact No. 25, this day entered of
record; that such control and possession was of such na+ure as to constitute Indian title.

The evidence before us does not admit of a determination of the
acreage included in the three separate tracts above referred to.c Furevidence will be received respecting that acreage, the acreages
within such tracts which were ceded to the defendant on August 29, l82l,

their respective values on that date and the consideration therefor

passing to the respective parties.

s/ Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 MarLi-m**

Chief Commissioner

__§ tam. qI_t-_1;__I;:o1t
Chief Commissioner

