BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS CO%MISSION

-THE cosua D‘ALENE°TRIBE )
or INDIANS,   9 )
Petitioner, 3
V. , g Docket No. 81
THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA. 3
Defendant. _g
neeided: August 26. 1955

FINDINGS OF FACT

 

Preliminary Statement

-a—-‘wanna-we

On December H, 1951, the Commission entered its order directing
that in the above cause there first be heard and determined the question
as to petitioners‘ rights to the land claimed in their petition (the deé
fendant having by its answer admitted the authority of the petitioner
to assert the claim presented), and the area thereof, at the time of
the cession by the Agreement of March 26. 1887, which was ratified on
March 3, 1891, 26 Stat. 989. So, the findings hereafter set forth are

confined to the issues limited by said order, leaving for later determ¥

ination the other issues, including that of the consideration paid for

the cession and the value of the lands ceded.

1. Petitioner is an Indian tribe residing within the territorial

I

limits of the United States with a tribal organization recognized by the

Secretary of the Interior as having authority to represent such tribe.

Petitioner is therefore authorized to maintain this action under Section 2

of the Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. 1on9).

H

1

2. The first known white Contact with the Coeur d'Alene Tribe was
the Lewis and Clark Expedition of 1801:--06.. 3/ Later» in 182‘!-=25» fur
traders reported this tribe as living in the vicinity of Coeur d‘Alene
1eke,§[ the same location given for them by Lewis and Clerks ;/ The
tribe sas located in the same general area when the missionaries
established a mission among the Coeur d’Alene in l8M2 on the banks of
the St. Joe River at the point where it flows into the southern end of
the Coeur d’A1ene Lake, near St. Maries, Idaho. Father Point, first
missionary to reside with the tribe, found them occupying 27 different
localitieso

39 The name Coeur d“A1ene is the name popularly given to the Salish
Tribe originally and most commonly known as Skitssish, although often
referred to by other names such as "Skeetsomishn and "Skeetshne” and in
the anglicised translations as the “pointed.hearts§ “needle hearts," and
similar nameso 3/ The Coeur diilene were clearly distinguished from
neighboring tribes on the basis of languageg religion, physical appearance, and geographical locations §/

 

1/ Tr. Hl=h2

3/ Pet. Eats 12,,, p. any; Pet. Exo 139 p. 150
;/ Pet. Ex. 8, pp. 335, 356

3/ Pet. Exsa 1, M9 7 (p. 992); 9 (pa 711)

2,’ Pet.. Exec 13,, pg 153.; Pet. Ex. 29,, pp. 508%-509;
Pet. Ex. 1?; Pete Exo 59 pg 110; Pet Ex.. 339 p. lair

1:2

H. In 185M, Governor Isaac Stevens, while on his expedition to
locate a railroad from the Mississippi to the west coast reported the
Qoeur d‘Alene as living "on the upper part of the Coeur d'Alene River,
abote the Spokanes, and around the lake of the same name. They are
estimated by Dr. Dart as only two hundred in number, which is believed,
however, to be too low an estimate. Father Mengarini * * * gives as his
opinion that they reach four hundred and fifty." §/ Father de Smet who
spent much time with the Plateau Tribes in 1858 described "the country
which is occupied by this tribal group [§beur d‘Alen§7 which our fathers
are taking care of. * * * From north to south and east to west, the
territory where the Coeur d'Alene Indians occupy is about 100 miles.

The country is very mountainous? 1/ In 3 letter WTitt9H in M33: 1859»

Father de Snet said: "Taking Coeur—d‘Alene Lake as a central point,

§/

their country may extend fifty miles to every point of the compass."

In writing of his experiences with the tribe, Father Diomedi, to whom
fell the task in 1875 of getting the whole tribe to settle at the new
mission at Nilgoalko, related: "The Indians of this tribe were now

located in camps scattered over a radius of fifty miles. * * ”“ 2/

 

Pet. Ex. 33. p. 257
Pet. Ex. 27, p. 39M

Pet. Ex. 19, p. 1M2

'$‘$'§‘&‘

Pet. Ex. 22, p. 55

5. In aboriginal times the Coeur d'Alene territory was surrounded

by other tribes: the Spokane on the west, the Kalispel on the north,

the Flatheads on the east and the Nez Peroe on the south and southeast,

with the Palouse on the southwest at least in later periods. Each of

these tribes recognized in general the territorial boundaries of the

Coeur d'Alene.

James A. Teit, one of the early recognized authorities on the
Plateau Tribes, in his work on said tribes in 1904, wrote of the
Coeur d‘Alene as follows:

The country occupied by the Coeur d'Alene was almost
entirely within what is now the State of Idaho. A small part
extended into Washington. They held all the waters of Spokane
River from a little above Spokane Falls to the sources, include
ing Coeur d'Alene Lake and all its tributaries. To the SOuthv
east their territory extended across the head of the Clearwater,
a tributary_of the Snake River. Their eastern boundaries were
the Coeur d'Alene and Bitter Root Mountains. Generally speakv
ing, their country is mountainous and more or less heavily
forested, with more rain and snowfall than the territories of
the surrounding tribes. The western part, around De Smet,
Hangman‘s Creek, Tekoa, Farmington, and toward Spokane Falls,
is drier and comparatively flat, open and well grassed. In the
central part are many navigable waterways.

On three sides tribes of the flathead group were neighbors
of the Coeur d’Alene — the Spokane to the west, the Kalispel
to the north, and the Pend d‘0reilles to the east. On the
south their neighbors were the Nez Perce and Palous; but, as
the latter are considered comparatively new arrivals, in olden
times probably they bordered only on the Nez Perce. It seems
likely that there was a narrow strip of neutral country between

the two tribes, used to some extent by both in times of peace.
a a e

Although Teit was not a trained ethnologist, his work was edited by Franz

. 10
Boas, who became known as "The father of American Anthropology.“ -/

 

lg} Tr. #57

M M

Leslie Spier in his "Tribal Distribution in Washington" (1936). wrote:

Their (Coeur d‘Alene) territory was almost wholly in Idaho,
only a small part extending into Washington.. We are concerned
here only in the definition of the latter segment. * * *

The bands were grouped into three, possibly four, units
~ corresponding to divisions of the tribe. Of these only the
Coeur d'Alene Lake - Spokane River division seems to have
held territory in Washington. Permanent winter villages
are noted on the Spokane River from the Idaho line to a
point agput twenty miles above Spokane City. "A few miles,
below ithis last poinE7 was the boundary between the Coeur
d'Alene and the Spokane. The latter, however, did not reach
much above Spokane Falls (or City)." 11/

It seems possible that at one time the narrow strip of
Palous country above the mouth of the Palouse was neutral
ground, the contiguous tribes of Columbia, Spokane, Coeur
d‘Alene, and Nez Perce each making use to some extent of the
part lying nearest them. This neutral strip, and previous
decimation of the Colunbia.population by disease, would make
the expansion of the Yakima or Palous in this direction very
easy._

, Colfax was considered to be in Palous country, at least,

in later days, but was to some extent within both Coeur d'Aleno

and Nez Peroe spheres of influence." lg]
Dr. Verne Ray, petitioneris ethnologist, in his "Native Villages and Groupings of the Columbia Basin" (1936), extracts of which appear in petitioner's Exhibit 119 on page 116, shows the territory of the Coeur d'Alene
with the western and northern boundaries as then determined by Dr. Ray.
and on page 10} his boundaries for the Coeur d‘Alene and other tribes

in the Northern Plateau. (Compare with his map on page 386, Pet. Ex.

120)o

11—j 11t

gy See Def. Ex. 13, p. 36; Def.  6

_1_2j See Def. Ex. 13, p. 39

6. In 1873, at the direction of the Department of the Interior,
three commissioners negotiated an agreement with the Coeur d‘Alene
Tribe for the purpose of extinguishing the title of said Indians to
all lands claimed by the tribe and for the purpose of establishing
a reservation. By this agreement made on July 28, 1873, which was
never ratified by Congress, the tribe agreed to relinquish to the

Government all right and title in and to all lands theretofore claimed

by said tribeg lying outside of the proposed reservation, and bounded

as follows:

a Beginning at the head of the upper Palouse or Mohnasha
river in the Territory of Idaho; thence westerly across the
ridge to Steptoes Butte; thence northerly to Antoine Plants,
on the Spokane river; thence across ridge to the foot of Pen
do 'Orei1le Lake, thence up said lake to the summit of the
Bitter Root Hountains; thence along the summit of the Bitter
Root Mountains to the place of beginnings 1;]

In reporting the proceedings culminating in this agreement, Agent
ionteith, one of the signers of the agreement, wrote that the Coeur
dFAlene said that the country so bounded “was their country although
I found that a portion of it to be in dispute between them and a half
breed Spoken Chief.” }E/

7. In 1885, the Coeur d‘Alene Tribe, in petitioning the Government
to send a commission to treat with them respecting their lands outside
of the reservation established for them by executive order in 1873, and

on other matters, claimed their boundaries to be as follows:

h 6

The boundaries of the country owned by your petitioners,

and by their forefathers from time immemorial are as follows,
to wit: Beginning at a point on the Pelouze River West of a
high butte now known and called Steptoe Butte; thence extending_northwesteardly to the Spokane River at a point on its
north bank formerly resided at by Antoine Plant, a half breed
Indian; thence extending to the lower end of the Pend d'Oreille
Lake; thence eastnardly to the summit of the Coeur d}Alene I
Mountains, separating the waters of the Flathead or Missoula
River from those of the Coeur d'Alene and Saint Joseph's River;
thence southerly along the summit of said mountains to the most
southern thereof, whence flows the Pelouze River; thence westwardly along the southern rim of the watermshed of the waters

of the Pelonze River to the point of beginning. 15/

8. The Northwest Indian Commission, on March 26, 1887, concluded
an agreement with the Coeur d‘Alene Tribe at De Smet Mission on the
Coeur d'Alene reservation, Territory of Idaho. The pertinent articles

are as follows:

Article 1. Whereas said Coeur diglene Indians were
formerly possessed of a large and valuable tract of land
lying in the Territories of Washington, ldaho,and Montana,
and whereas said Indians have never ceded the same to the
United States, but the same, with the exception of the
present Coeur d'Alene Reservation, is held by the United
States and settlers and owners deriving title from the
United States, and whereas said Indians have received no
compensation for said land from the United States: Therefore,

Article 2. For the consideration hereinafter stated the
said Coeur dislene Indians hereby cede, grant, relinquish, and
quitclaim to the United States all right, title, and claim
which they now have, or ever had, to all lands in said territories and elsewhere, except the portion of land within the
boundaries of their present reservation in the territory of
Idaho known as the Coeur d'Alene Reservation.

Article 1%. This agreement shall not be binding on either
party until ratified by Congress.

}§/ Pet. Ex. 109, p.UO

yThe consideration agreed to be paid by the United States under the
terms of the agreement was $150,000 (Article 6). The agreement was not
ratified by Congress until the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 989,

I Kapp. U19). In this act the agreement was referred to as dated

 

March 26, 1889. This was without doubt a typographical error, for the
text of the March 26, 1887 agreement (Ex. 105; see also Ex. 106, p. 56)
is identical to that set out in the act except as to the year. Moreover, the later agreement of September 9, 1889, which was also ratified
by the same act, in article M expressly refers to the former agreement
by its correct date, March 26, 1887. The reservation as established
in 1873 contained 598,500 acres of land.

Although the above agreement does not state the boundaries of the
lands ceded by the tribe, the Northwest Indian Commission was cognizant
of the lands claimed by the tribe. In reporting its negotiations with

the tribe, the Commission had this to say:

The lands which they claimed, and held by occupancy,
contained about 4,000,000 of acres. They had the same title
to it which other Indians had, that is, the fee in the United
States, and the occupancy, with all its incidental rights, in
the Indians. The right of the Indians to their occupancy is‘
as sacred.as that of the United States to the fee.

On page 9 of_}his document Lgen. Ex. Doc. go. 122, U9th
Oong.. lst Sees;/will be found the petition [Edg. I7 of the
Coeur d’Alene Indians, addressed to the President of the United
States, setting forth, their claim and the boundaries of the
land in question. This country. as the petition alleges, "is
one of the most valuable in Washington Territony, dotted by
numerous and valuable wheat farms, valuable forests of timber,
saw-mills, gold, silver, and lead mines, the military post of
Coeur d'Alene, and numerous thriving towns and villages. The
Northern Pacific Railroad runs directly through it, and much
of the land owned by that corporation was the land of these
Indians.

#613

M 8

At De Smit Mission we were furnished with the original agree?

ur:I

ment [§hratiTied/ made and concluded on the 28th day of July,
1373, s m m.

* * * By reference to the copy of the agreement, it will be
observed provision was made for a reservation for the Coeur
d'A1enes out of a portion of these lands. and the tribe
relinquished to the Government all lands heretofore claimed by
them lying and being outside of said described reservation.
The boundaries are then given in detail, and it will be found

that they substantially agree with the boundaries given in the
petition of the Indians. i§/

9. Following the execution of the Agreement of 1887. and prior to
its ratification, the Secretany of the Interior was directed by a Senate
Resolution in 1888 to report whether it was advisable to throw open any
portion of the Coeur d‘Aleno Reservation to occupation and settlement
‘under the mineral laws of the United States. The Commissioner of Indian
Affairs, in advising the Secretary of the Interior that he believed a
cession of part of the reservation for such a purpose could be obtained

once the 1887 agreement was ratified, said:

In conclusion I will state that in my opinion these Indians
have all the original Indian rights in the soil they occupy.
They claimed the country long before the lines of the reservation were defined by executive order of 1873, and the present
reservation embraces only a portion of the lands to which they
laid claim. This claim has been recognized in various ways and
at sundry times, and the last Congress authorized the Secretary
of the Interior to negotiate with them "for the cession of their

lands outside the limits of the present Coeur d'Alene Reservation
to the United States? * * viz]

Thus, it appears that the Congress of the United States and the
officials of the Department of the Interior recognized that the Coeur

dPAlene Tribe had Indian title to lands outside of the boundaries of the

 

;§/ Pet. Ex. 106, pp. 38 and 39
ll] Pet. EX. 109, p. 23

reservation established by the Executive Order of 1873 (I Kapp. 837).
While the boundaries of the lands claimed by petitioner were_not
expressly recognized, it is plain that the Congress and officials
of the Interior Department dealing with Indian Affairs in considering the Coeur d'Alene land claims outside their reservation recognized the boundaries described in the 1873 unratified agreement (Ex. 9M)
and the 1885 petition of the Indians (Ex. 109, p. N0) which were
boundaries consistently claimed by the Coeur d‘Alene and which are
substantially the same as those described in Finding ll hereof, although
we found an overlapping of areas claimed in cases pending before us by
the Nez Perce on the south and the Kalispel on the north, which have
been adjusted by the Coeur d'Alene in changing the boundaries claimed
by them. (See amendment to their proposed findings filed herein on
August 11, i955).

10. The Coeur d!Alene Indians_at all times pertinent to the period

involved had a tribal organization capable of using and occupying an area
of land. 15/

(1) Coeur d'Alene Lake, (2) Coeur d'Alene River, and (3) the St. Joseph

$9.]

returning to permanent villages which remained fairly static and have been

The_tribe consisted of three divisions or bands, 1. e.,
River bands or divisions.

The tribe was semi—sedentary. always

located generally in the same places by those who have studied the tribe,

 

;§_/ See Ray, Pet". Ex. 121, and extracts from Bay in Def. Ex. 13.

£2] Teit, Pet. Ex. 5

E9/EU

i. e., Teit, . Hay, , and Chalfant,

3.?-7

along the Coeur d'Alene, Spokane
and St. Joe Rivers, and on the borders of Coeur d'Alene and Hayden Lakes.
There were also camps to which the Indians went in season for berry pickr

ing, camas root digging, fishing and.hunting. In all, some 3U-permanent

or tenporany camp sites have been located by the ethnologists. There is
no record of any migrations of this tribe and according to tradition

the tribe has always been in the area where they were first contacted
by the whites. 32/ It is the same region from which the Coeur d‘Alene

reportedly excluded the Hudson Bay Company when the latter attempted to

enter their territory. §E/

11. The Commission finds from the evidence that at and long prior
to the agreement of March 26. 1887, ratified by the Act of March 3, 1891.
26 Stat. 989, the petitioner had aboriginal Indian title, and that such
title was recognized by defendant, to the lands situate in Idaho and

Washington within the following boundaries:

Beginning at Steptoe Butte, thence northerly to the Spokane
River at a point on its north bank where Antoine Plant formerly

resided and operated a ferry; thence northeastwardly. including
Rathdrum Prairie, to the most southerly tip of Pond d‘0reil1e
Lake; thence eastwardky to the summit of the Coeur d'Alene or
Bitterroot Mountains; thence southerly along the summit of said

39/ mar... L

g1_/ Pet. Ex. 119, pp. 116, 130-133
32] Def. Ex. 13--A

gy Teit, Pet. Ex. 5, p. 140

§H/ Pet. Ex. 31. 9- 372 Pet. Ex. 22, p. 53; Pet. Ex. 13

mountains to the divide separating the watersheds of the North
Fork of the Clearwater River and the St. Joe River; thence _
westerly along said divide to a point separating the headwaters
of the St. Marisa River from the headwaters of Potlatch River;
thence in a direct westerly line to the place of beginning.

Edga{;E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. 0'Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt"
Associate Commissioner

