’ t J
- -2 2
f
  1-  BEFORE THE INDIAN cmms COMMISSION
   
~-:. » "j     mmrn AND MODOC TRIBES )
"   AND YAHOOSKIN BAND or smart )
_ p -»:-  _: 3-‘"1 _ )
‘-‘— .«'i""?-‘.7’ 3
._-f:~.f. ;,_  3 Petitioner, )
-‘.';'-h":-‘  f'...E3 ' _)
  __';: v_ ) Docket No. 100
-"“ n. )
_-_ it  THE U'N3’.'1.'ED STATES OF AMERICA, )
- ":_  3--""‘v  ‘ )
" —:;_:_'  ,3 Defendant. )
 :;- TI i.-:§ i
A’ -  Decided: April 9, 1954

'i‘::§ Appearances :
 .' '12
 Wilkinson, Boyden, Cregtu
3 & Barker , with whom were
'  Donald C. C-ormley and \
 John M. Murray, .
 Attorneys for petitioner
 Lelazd L. ‘East, with whom
‘Q was 14:. Assistant ttorney
2 General, Perry W. M-orton,
“ _, *3 Attorneys for defendant.
> ormzos es in cozvnnsszon
_  0'Marr, Comissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission. .
-, ‘r  We have before us a motion by petitioner (filed March 24, 1954)
ii , , _  .: seeking an order "excnsing petitioner * * from the burden of proor
 p  and’ burden of proceeding first with evidence as to the occupancy or
*   ownership" of the tract of land involved in the case.
, -  The nature of the claim stated in the petition seems necessary
5  for a clear understanding of the motion and its effect on the conduct
H  of the trial of the cum.

2 685

By the treaty of October 14, 1864, 16 Stat. 107, a large area of

1and.was ceded by petitioners to defendant. is land, at the time of

the cession,*was "claimed, used and_occupied by petitioner in the

accustomed Indian manner," according to the allegations of the petition;

in other words, the petitioner had aboriginal title to the land when
ceded. They further allege that the consideration paid them by the
government was unconscionable and they seek recovery for the difference
between the value of the land as of the date ceded and the amount they
were paid for it.

The petitioner maintains in its motion and supporting brief that
in this proceeding it will make a prime facie case by proving the
treaty and by establishing that at the time of the cession the lands
described in the treaty had a'market value so much greater than the
consideration paid for them as to constitute an unconscionable consideration. The practical effect of a ruling on the motion favorable to
the contentions of petitioner, would be that the burden of proving that
the petitioner did not have original Indian title, that is, Indian
right of occupancy based upon aboriginal possession, would be placed
upon defendant in all such cases where the government denies Indian
title to all or a part of the lands ceded, as it has done here.

Heretofore we have proceeded in the trial of cases such as this
on the theory that where original Zndian title is pleaded and must be
proved as a basis for a claim for additional cooaideration for ai
cession the burden was on the claimant to snow such facts. Counsei in

other cases have quite generally followed this procedure'without

, . . '0. "u .- _ _. . ._,'

. A Q

-., . . ‘ - u _L." ‘ .33
utilunsfb ‘dHllI«'|l ‘OI’-"3-.I\¢ -1".‘-"

.-a.oz A. o.'-.. '5
y _ . ' ..u'l. __
. . , ‘ o": . 9
been .I4Kos-.0-l"a-.-.-saw‘: ...uJn... 3.: .13-—.-'3-.-.L...... .9. '
I u

objection and we have dismissed claims because of the failure of the
claimants to prove original Indian title to the lands ceded. “Until
now the procedure we have followed has never been seriously questioned,
at least, never before pressed upon us for determination, so it seems
necessary to give the matter further consideration.

Petitioner's argument is based on the concept that a treaty is
a contract and that the traditional rules governing suits on contracts
for the purchase price of property sold, which places the burden on the
buyer to prove a defense that the seller had no title to the property
sold, should apply. is the analogy valid in Indian cases like this?

The applicable provision of the Indian Claims Commission Act is as

\

follows:

"(3) Claims which would result if the treaties, contracts,
andagreements betweenthe claimant and the United States

‘were revised on the ground of * * unconscionable consideration
* *3: '

Here, obviously,.is a statute permitting Indian claimants to sue for
loss resulting from selling their lands at a grossly inadequate consideration. The statute does not create a liability but:merely permits

the assertion of a claim or an existing liability.

In passing the Indian Claims Commission Act the Congress had in
its collective mind.the objective of finally disposing of claims for
sales of lndian lands based upon grossly inadequate consideration.

The extended hearings on the act, and similar hearings on.bills between

1930 and 1946 amply support this statement. Such hearings also show

that the Congress was aware of the fact that the subject-matter of

_____ _ .. . . ' ‘I’-ii--._.-..

AP'* 2 687
Retyped

practically all treaties, contracts and agreements of sale had passed
beyond recall, as had the considerations paid; that it was dealing
with engagements ldhg ago fully executed.

The remedy for unconscionable dealings is rescission of the con-'
tract with the prerequisite'condition of placing the defendant in status
quo. Obviously, suchiequitable procedure cannot and was not intended
to apply in a dhhhylike that under consideration here; the very nature
3f the transaction, coupled with the radical change in conditions in
the eighty-eight years that have elapsed since its consummation, shows
the impracticabiliiy of applying the traditional equitable remedies
to cases like this. Clause (3), considered in the light of the pruposesito be accomplished, provides a direct and realistic remedy in
cases where the Government acquired land from Indians for a price so
low as to shock the conscience.

%True, the ground is for "claims which would result if the treaties
** were revised**." To revise a treaty connotes a change in terms.
But why must there be a change (revision) of terms in order to grant
relief where unconscionable consideration is the basis for relief?

The clause in effect, if not expressly, permits a recovery for the
difference between the value and the unconscionable price paid. So
‘why should we judicially direct the useless ceremony of revising a

contract long since performed in an attempt to bring our acts within

the scope of applicable rules of equity jurisprudence. At best, such
judicial action would be fictional and not in keeping with the purpose and intent of the remedy provided. Of course, a treaty (or

contract or agreement) must be involved to bring it'within the scope
of clause (3) and, in most casesg to show the consideration, but a
claim for the difference between the value and an unconscionable
consideration.is not here based on the treatvjbut upon the statute,

clause (3), and the claimant would make out a prime facie case by

showing it had Indian title to the lands, that it ceded them by treaty,‘

the consideration paid and proof that the value of the property, at
the time of the cession, was so greatly in excess of the purchase
price as to make the consideration unconscionable. No doubt the act
is based upon equitable principles. including the meaning of unconscionable consideration. but such would not bar Congress\from
eliminating equity routine or fictional revisions in order to arrivep
at the designed remedy through direct approach to problem presented.
As indicated above, the claim here pleaded does not come within the
"contract context" of law, but is bottomed on the permissive statute

quoted above.

§We are not to be understood as construing the statute with

.respect to claims predicated upon any of the other equitable grounds

__..I

set forth in clause (3) for the obvious reason that none of those
grounds is involved here and therefore are not'considered.

In view of what has been said above, we are of the opinion that
the burden of proof and the burden of proceeding first with evidence

as to ownership of the lands rests upon the petitionern

O

'1 .§'Q.f_‘-«'0
- . tn.
'0

U
 .5.
O o'
‘.'-.' .1.'.“.“
_ ' _- ‘. .-o=" .. !._I '.;'.*I‘- -:-.3-.
_, M “_.‘,‘_,.._-,.5.._.,ja,'...¢...'\I.uIng.n.a..nu-05.:-I.-an h-u-I‘ulIIh-o4J'I'v.‘- I 1-luau-lMh..AJAAIa-.0-7'5’ 3"‘
. . . .

U
5-.o..... . -out».-O-J c

We, accordingly, find it necessary to enter an order denying
the motion insofar as it asks to be excused from the burden of
proof and burden“o£ proceeding first with evidence as to ownership

eof the_1andé involved io above-entitled cause.

_ V ,_ V Raga».-:Ei.' Witt I
, ,o- . .. c_ - 3Chief'Qommissioner

‘Louis J . 0'21‘-_=.:.':.*
Associate Commissioner

V Wm. M. Holt
i.Associate Commissioner

 

\
C
-s
9 .
-I \
o \
'-u.
\
. 3
Q
. I.
,. J
C
’
I .— g
C
9 ‘1.
C
. ..
. ‘,
c ¢ '
.’ ‘
as a
I
I .
I.
u
‘ I
’
1
1

\

