7 Ind. C14 Com. 1

BEFORE TEE II~TDI.5-.1‘? CL5 "'15 CO3-E-EISSIOI

THE QUINAIELT TRIBE OF IEDIANS, on its
own behalf; QUINAIELT TRIBE OF INDIAES
on behalf of the QUEETS‘TRIBE OR BAND OF
INDI.-‘-_1‘ES; QUEEI‘S TRIBE OR B.’-END OF II‘-*'DI.:‘-.335 ,
on relation of and represented by Harry
Shale,

Petitioners, Docket No. 242
V.

THE UNITED ST.9~.TES or M-ERICA,

\..J‘-u—’\~./'\~./\—uJ\u./\../‘K.../\-uJ\._/\../\._/‘~—./\-d’

Defendant.

Decided: December 1, 1958

FINDINGS OF F£CT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

l. The Quinaielt Tribe of Indians are an identifiable tribe of
American Indians who resided in aboriginal times within the territorial
limits of the United States in what is now a.western portion of the
State of‘Hashington. we find the identity of this aboriginal tribe,
as such, has been established in this record and meets the requirements
of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August l3, 1946 (60 Stat. lO#9;
25 U.S. Code Sec. 70(a)).

EVIDEETIARE FEGTS SUPQORTING ULTIMATE FINDING OF FACT NO. 1

(a) The United States recognized this tribe and executed "the
Treaty with the Quinaielt," etc. in l855 (12 Stat. 971, II Kappler 719 ,
‘with the "chiefs, headmen and delegates of the different tribes and

bands of the Qui-nai—elt and Quil—leh—nte Indians."

}..J

7 Ind. Cl. Com, 1

(b) During February, l855, Governor Isaac I. Stevens

. scheduled a treaty council involving Indian tribes west of the Cascade
Mountains whose lands had not theretofore been ceded. He summoned

representatives of all such tribes known to him except Upper Chinook
and Klikatat Tribes. That summons included the Quinaielt, the Upper"
Chehalis and Cowlitz Tribes. The Council was held on the Chehalis River
a few miles above its entrance into Gray's Harbor; (Dr. Nancy 0. Lurie.
Tr. 272; Pet. Ex. l9(b), p. 103).

(C) The minutes of the above-mentioned council state:

The Kwinai-ult Chief now came forward accompanied by
the principal men of his tribe and expressed his willingness
to sign the Treaty and.Governor Stevens accordingly signed

it first and was followed by'Tahola. (Pet. Ex. 17, p. 58)

The council began deliberations in February,.l855, "on the

site of Mr. Pilkenton's claim a few miles above the entrance of the Chihalis

River into Gray Harbor." The council journal reports:

It was now however found that the Quinauilts did not
occupy the whole country between the Chihalis and the

Makahs, but that another and distinct tribe, the
Kwilleyutes were intermediate. (Pet. EX. 1?)

(d) Handbook of American Indians (l9l2, Bulletin 30, Part II)
edited by Frederick Webb Hodge of Smithsonian Institution states:

Quinaielt, a Salish tribe on the Quinaielt r.,‘Wash.,
and along the coast between the Quileute and the Quaitso on
the N. (the latter of which probably formed a part of the
tribe), and the Chehalis on the s. Lewis and Clark described
them in two divisions, the Calasthocle and the Quiniilt, with
200 and 1000 population, respectively. In 1909 they numbered.
156, under the Puyallup school superintendencefl

Ce) The language of the Quinaielt Indians was of the Salish.

linguistic stock but was sufficiently different from that of any other

3

Salish—speaking Indian group to form a separate and distinct dialect of

7 Ind. C]... CO-..'.;s . 3.

that linguistic stock. The Qweets spoke the same language as the
Quinaielt proper, (Hodge, Pet. Ex. 8l; Boas, Def. Ex. 90; Riley, Def.
Ex. l26; Mooney, Pet. Ex. 85; Swanton, Pet. Ex. 91; Ray, Tr. #5; Olson
Tr. 47?) .

(f) Quinaielt Indians have been the subject of numerous brief

sketches and mentions by ethnologists. The first systematic description of Quinaielt Indians was written by Dr. Ronald.L. Olson, and.published in the University of Washington Publications in.Anthropology;

November, l936. (Pet. Ex. l24)

(g) Henry R.‘Wagner reported in The Cartographv of the Northwest Coastof America to the Year l800, Vol. II, p. #88 (l937) as follows:

Queen Hithe, or H the, probably at the mouth of
the Quinault River,'Washington, one of the names said
to have been given by Meares for some place on the
Thames River in England but more probably it was what
Quinault sounded like to him. Meares refers to it
July'l, 1788. It is likely that it was named by Capt.
Barkley in 1787. It was once spelled Queenault.

(Pet. Ex. 3)

Ch) George Davidson, Assistant Superintendent, U. S. Coast
Survey (circa 1858) wrote this about Quinaielt Indians:

Que‘—ni—ult River. The mouth of this small stream is
between three and four miles N‘W. by‘W. from Point Grenville,
and.is almost closed by the shingle and gravel thrown up by
the surf; which leave, however, a contracted opening for the
passage of canoes in calm weather. The closing of the entrance has so dammed the river as to form a small lake inside,
upon the banks of which is situated a village of the Queniults,
a race of Indians hostile to all other tribes. Conbined.with
others to the northward they have ever been notorious for their
hostility and vindictiveness to the whites. Several Spanish,
English, and Russian vessels and their crews were, in former
times, taken and destroyed. Hence we meet with the names
Destruction Island, Isla de Dolores, Punta de.Matires, &c,
in this 'trediate vicinity. The river is said to head in.a
lake at the foot of the mountains.

K40

? Ind. Cl. Com. 1

The name of this river is usually'known by the old
settlers as Que‘-noith, but the Indians are said to pronounce it as if spelled Que‘—ni—ult, accenting the first
syllable strongly, and the last so softly that many per;
sons consider they call themselves Que-nai. A tribe still
further north is called the Que—nait‘-sath.
2. The Queets Indians were a small division of the Quinaielt Tribe
and resided principally on the Queets River. (See l(b), l(e) and l(f)
‘W078. and 3(b). 3(c). 3(d) below)
3. We find this petitioner is the tribal organization of Quinaielt

Indians whose predecessors in interest, Quinaielt and Quests Indians,

Coded their lands, together with other groups of Indians, under the terms
of the Treaty with the Quinaielt, etc. 1855, to derenmt. (12 Stat. 971;

II Kappler 719). This treaty is sometimes called "The Treaty of Olympia.”

  

EVIDEHTIAFE'F1CTS SUPPORTING UETIHATE FINDIKG OF FACT NO.

         

(a) ‘The Quinaielt and Queets were of the Salish lingual stock,
Speaking a common dialect of Salish, separate and distinct from their
noighbors. (See Finding lCb) and l(f) above)

(b) In 1877, Dr. George Gibbs wrote a comprehensive report for

.he Smithsonian Institution onHNashington Indians in which he described
the Quinaielt Indians as follows:

The Kwinaiutl, of which tribe the Kwe‘hts-hu form part,
‘were present at the council. This tribe speak little more
than a dialect of the Lower Tsihalis tongue. They are mostly
on the ‘no streams which bear their respective names. The
Kwinaiutl is celebrated for its salmon, which are considered
to excel in quality'even those of the Columbia. (Pet. Ex. 20,
p. l72;.Dft. Ex. Q) (Underscoring supplied) (c) Leslie Spier in his Tribal Distribution of Nashinaton cites

N.
.

-nibbs in classifying Queets as part of Quinaielt. (Pet. EX. 89, p. 28)

 

of Smithsonian Institution, Bureau of

K .
~\merican Ethnology‘ reported:

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. l

Queets or Quaitso. Significance unknown. Connections—-The Queets belonged to the coastal division of the
Salishan linguistic family and were most intimately related to their neighbors of the south, the Quinault. (Pet.
EX. 91, p. 434)

(d) James Mooney‘s Population Statistics, published in l928,

explains the great decimation of the Indians of this area in pre—treaty

times as follows:

That regular trade of ocean vessels at the mouth of
Columbia 1788 marked the introduction of sexual diseases
from sailors and traders which soon poisoned the blood of
practically all of the Indians west of the Cascades . . . .
Liquor, introduced in large quantities by Russian traders,
despite the efforts of the Hudson Bay Company officers to
prevent it, is also said to be a potent destroyer along the
coast and the Columbian (Farnham). In l823 . . . an epidemic
of fever. . . spread . . . and apparently also along the coast
and central region . . . . It destroyed four fifths of the
natives, practically exterminating the Chinookan tribes . . .
but the Salishan . . . tilbcb of'Hashington appear to have
escaped. In IEQ6 the Colunbian tribes . . . suffered another
visitation of smallpox. In l8¢7 a measles epidemic spread‘

. . . . In l852—3 smallpox, introduced from San Francisco
among the Makah,'with its usual destructive effect among
nearly all the tribes of'Washington . . .'wiped out whole
villages in some tribes . . . .

-'-u—I-P -d-A--—r

‘Washington, Westernirribes lZ80 I202
Hakah (Quinnechant) 2000 438
Quilleute and Hob 500 295
Quinaielt and Queets 1500 I96

(Pet. Ex. 85, pp. l4-lj)

b. Petitioners‘ aboriginal territory was situated generallv along

the Quinaielt and Queets River on the Pacific Coast in the present

State of‘Jashington between Gr , s Harbor and the Strait of Juan de Fuca.

That area had no natural harbors and was so heavily wooded that it was

extismely difficult to traverse by land. Aboriginal conditions were

y negotiations with the United

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

The North American Eihnology_in l877 published a contribution
by Dr. George Gibbs containing this general comment on Quainaielt Indians:

The coast north of the Tsihalis tribe is successively
occupied by the Kwinaiutl, the Kwillehiut, and the Nakah,
the first speaking a dialect varying considerably from the
Tsihalis, the second is a distinct language, the root of
which is also probably in the Selish, and the third the
language or the Rutka Sound. The Makah territory extends
from the southern Cape Flattery. . . .

The Kwinaiutl find their supplies in the streams, and

to a certain extent in hunting, while the Tsihalis properly
belong to the bays, from which they obtain winter salmon and
shell-fish, and trade with the interior for Kamas roots and
berries. Trails are said to exist from the Chahlatt River to
the Elva on the straits, and from.the Kwillehiut to the
Pishtst and the 0}-:e’no . . . . (Dft. E35. 1+, p. 167)

5. The "Treaty of Olympia," as it is sometimes called, was consummated after the Februaryamaroh, 1855 treaty council took place. Governor

Stevens had instructed Colonel M, T. Simmons to explore the territory

between that occupied by the Makah Tribe and.Gray‘s Harbor. (Pet. Ex. l4)

While carrying out this exploration, Colonel Simmons met with the Quileute
and Quinaielt tribes on their home grounds and concluded a treaty which
Governor Stevens subsequentl3'signed at Olympia,‘Washington Territory;

The different tribes and bands of the Quinaielt and ”Quileute"
Indians ceded all their rights in lands occupied.by them, bounded and
described in said treaty as follows:

. . . . Commencing at a point on the Pacific noa:Y
is the southwestcorner of the lands lately ceded by tr;
tribe of Indians to the United States, and running e;o£=;£
with and along the southern boundary of the said Makrw Toifa
to the middle of the coast range of mountains; thence soutnorly
‘with said range of mountains to their intersection with the
dividing ridge between the Chehalis and Quiniatl Rivers;
thence westerly with said ridge to the Pacific coast; *:gru\:
northerly along said coast to the place of beginnir: 'W.;
with Quinaielt, etc., 1855, 12 Stat. 791, II Kapple;t.}V

7 Ind. Cl. Com.. l 7

6. The treaty further provided "in consideration of the above cession the United States agree to pay to the said tribes and bands the sum
of twentyafive thousand.dollars . . .” (Article 4). Article 5 further
provided "the United States further agree to pay the sum of three thousand
five hundred dollars” for reservation lands for the tribes and bands.

7. In 1861, a reservation on the Pacific Coast south of the Quinaielt
RiVer'was established by the Superintendent of Indian Affairs for”Washington
Territory for the Quinaielt and Quileute Tribes. Subsequently, in l873,
that reservation was enlarged to its present size by Executive Order, and
was opened to other tribes of "fish-eating Indians" on the Pacific Coast.
(Pet. Ex; #3)

8. The political.organization of the Quinaielt Tribe was an integral part of its social order. This social organization was dominated
by the concept of class consciousness found throughout the Puget Sound
areas in which each individual was born into his place, as a slave,
commoner, or of the rqyalty or "chief" class. The ranking member of this
social structure was a “leader” or respected "chief" of the village. He
‘was spokesman for the village in tribal matters. (Dr. Ray, l Tr. 63-63)

9. The Quinaielt Indians in pre-treaty times lived in multiple
family lodges situated.along the Quinaielt River, near its mouth and
up to Lake Quinaielt. Similarly, the Queets Indians lived along the
Queets River near its.mouth. Temporary or seasonal csvps were also
maintained.by these Indians along the respective rivers bearing their

names. The location of such campsites and permanent locations are shown

on Dr. Ray‘s map. (Pltf. Ex. 73)

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

l0.

Petitioners herein claim exclusive use and occupancy in pretreaty times of a tract of land alleged to encompass approximately

814,080 acres, the boundaries of which petitioners describe as follows:

ll.

land areas south of the Quinaielt claim.

Commencing on the Pacific Coast at the mouth of
Steamboat Creek; thence easterly along the crest of the
watershed of the Hoh River to Mount Olympus; thence
easterly along the crest of the watershed between Hoh
River and Clearwater River; thence easterly along the
crest of the watershed between the South Fork of Hoh
River and Queets River to the crest of Mount Olympus;
thence easterly to Bear Pass; thence southeasterly along
the crest of the Olympic Mountains to Mount Anderson;
thence southwesterly along the crest of the watershed between Quinaielt River and Skokomish River; thence along
the crest of the watershed of Quinaielt River and the
Humptulips River; thence southwesterly along the crest
of the watershed between Chehalis or Copalis River and
Humptulips River to a point on the North Bay approximately
3 miles west of the mouth of the Humptulips River; thence
westerly and southerly along the coast of the North Bay
to Point Brown; thence northerly along the Pacific Coast
to the place of beginning.

The Chehalis Indians (Docket No. 237) assert claim to the

There is an overlap of

approximately six:miles width of the respective claim of petitioners

and the Chehalis claim.

The Chehalis, in their Amended Petition filed

with this Commission on February 24, 1954 claim “their north aboriginal

1mmmay"am

Beginning on the coast of what is now the State of
‘Washington at a point north of Gray's Harbor, which point
istnow called Copalis Rock; thence in a northeasterly'direction to the headwaters of the Humptulips river; thence in a
generally easterly direction from the head of the Humptulips
river to the head of the Wynoochee river; etc. . . . .

‘b

5

Dr. Ronald Olson, anthropologist, who testified for petitioners

in this case, stated,in his Quinaielt Indians, published in l936 on

page 13:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

In theory the tribal territory embraced the whole region

drained.by the Quinault river, and in addition a district

along the beach between a point near the mouth of the Raft
river and a spot near the present site of Pacific Beach, or

the mouth of Joe Creek. In practice not a foot of the tribal
boundary was sharply determined. The southern boundary is

said to have followed Joe Creek to its source and thence along
the height of land of the Quinault watershed to the summit of
the Olympic mountains. The heights above the sources of the
river were more or less common hunting territory for Quinault,
Skokomish, Klallam and Queets. The northern limit of Quinault
country'was roughly along the northern rim of the watershed to
the source of the Raft river and down that stream to its mouth,
But the feeling of ownership or exclusive right to this terri4
tory was unheard of, and if expressed, no doubt would have been
considered a great joke. any one had the right to travel along
the beach, to dig clams where he pleased and to hunt where ame
‘was most plentiful, just as anyone had the privileges of voyaging after whale or seal. Yet the rights or members of th
Quinault tribe were slighthy different from those of aliens.

A whale which drifted ashore between Joe Creek and Raft river
belonged first of all to members of the tribe. An alien hunting in the Quinault watershed might be shot at, but largely because it offered a better opport ni*y'than if close by his home
village. (Pet. Ex. 12¢, p. 13)

12. The overlap on the southern boundary alleged by petitioners
here (Amended Petition filed Dec. 23, 1955, par. VII)'with the alleged
northern boundary of the Chehalis claim in Docket 23? turns on the re»
lationship and tribal identity of the Copalis and also of the Humptulip
Indians residing on the streams bearing their respective names in the
overlap area. We find that neither the Copalis nor the £umptulips*were
a part of petitioners‘ Quinaielt Tribe. '

‘The land description contained in the Treaty with Quinaielt,
euc. l855, describes petitioners‘ southern boundary in somewhat anbigu
‘uous terms, viz.: "Thence southerly with said range of Mountains to
their intereection with the dividing range between the Chehalis and
Quin=ialt Rivers, thence westerly with the said ridge to the Pacific

Coast . . . .“ (Pet. “xi 24, p. 4; l2 Stat. 971; II Kappler 719)

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l 10

The dividing ridge of the Chehalis and C.uiz1ault Rivers is
not easily discernible, as there are several streams, including the
Moclips, Copalis, Humptulips and Wenatchee (Pet. Ex. 71) which are
not part of the drainage of either the Quinault River or Chehalis
River proper. They flow into the Pacific Ocean or Grz1y‘s Harbor.

(Dr. Ray, Tr. 37, 68, 69; Olson, Tr. 636) An examination of the topographical map of this a.rea (Hmmptulips Quadrangle, Grid "G," Dft. Ex.
lOl-A) shows that the drainage of this disputed overlap area is of far
greater proportions southward, in the general direction of the Chehalis
River, than such disputed area is drained northward into, or in the direction of, the Quinaielt River drainage area, Hence, the crest of the watershed betueen the Quinaielt and Chehalis Rivers, referred to as the south
boundary of the Quinaielt by the treaty cession description, must be
reasonably concluded as several miles north of the position advocated
by petitioners. We observe that petitioners‘ south boundary claim is
not supported by the boundary description contained in the treaty cession
made by the Quinaielt Indians.

However, petitioners in their Requested Finding 10, state:
“Actually, the con_{'lict arises because of the Chehalis claim that the
Copalis Indians are a band or subdivision of the Chehalis Tribe,"
followed by citations of ethnological studies tending to regard the
Copalis Indians as part of the Quinaielt, by inference, if not expressly so»

The defendant‘s expert witness, Dr. C, L. Riley, noted.in his

testimony of the Copalis area that it was used also by other people up

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1

and down the coast for clamming. The Quinaielt were among the nearest
coast neighbors of the Copalis and spoke the same Salish language.
(Dr. Riley, Tr. 73—7¢)

Dr. Edward S. Curtis in his monumental work The North American

 

Indian described the territory of the Quinaielt as extending from the

 

Queets River to the Hoquiam River which would include the Copalis area.
(Pet. Ex. 83, p. 9)

Dr. Ronald L. Olson, in his extensive work among the Qninaielt
in the l920‘s listed the Copalis as a separate tribe joining the
Quinaielt on the south. Olson noted the Copalis as a most hospitable
tribe who never "let their fires die out." (Pet. Ex. 124, pp. 16, 2%,
ll5)_ However, Dr. Olson in his testimony in the hearing of this case
stated that he had altered his position and concluded that the Copalis
were a part of the Quinaielt. (Dr. Olson, Tr. 536-538) Frederick‘Webb

Hodge in Handbook of Anerican Indians (l9l2) lists the Copalis as a

 

separate tribe.

James G. Swan, one of the most informed writers of treaty times

treating with Indians west of the Cascades and who was present at the
treaty council conducted by Governor Stevens with the Quinaielt, relates
the following in his book, Three Years at Shoalwater Bev, as to the
identity of Copalis Indians:

In May, I855, General Gibbs, who was connected with
Governor Stevens’ Commission for treating with the Indians
of'Hashington Territory, wrote me for the purpose of ascertaining the names of the Coast Tribes, and, after quoting
Lewis and Clarke’s account, adds, "If you can puzzle out
these names with the assistance of the Indian , I shall be
very glad."

ei  '13.: 'J'‘‘‘ "F '

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l 12

The list, as made out by Lewis and Clarke, are the
Chenooks, Chilts, Killaxthokle, Clanoitomish, Potoashees,
Pailsk, Quinults, Chillates, Calasthocle, Quinnechaut.

The names given me by the Indians, and by which the
tribes from the Columbia River to the Fuca Straits are
known are:

Chenooks, on the Columbia.

Karawee'awee, or Arts'milsh, the name of the Shoalwater
Bay Tribes, which are now nearly extinct, and are usually considered as Chenooks.

Che-ha'lis, on Gray’s Harbor and Chehalis River.

Co-oa‘lis, on the Copalis River, eighteen miles north
of Gray's Harbor. (Underscoring supplied)

Que‘-niault at Point Grenville . . . Next north of the
Queniult tribe are the Quai‘tso, then the Hooch or Hooh,
Que-lai-‘ult and Que-nait‘sath . . . Dft. Ex. 10, pp.
2lO-Zll)

The language of the tribes north of the Columbia is a
guttural sound which to a stranger seems a compound of the
gruntings of a pig and the clucking of a hen. All of the
tribes of the Territory (some twentyafive) speak a language
which, though.sounding the same to unpracticed ears, is'very
different when understood; and even tribes so nearly connected
as the Chenooks, Chehalis, and Quiniults, being only a few
miles distant from each other, yet members of the one can not
understand the language of the other. Still, there are indi'viduals of each who, from a roving, trading disposition, have
'become familiar with each other's tongue, and can usually make
themselves understood. The Chehalis language is that most
usually spoken at present, for the ancient Chenook is such a
guttural difficult tongue, that many of the young Chenook
Indians cannot speak it, but have been taught by their parents
‘the Chehalis language and the Jargon.” (p. BQ6)

The inescapable conclusion drawn from the above quoted James G.
Swan and George Gibbs, among the most respected authorities on the Indians

of the Northwest Pacific coast, is that the Copalis Indians were not a

tribelet or subdivision of the Quinaielt Tribe. Gibbs and Swan conducted

 

7 Ind. Cl. Con. l

their investigations during and immediately after treaty times and
‘were in direct contact with Copalis Indians.
l3. The Quinaielt Tribe of Indians, together with their subtribe of Queets Indians, used and occupied an area of land in aboriginal

times described as follows:

Commencing at the mouth of the Queets River thence
northeastward along a straight line to the present townsite of Elk Park on said river; thence southwesterly to
the headwaters of the Raft River; thence easterly to the
most northeasterly point on Quinaielt Lake; thence south
to the crest of the ridge line, between the Quinaielt
River and west fork of the Humptulips River; thence south»
westerly along the crest of said ridge extended, passing
north of the headwaters of the Copalis River, to the headwaters of Joe Creek; thence southwesterly along the course
of Joe Creek to its mouth; thence northward along the Pacific
Coastline to the place of beginning.

 
   

L EETIAPY FECTS SUPPORTING UlII£aT2 FEEDING OF FACT NO. l

    

     

Subsistence and Use areas of the
Quinaielt and u‘eets Indians:

 

In aboriginal times the Quinaielt and their tribal subdivision,
the Queets Indians, subsisted,very largely on fish and other seafood. All
five species of salmon spawn in the Quinaielt River. Blueback enter the
river as early as December and increase in numbers until April when
great numbers enter this river. By June the peak is over and only
stragglers persist until August. The black salmon spawn in August.

Dog salmon run in greatest numbers in September and continue to run

until mid—November. A few humpback run in late august and September
but they are of slight importance. Steelhead trout, often classed as
salmon by fisherman, run in the Quinaielt niver from November to Ray.

(Pet. Ex. 12%., p. 26; Dft. Ex. to, p. 10)

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. l 14

Olson states the Quinaielt caught salmon, trout, smelt, candle
fish, halibut, cod, rock cod, flounder, herring and some other fish from
the rivers by means of weirs, nets, and harpoons. The greater part of
the fish supply were caught by the weirs placed by the Quinaielt and
Queets on their respective rivers.

‘Whales, sea lions, seals and sea otter were obtained.from.the
Pacific Ocean. Shellfish or crustaceans were obtained along the coast,
the most important of which were razor clams. (Pet.'Ex. 124, pp. 26, 36,
38. 391 “@-49)

Gathering of camas roots, fern roots, snakehead roots, skunk
cabbage, black huckleberries, salmonberries, elderberries, salal berries,

crabappales, cranberries, strawberries and goose berries along the

prairies in the river valleys also constituted a part of the diet of
Quinaielt and Queets Indians in aboriginal times. They also hunted
deer, elk, bear, marmot, land otter, coon, wildcat, rabbit, mink and wolf.
The birds hunted were sawbills, canvasback, and mallards of the duck
family; and loon, sea pilot, sea gull, pheasant, grouse, eagle, pigeon,
snipe, crane and ptarmigan. (Olson, Tr. 51%; Pet. Ex. 12%, pp. 49-50)
‘Various plants were used for medicinal purposes. Shredded cedar
bark was used.by women for wearing apparel and was also used in the construotion of fishing utensils. (Dr. Ray, Tr. 80) The Quinaielt used a
‘Variety of grasses, barks and roots in the manufacture of baskets, mats,
nets, cords, etc., obtained from Quinaielt Prairie and the shores of

GT3Y'S Harbor, and from.mountainous and also swamp areas. (Pet. BX. 124,

pp. 82-84)

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. l

Travel:

Near_y all travel was by canoe, most of it up and down the
Quinaielt River. It ‘as a two or three day trip from Kwi‘nail (village
at mouth of Quinaielt River) to the lake (Quinaie t) with a man at the

bow and one at the stern each with a pole. Portages were constructed

at log jams and in the summer the log jams were burned to clear the channel.

Ocean travel was limited to the quiet summer season or to short trips
on calm winter days. (Pet. Ex. l24, p. 87)
North Boundarg of the Queets (sub—tribe of the Quinaielt)

The Queets Indians claimed the whole watershed of this river
bearing their name. However, th ir principal use of the Queets watershed was limited to the lower portions of the river where their villages
and salmon weirs were situated. (Pet. Ex. 73)

They had a number of villages. One was located on

the south bank near the river mouth, another on the north

bank of the Clearwater River. In language and culture

this tribe was almost identical with the Quinaielt (Olson,

Pet. Ex. 12%, p. 15)

The Hoh Indians were situated north of the Queets.
South Boundary of the Quinaielt Tribe

Royce's Hap I of‘Washington, shows the division boundary of
Quinaielt, area 371, with Chehalis, Area Q58 as north of the Copalis
River.

In discussing territory of the Quinaielt, Olson wrote the
salient comment: "A whale which drifted ashore between Joe Creek
(apparently the south boundai') an Raft River (apparently the north

boundary) belon ed first of all to the members of the tribe.” (Paren_ ,.. .._.. - ..;-....a -. urn. a..u.- . -__ . _--an.-q_ 4-5*...’-gym-.._: -1-um-an--I-_--at-Zu---'--D-I-v-II"""'~|'

$,,r__g;_"g'i‘-.}‘;-‘«*',‘,v:-, ‘oz: 47 Ind. Cl. Come 1

East Boundar? of the Quinaielt and Oueets

The concentration of villages and salmon Heirs were located
along the low flat expanse of the salmon bearing rivers. (Ray's map
of Village Sites and Fish‘Traps, Pet. Ex. 73). Only seasonal use was

made of the upstream areas. The headwaters of the Quinaielt and Queets

Rivers were respectively situated high up in the Olympic Mountains.
(Pet. Ex. 71)
The whole of the Olympic mountain range was a free range to

everyone. (Gunther‘s Klallam Ethnography, p. 205; Dr. Ronald Olson,

Pet. Ex. l2£, p. 13; also see Finding No. l3)

14. The lands described in Finding No. l3 were part of the lands
ceded to the United States by the terns of the Treaty with Quinault,
etc., 1855 by the different tribes and bands of the Quinaielt and
Quileute Indians. The treaty pas signed by all parties between July l,
l855 and January 25, 1856. This treaty was not ratified, however, until
more than three years later on April ll, l859, and the date of such
ratification'by the United States Senate constitutes the date of taking.
(12 Stat. 971; II Kappler 719)

l5. Any right which petitioners or their ancestors and predecessors in interest may have retained or acquired to any lands within the
boundaries as set forth in Finding No. 13 may be made the subject of
inquiry at the further hearing of this claim respecting the credits of
defendant and consideration paid to petitioner or its ancestors and

predecessors in interest, and as to the value of said lands as of the

effective date of the treaty, April ll, l859.

 

Associate Commissioner

l6

