7 Ind. Clo Comm. 6b 6b

BEFORE THE INDIEN CLAIRE COHMISSION

THE CHICKASAW NATION, )
Plaintiff, %
v. 3 Docket No. 269

THE UNITED STATES, )
Defendant. }

)

)

)

THE caoctaw NATION, )
Intervenor. }

Decided: January 23, l9S9
FINDINGS OF FdCT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact.

l. The petitioner, the Chickasaw Nation of Indians of the State of Oklahoma, is an organized tribe of Ameridan Indians within the meaning of the
Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19b6, c. 9h9, 60 Stat. lOh9, 25
U.S.C. 0 70 (a) et seq., and as such is authorized to bring this cause of action under Section 2 of said Act, and its petition has been timely filed herein.

2. The Treaty of January 10, 1786 (7 Stat. 2b; 2 Kapp. lb), between the
Chickasaw Nation and the United States, provided in part as follows:

Article II. The Commissioners Plenipotentiary of the Chickasaws

do hereby'acknowledge the tribes and the towns of the'Chickasaw Nation,

to be under the protection of the United States of America, and of no

other sovereign whosoever.

Under the above provision, and under Article I, Section 8 of the Ccnf*5“

tution of the United States the Chickasaw Katicn became a dependent Indian

? Ind. Cl. Com. (:1; . 65

D‘

Nation under the United States. (The United States v. Creek Nation, 295 U.S.
lO3, lO9-121.0; Seminole Nation V. Unitedstates, 316 U.S. 286, 296-2973.) Choctaw
Nation V. United States, 119 11.5. 1, 28; Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 30 U.S.

(5 Pet.) l, 1?-20; Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations *9‘. United States and the Wichita and Affiliated Ban® of Indians, 31; C. Cl. 17, 39, l20).

3. The lands involved  this case, located in the present State of Oklahoma, were acquired by the Choctaw Nation in a cession from the United States
under Article 2' of the Treaty of October l8, 1820 (7 Stat. 210; 2 Kapp. l9l),
which cession was slightly modified by the Treaties of Januam 20, 1825 (7

tat. 23b; 2 Kapp. 2ll) and September 27, l83O (7 Stat. 3333 2 Kapp. 310), between the Clhoctar.-I Nation and the United States’. The title of the Choctaw
Nation to said lands is evidenced by a patent issued by the United States to
said Chocta:.~: Nation on March 214, 18112.

(admitted in di‘t's ans., page 2, and in ans. of intervenor, page l).

1:. For a valuable consideration the.Chickasa1-I Nation acquired an undivided interest in said laxns of the Choctaw Nation under the pro1:«':I.sions of
the Treaty of January 17, 1837 (11 Stat. 5733 2 Kapp. I486), between the Choctaw
and Chickasaw Nations and the United States.

Thereafter said lands were held in common by said Choctaw and Chickasaw
Nations, the Choctaw Ration having a three--fouI'ths undivided interest in said
lands, and ‘-the Chickasaw Nation having a one-fourth undivided interest in said
lands; and all proceeds derived from the lease, cession, sale or other disposition of said lands, have since been distributed on the basis of three-fourths
to the Choctaw Nation, and one-fourth to the Chickasaw Nation.

(Admitted in Dft‘s ans., page 2, and in intervenor‘s ans., page 13 Choc’

tat: Nation -v. The United States and the Chic‘.<asaw Nation, 83 C. Cls. 1110)7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 614 ' 66

S. The Treaty of June 22, 1855 (ll Stat. 611; 2 Kapp. 706), between the
Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations and the United States provided in part as follows:

Article 1. ' The following shall constitute and remain the boundaries
of the Choctaw and Chickasaw country, viz: Beginning at a point on the
Arkansas River, one hundred paces east of old Fort Smith, where the western boundary-line of the State of Arkansas crosses the said river, and
running thence due south to Red River’ thence up Red River to the point
where the meridian of one hundred degrees west longitude crosses the same;
thence north along said meridian to the main Canadian River; thence down

said river to its junction with the Arkansas River; thence down said river
to the place of beginning.

Anipursuant to an act of Congress approved May 28, 1830, the United
States do hereby forever secure and guarantee the lands embraced within
the said limits, to the members of the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes, their
heirs and successors, to be held in common; so that each and every member
of either tribe -shall have an equal, undivided interest in the whole:
Provided, however, No part thereof shall ever be sold without the consent
of both tribes, and that said land shall revert to the United States ii‘
said Indians and their heirs become extinct or abandon the same.

._ _ . . .
‘A’ 'n' 75' "in" '5' "EC '0'

Article 7. So far as may be compatible with the Constitution of the
United States and the laws made in pursuance thereof, regulating trade
and intercourse with the Indian tribes, the Choctaws and Chickasaws shall
be secured in the unrestricted right of self-government, and full jurisdiction, over persons and property, within their respective limits; -31- ‘-4- t‘

5. The Treaty of April 28, l866  Stat. 769; 2 Kapp. 918), between the

United States and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations, provided, inter alia‘, as

follows:

Article II. The Choctaws and Chickasaws hereby covenant and agree that
henceforth neither slavery nor involuntary servitude, otherwise than 
punishment of crime whereof the parties shall have been duly convicted,

in accordance with laws applicable to all meznbers of the particular
nation, shall ever exist in said nations.

ticle Ill. The Choctaws and Chickasaws, in consideration of the
sum of three hundred thousand dollars, hereby cede to the United
States the territory west of the 98° west longitude, ‘known as the
leased district, provided that the said sum shall be invested and
held by the United States, at an interest not less than five per
cent, in trust for the said nations, until the legislatures of the
Choctaw and Chickasaw Eiations, respectively, shall have made such 

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 6h _ 6?

rules and regulations as may be necessary to give all persons of
African descent, resident in the said nations at the date of the
treaty of Fort Smith, and their descendants, heretofore held in
slavery among said nations, all the rights, privileges and immunities,
including the right of suffrage, of citizens of said nations, except in the annuities, moneys, and public domain claimed'hy, or belonging to,said nations respectively; and also to give to such persons who were resident as aforesaid, and their descendants, forty"
acres each of the land of said nations on the same terms as the Choctawsand Chickasaws, to be selected on the survey of said land, after
the Choctamsand Chickasaws and Kansas Indians have made their selections as herein provided; and immediately on the enactment of such
laws, rules, and regulations, the said sum of three hundred thousand
dollars shall be paid to the said Choctaw and Chickasaw'nations in
the proportion of three-fourths to the former and one-fourth to the
latter -- less such sun, at the rate of one hundred dollars per
capita, as shall be sufficient to pay sudl persons of African descent before referred to as within ninety days after the passage of
such laws, rules, and regulations shall elect to remove and actually
remove from the said nations, respectively. And should the said
laws, rules and.regulations not be made by the legislatures of the
said nations, respectively, within two years from the ratifications

{Np      an-III‘-In--s a-tic. U‘-It-I--I--u—-—.. 1-as-an-nu:--sq-zal-3 J-L.—--_-—-u-no-3 -3.-.-‘1-—---.. -av--..a.¢... «:4 s........-.s..J 3 ca.-.....; ~.q..\.r I...I<..a...5--A guau \.:..i.. win. CFC. ;au...I.u.A.J.. tau. uLz\.lt.La.JG..L.L\.I. LL\..n._L_‘.::1.L 23

shall cease to be held in trust for the said Choctaw and Chickasaw
Nations, and be held for the use and benefit of such of said persons
of African descent as the United States shall remove from the said
territory in such manner as the United States shall deem proper-the
United States agreeing, within ninety days from the expiration of
the said two years, to remove from said nations all such persons

of African descent as may be willing to remove; those remaining or
returning after having been removed from said nations to have no
benefit of said sum of three-hundred thousand dollars, or any part
thereof, but shall be upon the same footing as other citizens of
the United States in the said Nations.

Article III was not compiied'with within the two year period by either the
Choctaws or the Chickasaws. The United States did not remove any freedmen pursuant to the treaty; (The Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cl. 192,
19b.-195, Finding 2; Cl. Ex. 8; Cl. Etc. 1, p. 37; Dft. Ex. 11).

7. By an act of Congress approved May 17, l882 (22 Stat. 68, 73), the surz
of $10,000 was appropriated out of the $300,000 reservediby Article III of the
Treaty of l8o6 for the education of the freedmen of the Choctaw and Chickasaw

Nations. It was provided that either tribe might, before thesexpenditure was

7 Ind. Cls. Comm. ea , 68

made, adopt its freedmen in accordance with Article III of the Treaty of 1866

andin such case the money provided for education would be paid over to the tribe,

in its proper share.

By a measure of the general council oi‘ the Choctaw Nation approved May 21,

1833, entitled “An Act to adopt the freedmen of the Choctaw Nation," enacted in

conformity with the act of Congress approved.May 17, 1882 (supra), the Choctaw

Nation adopted its freedmen.
Sections 1 and 3 provided:

Sec. 1. .Be it enacted by the general council of the Choctaw'Nation
assembled, that all persons of African descent resident in the Chocm
taw Nation at the date of the treaty of Fort Smith, Sept. 13, 1865,
and their descendants formerly held in slavery by the Choctaws or
Chickasaws, are hereby declared to be entitled to and invested with
all the rights, privileges, and immunities, including the right of

......:-.:-__..._...,_ .9 ...:.s...-._..... _n .:.».. rn---_;.. - -n-:.. .  - H _ -' - .
.'_n........t..~...5<.; u.» \a.;.U...I.Z:LJ.J.£J us. ‘LILAC vxxvuucaw n<:.u.L\..u1, c.A.\..t.']_.Jb ..L£1 but c:..{.£1.tLI...i.L;J.£:«’b,

moneys and the public domain of the nation.
Sec. 3. Be it further enacted that all said persons are hereby declared

to be entitled to forty acres each of the lands of the nation, to be

selected and held by them under the same title and upon the same terms
as the Choctaws.

No permanent allotments were ever made under this legislation.

The Chickasaws didznot adopt their freedmen and objected to allotments
to the Choctax freedmen out of the commonly owned lands. (Chickasaw Ration
v. United States, 95 0. c1, 192, 1%, Finding 3: Cl. Ex. 7; Dft. Ex. 5).

8. The Chickasaw Nation, the Choctaw Nation, and the members of the Danes
Commission.to the Five Civilized Tribes, on behalf of the United States, enw
tered into an agreement on April 23, 1897, known as the "Atoka” Agreement, providirr for allotments in severalty of their common lands'and the sale or disposiw
tion of other common properties of the tribes. This agreement, as amended, was

ratified and confirmed by“ the Curtis Act (30 Stat. E95, S03), and made a port

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. an 69

th€T90f; 3nd'WES Sibsequently aPPT0V3d by a majority vote of the rembers of each
of the tribes. (Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cl. l92, 19?, Finding
1;; Dft. Ex. 12)

9. The original Atoka Agreement, between the Commissioners for the United
States and the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations was negotiated at Atoka, in the
Indian Territory and signed on April 23, 1897. Chairman Dawes of the Commission'was not present (Cl. Ex. l, pp. 59-60).

The Agreement provided for forty-acre allotments to the Choctaw freedmen and contained a provision for the reduction of the allotments of Choctaw

Indian citizens on account of the allotments to Choctaw freedmen.as follows:

"Provided that the lands allotted to the Choctaw freedmen, are

to be deducted from the portion to be allotted under this agreement

to the members of the Choctaw tribe, so as to reduce the allotments

to the Choctaws by the value of the same and not affect the value

of the allotments to the Chickasaws".

The Agreement contained no provision relating to allotments to the Chickasaw freedmen. ‘(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. C15. 192, 197, Finding 5; (:1. Ex. 1, pp. 56-57, 62-63; Dft. Ex. 12.)

lo. The Agreement as ratified.by the Act of Congress of June 28, 1898
(30 Stat. h95), was amnded by providing for the MC-acre allotments to the
Chickasaw freedmen, but with the condition that such allotments were"% * % to be selected, held.and used by them until their rights

under said treaty (the Treaty of l866), shall be determined, in

such manner as shall hereafter be provided by Act of Congress,"
and the provision,set'out in the preceding paragraph, for the reduction of
the allotments of Choctaw Indian citizens on account of allotments of the Choctaw freedmen, was amended.by providing that the allotments of Chickasaw Indian

citizens be also reduced on account of allotments to the Chickasaw freedmen, 35

follows:

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. at 70

"That the lands allotted to the Choctaw and Chickasaw freedmen are
to be deducted from.the portion to be allotted under this agreement to the
members of the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes so as to reduce the allotment
to the Choctaws and bhickasaws'by the value of the same."
(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. C15. 192, 197, Finding 6; Cl. Ex. 1,
ppo  ) 0

ll. The Chickasaw Nation, the Choctaw Nation, and the United States, entered into a further agreement on.March 21, 1902 (32 Stat. éhl). This agreement, known as'the "Supplemental" Agreement, contained detailed provisions fir
the enrollment of the members and freedmen of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations,
the appraisement and allotment of the common lands in severalty to the members
and freednen.of the two tribes, the sale of the residue of such lands after
allotments had been made and equalized, and the reservation and sale or disposition otherwise of the common properties of the two tribes, and the distri~
bution of all moneys arising therefrom. (Chickasaw Nation v. United States,
95 0. C15. l92,‘l98, rinding 7).

12. The Supplemental Agreement provided in sections 36 to ho, inclusive
for a suit in the United States Court of Claims, with right of appeal to the
Supreme Court, to test the rights of the Chickasaw freedmen to the commonly owned
lands allotted to them.under the Atoka Agreement. These sections appeared unp
der the heading "Chickasaw Freedman."

Sections 36, 37, and hC provided:

"36. Authority is hereby conferred upon the Court of Claims to determine the existing controversy respecting the relations of the Chickasaw
freedmen to the Chickasaw Nation and the rights of such freedmen in the
lands of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations under the third article of the
treaty of eighteen hundred.and sixty-six, between the United States and
the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations, and under any and all laws subsequently’

enacted by the Chickasaw legislature or by Congress.

"37. To that end the Attorney General of the United States is hsrc?g*

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 63.: 71

directed, on behalf of the United States, to file in said Court of Claims,
within sixty days after this ag:°eem-ant becomes effective, a bill of interpleader against the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations and the Chickasaw freedmen, setting forth the existing controversy between the Chickasaw Nation
and the Chickasaw freedmen and praymg that the defendants thereto be required to interplead and settle their respective rights in such suit.

"140. In the meantime the Commission to the Five Civilized Tribes
shall make a roll of the Chickasasa:-I freedmen and their descendants, as
provided in the Atoka ikgreement, and shall make allotments to them as pro-—
vided in this agreement, which said allotments, shall he held by the said
Chickasaw freednen, not as temporary allotments, but as final allotments,
and in the event that it shau be finally determined in said suit that the
Chickasaw freedzren are not, independently of this agreement, entitled to
allotments in the Choctaw ard Chickasaw lands, the Court of Claims shall
render a decree in favor of the Choctaw and Chickasaw nations according
to their respective interests, and against the United States, for the
value of the lands so allotted to the Chickasaw freedven as ascertained
by the appraisal thereof made by the Commission to the Five Civilized
Tribes for the purpose of allotment, which decree shall take the place
of the said lands and shall be in full satisfaction ofall claims by
the Choc tan and Chickasaw nations agahzst the United States or the sai
freedren on account of the taking of the said lands for allotment to said
freed:.'1en: Provided, That nothing c::ntained in this paragraph shall be
construed to affect or change the ezszistin status or rights of the two
tribes as between themselves respecting the lands taken for allotment to
freedrren, or the money, if any, recovered as compensation therefor, as aforesaid."

0'}

It was provided in section 68 that:
"No act of Congress or treaty provision, nor any provision of the
Atoka agreement, inconsistent with this agreement, shall be in force in
said Choc tau and Chickasaw nations.”
(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cls. 192, 198-499, Finding 8).

13:. At the tire of the negotiations for the Supplemental Agreement in

Washington, D. C., in February and March 1902, the Chickasaw.-‘s insisted that

-ADA

the agreement contain some provision saving their richts not to have allotments to Choctaz-I freedmen made at the expense of the Chickasaws‘ i_.terest in ‘Oh
commonly owned lands. After conference with the Assistant Attorney General, who

was legal adviser to the Departrent of the Interior, it was agreed that the pro"

viso to section LC, set out in finding 12, be included to protect their izztezw : ‘7 Ind. Cl. Cozm. 6h 72

The Assistant attorney General for the Department of the Interior (later
Justice Willis VanDeVanter of the United States Supreme Court), who wrote said
proviso to section b0, and who represented the United States during the negotiations for the Supplemental Agreement, Hon. Douglas H. Johnston, Governor of the
Chickasaw Nation, Hon. Green McCurtain, Principal Chief of the Choctaw Nation,
and the other representatives of the Indian parties present, all believed at
the time said proviso was adopted.by the parties that the language of said
proviso preserved to the Chickasaw Nation the right to claim.fqr its interest in the common domain of the Choctaws and Chickasaws allotted to the Choctaw freedmen. (Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. C18. 192, 199, Finding
9; c1. Ex. l, pp. 8h-86, also pp. 2§—29, 38—hS, h?-b8; Deft. Ex. 9, pp. 5352,
5360).

lb. Suit was brought as provided in sections 36«hO of the Supplemental
agreement. Judgment for $6C6,936.C8 was rendered against the United States and
paid to the two nations, in the proportion of one~fourth to the Chickasaws and

three-fourths to die Choctaws (38 c. Cls. 558, 193, U.S. 115).

(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cl..l92, l99-200, Finding lC, C.
Ex. u). 

15. In that suit, prior to the entry of final judgment on January 2b,
1910, the Choctaws filed an “Application for additional Decree" in which they
set out that the Chickasaws were entitled to pay for their proportionate interu
est in the commonly owned lands allotted to the Choctaw freedmen and requested
the court to enter a supplemental decree deducting from their proportionate

Share of the judgment one-fourth of the value of the jointly held lands allotted

to the Choctaw freednen and add that amount to the amount to be apportioned in

the Chickasaw Nation under the judgment.

No action ras ever taken by the Court on this request.

(Chickasaw Nation V. United States 95 C. C15. 192, 200, Finding 11, Cl. Ex.
8; Cl. Ex. 2 a 3).

16. On.March 11, 1910, the Govenor of the Chickasaw Nation, Hon. Douglas
H. Johnston, wrote to the Commission of Indian Affairs requesting permission to
employ separate counsel for the Chickasaw Nation and setting out in support of
his request the Chickasans' claim for compensation for lands allotted to the
Choctaw freedmen out of the common domain of the two nations without the cone
sent of tte Cbickasaws and pointed out that the Chickasaws had no attorney to
represent them at the time that judgment was entered in the suit brought pursuant to the Supplemental Arreement.

On March 15, 1910, denial of the:request‘sas recommended by the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs on the ground that in view of the admission of the Choctaws
in their request for an additional decree, judicial action did not seem to be
necessary to settle the controversy. A final determination was promised within
ten days. Ho such determination seems ever to have been made.

(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cls. 192, 2co, Finding 12, C1.
Ex. 8; also C1. E3. 1, pp. 38-b8).

17. The Chickasaw Nation has never received any compensation for its

of the allotments of Choctaw Indian citizens, or by a1 adjustment or settlement
otherwise.

(Chickasaw Nation v. United States, 95 C. Cls. 192, 200, Finding 13 — Cl»

Ex. 5; also Cl. Ex. 1, pp. 68, 77, 86).

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. ea 7h

18. The Superintendent for the Five Civilized Tribes reported on July
26, 1939, that allotments had been made to 5,973 Choctaw freedmen of 266,b35.13

acres of land, the appraised value of which for allotment purposes was $763,739.12.

The value of the undivided one-fourth interest of the Chickasaw Nation was

one-fourth of same, $190,93h.78.

(Chickasaw Nation v. United states, 95 c. Cls. 192, 200-201, Finding lb Cl. Ex. 5; also c1. Ex. 1, pp. 20.23).

Q

19. In prior litigation under the jurisdictional act of June 7, 192h
(h3 Stat. 537), between the parties hereto the United States Court of Claims
held that the language of the proviso to Section b0 of said Supplemental Agreement of March 21, 1902 (32 Stat. ohl), was intended by the parties to preserve
and did preserve to the Chickasaw Nation the right to claim for the value of its
one-fourth interest in the lands jointly owned by the Choctaw and Chickasaw Eations allotted to Choctaw freedmen, without the consent or acquiescence of the
Chickasaw Nation (Chickasaw Nation v. United States and the Choctaw Eation, 95
C. Cls. 192).

On March 5, 19b3, the United States Supreme Court reversed the case and
held, as a matter of 1am, that the language of the provisions of said Supplemental Agreement could not be construed so as to preserve to the Chickasaw
Nation the right to clainxfor its one-fourth interest in the common domain.of the
Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations allotted to Choctaw freedmen (Choctaw Nation.v.
United States and the Chickasaw Nation, 318, U.S. M23).

20- Since 1866, the petitioner‘s demand for compensation for any of its
lands to be awarded.by the Government to freedmen were well known to all cone

corned. (lb Stat. 769) Henry'L. Dawes, the Chairmai of the Commission to Viua

7 Ind. Cl. Comm.6h ‘ .75

Civilized Tribes, expressed this position of the Chickasaws to the Secretary of
the Interior in his annual report dated October ll, 1897, on the question of
Chickasaw freedmen allotments in this language, (Dft. Ex. l6, pp. 17-18):

The citizenship of the Chickasaw Freedman is in dispute. There
are many thousands of them. As there never has been any enrollment
of them.the Commission has no means of knowing how many, but without
doubt there are nmre than in all the other tribes put together. They
claim.they have been made citizens by the Chickasaws, which is denied
by them, If they are citizens they are entitled under treaty to an allotment of forty acres each. There can.be therefore no allotment of
the Chickasaw lands until this question is settled. Nor can the enrollment required be proceeded with while this question remains unsettled.
It is of great importance that provision be made for its early settlement. The Choctaws and Chickasaws owning their land in common, all allotment must await this decision. If they are not Chickasaw citizens,
then the United States is in under treaty obligation to remove them
from the territory. (Underscoring supplied).

 

This same position of petitioner, consistent with its position as above
Chairman Dawes in reference to Chickasaw freeomen, was also the
petitioner‘s position as to Choctaw freedmen allotments and said position was
never abandoned. A treaty Commissioner of the Chickasaws, Ben H. Colbert,
testified in his l9hC deposition how the issue was raised in the negotiations
of the subsequent 1902 agreement (Cl. Ex. l, pp. 8h-86).

‘we find and conclude as an ultimate fact, consistent with all of the findings of fact herein, and based upon our findings numbered 8, 9, l3, and l5
through l9, inclusive, that the Chickasaw and Choctaw Nations intended to agree,
and u1rierstood'anc1 believed tiny had agreed upon something very different from
the Supreme Court‘s literal interpretation of the language of the l9C2 agreement (Choctaw Nation v; U.S., l9h3, 318 U.S. L20); that is, said Nations believed
said agreement preserved to the Chickasaw Nation the right 5f compensation for
its lands allotted to Choctaw freedmen and that the value of same would be

deducted from funds of the Choctaw Nation and credited to funds of the Chickasaw

7 Ind. Cl. Com”. 6b a» 76

Nation held by the United States.

The representatives of the Chickasaw and Choctaw Nations,'which is related
by the above mentioned deposition of treaty commissioner Ben H. Colbert, understood and believed that by the addition of the proviso to Section ho of the l902
agreement (32 Stat. ohl, 650-651), to wit:

Provided, That nothing contained in this paragraph shall be construed to affect or change the existing status or rights of the two

tribes as between themselves respecting the lands taken for allotment

to freedmen, or the money, if any recovered, as compensation daerefor,
as aforesaid.

was added thereto with the intention and for the central purpose of assuring
the petitioner that the l902 Agreement would not “be construed to affect or
change the existing status or rights of the two tribes as between themselves
respecting the lands taken for allotnent to freedmen, or the money, if any,
recovered as compensation therefor, as aforesaid“ and that the word "freedmen”
included, and not excluded, Choctaw freedmen allotments, as well as Chickasaw
freedmen allotments.

Retention of the "deduction principle" would have protected the Chickasaw Nation for'its land allotted to Choctaw freednen, as was defined earlier
in the Atoka Agreement. (Finding No. 9} We have traced and recited such "existing status or rights” of the petitioner in.relation to proposed allotments to
Choctaw freednen.as "existed" prior to the 1902 Agreement in Findings No‘s 8, 9,
and lO above, which define the "deduction principle" as was adopted in respect
for Petitioner's rights by the Atoka Agreement. (30 Stat. E95)

We find petitioner executed the l902 Agreement in.reliance upon this under M
3t3“di“8 Of the construction of this proviso. However, the Supreme Court sub5’QUCnt1Y interpreted this proviso to be, in effect, nothing more than a superfluous recital of the relationship of these tribes to Chickasaw freedmen and

7 Ind. Cl. Conan. 6h 77

their allotments only. Thus, the l9C2 Agreement was construed to convey petitioner‘s interest in lands, by the allotments to Choctaw freedmen, without any
provision for compensation therefor, in that thel902 Agreement was held to
supersede and annul the earlier provisions of the Atoka Agreement, which did so
provide compensation to petitioner. The Supreme Court said the earlier‘provisiom for aliquot allotments in the Atoka Agreement were inconsistent with the
specific acreage allotment provisions of the l902 agreement, and therefore superseded the deduction provisions of the Atoka Agreement (318 U.S. LL23,LL29-1431).

The l902 Agreement, as so interpreted, was patently unfair to petitioner in
depriving; it of said rights and interests without its knowledge or consent, and
contrary to petitioner's understandin of its proviso contained in Section LLO.
(Finding No. l3).

2l. The United States assumed fuH administrative control, custody and
management over the property and affairs of the Choctaw and Chickasaw Nations
under the Atoka and subsequent agreements. (Cherohee Nation v. Hitchcock, T187
U.S. 291:; Lone won‘ v. Hitchcock, 187 U.s. 553; United States v, Creek Nation,
295 U.S. 103, 109-110)

The United States became vested with the responsibility, powers, and duties
of liquidating and di*Iidi_n§.; the lands and dis trihuting the funds of.‘ the two
tribes, not for its own benefit, but for the benefit of the tribes. It had full
power and authority, wi ch the consent of the Choctaw Nation, to equitably adjust‘
between the two nations the moneys deposited with it from the Chickasaw freedmen case judgment, as had been requested in the Choctaw‘s "Application for Addi)

v . g , . c a ti -. pg . o 1 9 ' ..; am 7"‘ P
The bniteo States stcoc in these transactions oi liquidating potitio,.c_ .»

\}1

tional Decree". (Finding No. l

u 1 a o o . 5 “ "V" ‘W7 17:‘
Property in all suostantial respects in the position of a trustee in COT1~--7 Ind. cl. corn. on v - 78

a beneficiary's property. In assuming the broad powers, control and mnagement over petitioner‘s property under the terms of the Atoka Agreement and the
Curtis Act (30 Stat. n95), and the 1902 Supplemental Agreement (32 stat. obi),
it assumed the duty to protect petitioner‘s rights in the exercise of same.

Instead, the United States allotted petitioner's interest in land to others
without providing or allowing petitioner compensation for same.

Thus, the United States, although in the furtherance of what may be sound
policy, deprived petitioner of its property in violation of the trust which it
assumed in fact, if not in name, under the provisions of the Atoka and l902
Agreements.

This Commission, under the standards of fair and honorable dealing of Clause
5, of Section 2, Indian.Claims Commission Act, applied to the above recited facts,
namely, that such loss was unfairly imposed upon petitioner, not with its express,
consent or acquiescence, but over its active protests, finds and concludes the

United States is liable for said loss to petitioner, the value of which is set

out in Finding No. 18.

EDGAR E. WITT
Chief Commissioner ~

I concur:

HM. N, HOLT
Associate ommissioner

 

I dissent: '

LOUIS J. OIMARR
“"Tf—t-:r—~—-—r——r——————————Associate Commissioner

