42 Ind. C1. Comm. 214 214

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE SIOUX TRIBE, et a1.,
Plaintiffs,

Docket No. 74

V.

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

\./\J\./\..J\-J\.d"\-l\-l\.-I

Defendant.

Decided: July 19, 1978
Appearances:

Arthur Lazarus, Jr., William Howard Payne,
and Marvin J. Sonosky, Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Craig A. Decker, with whom was Assistant Attorney
General Peter Taft, Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION
Vance, Comissioner, delivered the opinion of the Comission.
This docket is now before us on plaintiffs‘ motion for "an order

that no offsets, either payments on the.claim or gratuities, be deducted"

1/
from the award in this case. Concerning payments on the claim, it is

If The Comission has previously determined (1) that under the Treaty of
Fort Laramie of September 17, 1851, the "Sioux or Dakcotah Nation"
possessed recognized title to a large tract of land in North and South
Dakota, Montana, Wyoming, and Nebraska, 21 Ind. C1. Comm. 371 (1969),

amending l5 Ind. Cl. Com. 575 (1965); (2) that the "Sioux or Dakcotah
Nation," as that term was used in the 1851 Fort Laramie Treaty, consisted

of the Teton (Docket 74) and Yankton (Docket 332-C) divisions of Sioux,
and that the Tetons possessed an undivided 93 percent interest in the
Sioux Fort Laramie land and the Yankton Sioux an undivided 7 percent

interest in that land, 24 Ind. 01. Comm. 147 (1970), as modified by 41
Ind. C1. Comm. 160 (1977); (3) that the Teton and Yanktonais Sioux

(Docket 74) had aboriginal title to a tract of land in North and South
Dakota east of the Missouri River, 23 Ind. C1. Comm. 419 (1970); and

(4) that the value, on February 24, 1869, of the Sioux lands east of the
Missouri River was $20,895,000, and of the Sioux lands west of the
Missouri and outside the Great Sioux Reservation was $24,790,000, 38 Ind.

Cl. Comm. 469 (1976).

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 215

plaintiffs‘ position that the Treaty of April 29, 1868, was primarily a
treaty of peace rather than a treaty of cession; that the Sioux were
unaware that under the treaty the United States was acquiring Sioux land;
that the payments promised by the United States under the treaty were in
exchange for peace and other promises made by the Sioux; and that,
therefore, those payments cannot be offset as payments on plaintiffs’

3/

claim for compensation for their lands. Concerning gratuitous offsets,
plaintiffs assert that the nature of the claim and the course of dealings
between the parties are such that the Commission should not allow the
set off of any gratuitous expenditures by the defendant. Defendant's
contentions are 1- that all payments made pursuant to the 1868 treaty
were consideration for plaintiffs‘ lands and should be set off as payments
on the claim, and 2- that the Commission should decide on an item—by-item
basis which of the gratuitous expenditures by the United States should
be set off against plaintiffs’ award. For the reasons indicated below
the Commission shall grant the plaintiffs’ motion.
PAYMENTS ON THE CLAIM
The law concerning the determination of consideration under Indian

treaties is well established. Consideration for a land cession is that

 

2/ Plaintiffs’ claim in this docket is for compensation for lands acquired
by the United States under the Treaty of April 29, 1868, 15 Stat. 635
(proclaimed on February 24, 1869). The Commission has previously found
that this treaty effectuated a cession of Teton and Yanktonais Sioux lands
to the United States, 23 Ind. Cl. Comm. 419, 424 (1970). See also 38 Ind.
C1. Comm. 469, 470, 471 (1976); 23 Ind. Cl. Comm. 358, 359, 360 (1970),

15 Ind. Cl. Comm. 577, 606 (1965).

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 214 215

which the United States offers in exchange for the lands of the Indians,

and which the Indians accept as paymnt for their lands, See Nez Perce

Tribe v. United States, 24 Ind. C1. Comm. 429, 433-34 (1971). In

 

‘determining whether certain payments made by the United States are consideration for Indian lands the Commission must look to see what the
parties agreed to. Makah Tribe v. United States, 40 Ind. Cl. Comm. 131,
135 (1977).

The Treaty. In an attempt to ascertain the intention of the parties
we shall first examine the language of the treaty. In this task we shall

be guided by the principle that Indian treaties are to be interpreted in

the sense in which they would naturally be understood by the Indians,
and that any ambiguity is to be resolved in favor of the Indians. Choctaw
Nation v. Oklahoma, 397 U. S. 620, 631 (l970).2!

In terms of the current dispute in this docket, which is whether or
not the payments promised by the United States were intended by the Indians
as consideration for the cession of Sioux lands, the key provisions
of the treaty are in Articles I, II, XI, XV, and XVI.

Article I of the treaty contained a declaration that the war between
the Sioux and the United States was ended. Each party pledged its honor

to maintaining the peace. This article also provided for the punishment

of any individual who carried out depredations against the other party.

3/ The Court in Choctaw explained the reason behind the rule of construction.

[T]hese treaties are not to be considered as exercises in
ordinary conveyancing. The Indian Nations did not seek out
the United States and agree upon an exchange of lands in an
arms—length transaction. Rather, treaties were imposed upon
them and they had no choice but to consent.

397 U. S. at 630-31.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 217

In Article II the reservation for the Sioux was described. The
reserve was set aside for the exclusive use of the Sioux, and the United
States promised that no unauthorized person would be permitted to enter

the reservation. This article also contained a declaration by the Indian

signatories that

henceforth they will and do hereby relinquish all claims or

right in and to any portion of the United States or Territories,
except as is embraced within the limits aforesaid [the reservation] and except as hereinafter provided.

15 Stat. 636, emphasis added.
Article XI of the treaty is as follows:

ARTICLE XI. In consideration of the advantages and
benefits conferred by this treaty and the many pledges of
friendship by the United States, the tribes who are parties
to this agreement hereby stipulate that they will relinquish
all right to occupy permanently the territory outside their
reservation as herein defined, but yet reserve the right to
hunt on any lands north of North Platte, and on the Republican
Fork of the Smoky Hill river, so long as the buffalo may
range thereon in such numbers as to justify the chase. And
they, the said Indians, further expressly agree:

lst. That they will withdraw all opposition to the
construction of the railroads now being built on the plains.

2d. That they will permit the peaceful construction of

any railroad not passing over their reservation as herein
defined.

3d. That they will not attack any persons at home, or

travelling, nor molest or disturb any wagon trains, coaches,
mules, or cattle belonging to the people of the United States,

or to persons friendly therewith.

4th. They will never capture, or carry off from the
settlements, white women or children.

5th. They will never kill or scalp white men, nor attempt
to do them harm.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 218

6th. They withdraw all pretence of opposition to the
construction of the railroad now being built along the Platte
river and westward to the Pacific ocean, and they will not in
future object to the construction of railroads, wagon roads,
mail stations, or other works of utility or necessity, which
may be ordered or permitted by the laws of the United States.
But should such roads or other works be constructed on the
lands of their reservation, the government will pay the tribe
whatever amount of damage may be assessed by three disinterested
comissioners to be appointed by the President for that purpose,
one of said commissioners to be a chief or headman of the tribe.

7th. They agree to withdraw all opposition to the military
posts or roads now established south of the North Platte
river, or that may be established, not in violation of treaties

heretofore made or hereafter to be made with any of the Indian
tribes.

15 Stat. at 639.

In Article XV the Indian signatories agreed that they would consider
the reservation to be their permanent home and that they would make no
permanent settlement elsewhere.

Under Article XVI the United States agreed that the country north
of the North Platte River and east of the Big Horn mountains would be
considered unceded Indian territory and that no non-Indians would be
allowed in this area. The United States further agreed that it would
abandon its military posts in the unceded territory and close the road to
the settlements in Montana.

The language of the treaty is ambiguous concerning the intention of
the parties. Although the language we have quoted from Article II
appears to be language of cession, the final phrase, "except as hereinafter provided," controls the sentence, and when read with other articles

42 Ind. Cl. Com. 214 219

of the treaty there is considerable doubt as to its meaning. Certainly,
the language of Article XVI talks of certain Sioux land as being
considered to be unceded Indian land. In Article XI, the only article

in the treaty which uses the word consideration, the Sioux agree to
"relinquish all right to occupy permanently the territory outside their
reservation . . ." (emphasis added). It is unclear whether the surrender
of a right to permanently occupy land is the same as a cession of the
land. Further, in Article XI, aside from this relinquishment, the

Sioux make seven other promises. All of the Sioux promises are stated

to be "[i]n consideration of the advantages and benefits conferred by

the treaty . . ." It is impossible to determine from the language of the
treaty which part of the advantages and benefits flowing to the Sioux
were intended by the parties to be in exchange for a cession of Sioux
lands, if in fact the parties intended there to be such a cession.

In short, the Comission is unable to determine from the language of
the treaty whether the payments and benefits promised by the United
States were in exchange for peace and other promises, as contended by
the plaintiffs, or were in exchange for the cession of Sioux lands, as

urged by the defendant. It is therefore necessary to examine the history

and negotiations leading up to the treaty in an attempt to ascertain the

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 220

4/
intent of the parties.

History. In the early 1860's gold was discovered in Montana. To

reach the Montana gold fields, emigrants traveled from Fort Laramie up
the valley of the Powder River and then westward into Montana. This
route lay in the middle of the principal hunting grounds of the western
Sioux. The influx of white emigrants and the disruption to the Sioux way

of life precipitated conflict between the Indians and the whites.
In 1865, in an attempt to solve the dispute peacefully, the United

States entered into nine treaties with various Sioux bands. Under these

treaties the signatory bands agreed that they would withdraw from any
overland route through their territory. However, the Upper Brule, Oglala,
and Hunkpapa Sioux residing along the Powder River Road, also known as the

Bozeman Trail, as the route to Montana was called, refused to participate

in the 1865 treaties.

3] The Comission frequently must look beyond the words of a treaty.

Both parties here have been given adequate opportunity to brief and argue
their positions concerning the intent of the parties to the 1868 treaty.
The briefing process began nearly 10 years ago when the Commission, by
order dated October 29, 1968, first requested briefs on the consideration
issue. More recently the question of consideration was briefed in response

to plaintiffs‘ motion, dated August 19, 1976, for an order directing that
no offsets be deducted from the award (this opinion is in response to

that motion). Fina1ly,on October 12, 1976, the full Commission heard
oral argument on the consideration issue. In the last 18 months neither
party has come forward with any additional information pertaining to

the 1868 treaty.

The parties agree that the Comission may rule on plaintiffs‘ motion
as a matter of law. Defendant has stated that it "has no objection to
the Comission ru1ing_§§h§_matter gf_lag_on plaintiffs’ motion to dismiss
all of defendants‘ offset claims" (Defendants' Reply on Motion to Adduce
Evidence, November 4, 1976). See also transcript in Docket 74, hearing
on offsets, October 12, 1976, at 37.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 221

Again in 1866 the United States attempted to obtain western Sioux
consent to the Powder River Road. Although some Sioux agreed, the
principal chiefs refused to sign the proposed treaty, and it was not
submitted to the Senate for ratification. Nonetheless, the United States
Army occupied the Powder River area and erected three forts to protect
the road. The Sioux reacted by waging war against the Army and any
emigrants who attempted to use the road.

During the early phases of the war, the Sioux were successful in
closing the Powder River Road, and inflicted a significant defeat on the
Army. In an attempt to curtail what was foreseen as a long and costly
war, the United States appointed a Special Indian Comission to ascertain
the causes of the war and to seek a method of ending it. The Commission
was also instructed to ascertain whether any of the Indians were willing
to go on a reservation, and to locate an adequate reservation in the
Yellowstone, Powder, Tongue rivers area.

The Special Indian Commission held several meetings with the Sioux
in the spring of 1867.

In June 1867 the Special Indian Commission issued its report. It
stated that to carry on a successful war against the plains Indians
would take a period of from five to ten years, and would require the
commitment of twenty-five thousand troops and the expenditure of hundreds
of millions of dollars. The Commission noted that the country could ill

afford such an undertaking, and that peace could be obtained more cheaply.

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 222

The Commission recommended the establishment of a reservation in which
the Indians could be civilized. In time game would diminish and the
Indians would turn to agriculture. In the meantime the Government would
supply material assistance to aid in their civilization.

In a report to the Secretary of the Interior in July 1867, the
Special Indian Commission warned that the continued disregard of Indian
rights would precipitate an Indian war of great cost and indefinite

duration. It stated it would cost the Government far less to recognize

Indian rights and enter into a fair treaty.

By the Act of July 20, 1867, 15 Stat. 17, Congress authorized the
President to appoint a Commission to negotiate with the Indians with the
objective of removing the causes of Indian complaint, establishing
security for railroads and other thoroughfares to the West, and insuring
civilization for the Indians and peace and safety for American settlers.
The Comission was also to select permanent reservations for the Indians.

The Indian Peace Commission, as it was called, met with various bands
of the Sioux in the late summer and early fall of 1867. The Comissioners
learned that the chief Sioux complaint was the Powder River Road. The
Indians believed that this presence of whites on their land had driven
away their game. The Sioux would agree to peace only if the United
States agreed to abandon the Powder River Road. The Commissioners informed
the Sioux that the Government wished them to settle on a reservation and

become farmers, and that if they agreed to do so the Government would

42 Ind. C1. C0. 214 

supply whatever assistance they might need. Many of the Sioux replied
that they would not surrender any of their land, that they did not wish
to settle on a reservation, and that they intended to continue to live

by the hunt.

In January 1868 the Indian Peace Commission reported to the President.
It recommended the establishment of a permanent reservation for Indians
east of the Rocky Mountains. On the reservation the Indians would be
instructed in industry and agriculture; their children would be compelled
to attend school; farmers, mechanics, millers, and engineers would be
supplied to instruct them. The Indians would also receive from the Government domestic animals, agricultural implements, clothing, and necessary
subsistence. In later years as they became self-sufficient these rations
could be discontinued. In time, as game diminished, all the Sioux would
become farmers on the reservation.
Despite the optimism of its report, the Indian Peace Commission

faced a dilema. In conformance with their instructions the Commissioners
desired to congregate all of the Sioux on a reservation at the earliest
possible time and at the least cost to the Government. The Oglala, Upper
Brule, and Minneconjou bands, however, were adamant in their refusal to
settle on a reservation so long as they could live by the hunt. Some of
the Comissioners wanted to use force to compel the Sioux onto a reservation. The military members of the Commission, on the other hand, warned

that the country could not afford the commitment both in manpower and

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 S 224

material necessary to subdue the Sioux, especially this soon after the
Civil War. The Comission finally agreed to seek peace with the Sioux
on the best terms available to the United States.

The Indian Peace Commission presented the proposed treaty to the

Sioux bands in a series of councils held in the spring of 1868. We
have set out in some detail the negotiations at these councils in our
findings of fact 84 through 89. At these councils, after hearing an

explanation of the terms of the treaties, the Sioux generally voiced
these sentiments: 1- they wanted the United States to abandon the Powder
River Road; 2- they were unwilling to cede any of their lands; 3- they
did not wish to settle on the reservation and become farmers until all
their game was gone; 4- they would accept no merchandise from the United
States which might be thought of as payment for their lands.
The record is most complete with respect to the treaty council

with the northern Sioux bands at Fort Rice in July 1868. l§gg finding

of fact 89. The explanation of the treaty given by the Commissioners

at that council is most probative in determining the Indians‘ understanding
of the treaty, and we shall sumarize it here.

The Sioux were told that under the treaty they would agree to remain

at peace and to make redress for any depredations carried out by Indians.

The United States in turn would agree to make redress for injuries done

by whites. The United States would further agree to exclude all whites

41.’ .£L1d. Cl. Comm. 214 225

from the proposed reservation, remove the military posts from the Powder
River Country, and hold the country west of the reservation as unceded
Indian territory until the Sioux agreed to cede it by treaty. Those
Sioux who wished to abandon hunting and settle down permanently could
do so only within the reservation. Those Sioux who wished to remain
hunters could do so at any time so long as they were peaceful and the
game lasted. The Government agreed to provide goods and services to
those Sioux who decided to settle on the reservation and presents to
those Sioux who continued to hunt. In return the Government wanted the
Sioux "to remain at peace, to settle down and commence farming into the
country designated for your home when you abandon hunting and surrender
such lands as no longer afford you any game." Def. Ex. 0-20, Part II,
pp. 123-24.

Later in the negotiations, in order to allay the suspicion of some
of the Sioux, General Sanborn, the spokesman for the Comission, stated
that the Government understood "when you tell us that you don't want to
receive any presents, that you don't wish to be thought as selling your

land. we are not going to give you these goods in exchange for any

land--we give them to you to help you along.” Id, at p. 137.

From this recitation it is clear that, based on the representation

of the United States negotiators, the Indians cannot have regarded the
1868 treaty as a treaty of cession. Nowhere in the history leading up

to the treaty or in the treaty negotiations themselves is there any

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 226

indication that the United States was seeking a land cession or that the
Sioux were willing to consent to one. On the contrary,the evidence is
overwhelming that the Sioux would never have signed the treaty had they
thought they were ceding any land to the United States. Since, in our
opinion, the Sioux intended no cession, they could only regard any
benefits accruing to the tribe as payment for the keeping of the peace
under article XI of the 1868 treaty. Thus, in the context of our inquiry,
any payments made by the United States cannot be construed as consideration
for lands cededaél

The Sioux viewed the treaty as one in which the United States agreed
to abandon the Powder River Road, and to keep white people out of a
substantial portion of Sioux territory; and in which the Sioux promised
to maintain peaceful relations with the whites and, at some indefinite
time in the future, if ever, that it arose that there was no more game, to
settle on the reservation. The United States viewed the treaty as one
in which it could obtain peace with the Sioux at a much cheaper price

than continued warfare and in which the Sioux agreed to make the reservation

their permanent home. The goods and services which it promised under the

.2] The Commission has held in its opinions in the title and valuation

phases of this docket that, whatever the intentions of the signatory
parties, the 1868 treaty did in fact effectuate a cession (see footnote
2, infra). As we have stated, however, the issue in the consideration
stage here is not what in fact resulted from the signing of the 1868
treaty, but rather what the Sioux understood and intended at the time
of the signing.

 

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 227

treaty were viewed by the Government as the cost of pacifying and
civilizing the Sioux and eventually incorporating them into American
society.

Defendant contends that the 1868 Sioux treaty was not significantly
different than many other Indian treaties in which both peace and a land
cession were involved. In all claims involving those other treaties, the
defendant argues, the United States has always received credit for the
payments it has made, and this claim should not be treated any differently.
Specifically, defendant refers to the other treaties which were negotiated
and executed by the Indian Peace Commission in 1867 and 1868. These
treaties contained much of the same language as the Sioux treaty. Therefore, the defendant urges that the goods and services if furnished the
Sioux under the 1868 treaty should be treated as consideration for the
Sioux lands.

In 1867 and 1868 the Indian Peace Commission entered into six treaties
in addition to the Sioux treaty. We have examined those treaties, whatever
history and negotiations we have in the record concerning those treaties,
and our decisions involving those treaties. We find that, with the
possible exception of one of them, these treaties are distinguishable
from the Sioux treaty.

Easiest to distinguish are the Treaty of May 7, 1868, with the Crows,

15 Stat. 649, and the Treaty of July 3, 1868, with the Eastern Band of

'42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 228

Shoshones and Bannocks, 15 Stat. 673. Unlike the Sioux treaty, neither

of these treaties were treaties of peace. Both the Crows and the ShoshonesBannocks were already at peace with the United States. Further, the

cession language in the second article of both these treaties is unequivocal
and does not contain the exception present in the Sioux treaty. Most
important, in the negotiations preceding these treaties the Indians were
informed that the United States was purchasing their land. _§gg findings

of fact 95-96. Therefore, the payments made by the United States under
these treaties were consideration for land cessions.

In the second article of the Treaty of May 10, 1868, with the

Northern Cheyennes and Arapahos, 15 Stat. 655, the Indians agreed to

accept some portion of the Southern Cheyenne—Arapaho reservation or the
Sioux reservation as their permanent home. They then "relinquish, release
and surrender" to the United States all of their rights and claims in all
other lands without exceptions such as are in articles II and XI of the

1868 Sioux treaty. This is clearly language of cession. Payments made

by the United States under this treaty are thus consideration for the

lands being ceded.

The Treaty of October 21, 1867, with the Kiowas and Comanches, 15
Stat. 581, and the Treaty of October 28, 1867, with the Southern Cheyennes

and Arapahos, 15 Stat. 593, are in the nature of substitution treaties.

Each of the tribes had ceded all of its lands to the United States in

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 21¢ 22:

1865 (Treaty of October 16, 1865, with the Cheyenne and Arapaho, 14 Stat.
703, Treaty of October 18, 1865, with the Comanche and Kiowa, 14 Stat.
717), and the purpose of the 1867 treaties, aside from establishing peace,
was to exchange the reservations established under the 1865 treaties for
new reservations. Moreover, the tenth article in each of these treaties
provided that the goods and services promised under these treaties were in
lieu of those the United States owed under the 1865 treaties. Therefore,

the payments under these treaties were consideration for the lands ceded

under the 1865 treaties.

The Navajo Treaty of June 1, 1868, 15 Stat. 667, was a treaty of
peace. However, the significant difference between it and the Sioux
treaty is in Article IX (the equivalent of Article X1 in the Sioux
treaty) where the Navajo agree to "relinquish all right to occupy any
territory outside their reservation . . . ," whereas the Sioux had agreed
to relinquish the right to permanently occupy territory outside the
reservation. It is not clear whether this is a significant difference.
In any event, the issue of consideration under this Navajo treaty has not

yet been decided by the Commission or the Court of Claims and therefore

it has no value as precedent in this case.

We conclude as a matter of law that the goods and services promised

by the United States under the 1868 treaty were not intended by the Sioux

(or by the Government negotiators) to be consideration for any Sioux lands.

The history of this case makes it clear that this treaty was an attempt by

42 Ind. C1. Comm. 214 230

the United States to obtain peace on the best terms possible. Ironically,
this document, promising harmonious relations, effectuated a vast cession
of land contrary to the understanding and intent of the Sioux. Therefore,
no consideration for the cession of Sioux lands under the 1868 treaty has
been promised or paid and the defendant may not offset any part of the
cost of these goods and services as payments on plaintiffs‘ claim for

compensation.

GRATUITIES

Under the Indian Claims Commission Act, this Commission may "if it
finds that the nature of the claim and the entire course of dealings and
accounts between the United States and the claimant in good conscience
warrants such action" set off against an award to a claimant all or part
of the expenditures made gratuitously for the benefit of the claimant

6/
tribe by the United States. 25 U.S.C. §70a (1976).

The issue of gratuities has been briefed by the parties in connection
with the pending motion (Plaintiffs' Motion of August 19, 1976). The
Comission heard oral argument on the issue on January 14, 1977. In
findings 3 through 6 of our decision in Docket 74-B, involving the same
parties as this docket, we set out the history leading up to the passage
by the United States of the Act of February 28, 1877, 19 Stat. 254. §§g_
Sioux Nation v. United States, 33 Ind. Cl. Comm. 151, 245-257 (1974). we

have incorporated those findings into this docket by reference.

_§/ For a discussion of the Commission's discretion with regard to
gratuitous offsets, see United States v. Assiniboine Tribe of Indians,

428 F.2d 1324, 192 Ct. C1. 679 (1970), aff'g 21 Ind. C1. Comm. 310 (1969).

42 Ind. c1. Comm. 214 23;

Our findings in Docket 74—B reveal that after the discovery of gold
in the Black Hills portion of the Sioux reservation the United States, in
1875, attempted to purchase the hills. The Sioux refused to sell. In
November 1875, in an attempt to force the Sioux to sell, President Grant
decided that the United States would no longer fulfill its obligation under
the 1868 treaty to keep whites out of the Sioux reservation. He ordered
that the Army be removed from the Black Hills and no longer oppose miners
attempting to enter the hills. Not satisfied with this action the Grant
Administration created a crisis by ordering those Sioux who were hunting
outside the reservation to return to the Sioux reservation by January 31,
1876, or risk being declared hostile and treated accordingly by the
military. Although most of the off-reservation Sioux were hunting legally
with the consent of their agent, and the severity of the winter made it
impossible for them to return before the spring, on February 1, 1876, the
Secretary of the Interior notified the Secretary of War that his order had
not been complied with and that the Sioux were being turned over to the
Army for appropriate military action.

In the spring of 1876 the Army commenced military operations against
the Sioux. It was during this campaign that Colonel Custer's Seventh
Cavalry was defeated at the Little Big Horn. In response to the Custer
disaster Congress attached a rider to an appropriation act which provided
that the Sioux were to receive no further rations until they ceded the
Black Hills to the United States. Since most of the Sioux had been
disarmd and were thus unable to hunt, the Congressional action meant

that unless the Sioux surrendered the Black Hills they would be permitted

to starve. Despite this ultimatum, the commission appointed to negotiate

42 Ind. Cl. Comm. 214 232

with the Sioux was unable to get more than 10 percent of the adult male
Sioux to consent to the cession agreement. Although this 1876 agreement
did not satisfy the requirements of Article XII of the 1868 treaty,§!
Congress extinguished Sioux title to the Black Hills by the Act of
February 28, 1877, supra.

We find that these actions of the United States between 1875 and 1877
were grossly dishonorable. The Court of Claims, in reviewing our 1974
decision, stated,

The duplicity of President Grant's course and the duress practiced

on the starving Sioux, speak for themselves. A more ripe and

rank case of dishonorable dealingswdll never, in all probability,

be found in our history. . .
United States v. Sioux Nation, 207 Ct. Cl. 234, 241 (1975).
We, of course, agree. The Commission concludes that the events described
above so taint the course of dealings between the United States and the
Sioux that we cannot in good conscience offset any gratuitous expenditures
by the United States against any Sioux award in this docket.

We shall enter an order granting plaintiffs‘ motion.

-..-,... 
We concur: John T. Vance, Commissioner
“lI!!’-{J$97"::I"aR_a¢/d§r.2£é9’

F K. Kuykendall, airman

M J.'z/J ._ ' 
Richard W. 'ar-oro h, Co» issioner

 

      
 
 

 

Margaret . Pierce, Commissioner

 
    

 
  

Brantley Blue, missioner

_§/ That art cle had provided that no cession of any portion of the Sioux
reservation would be valid unless executed and signed by three-fourths of

all adult male Sioux.

