BEFORE THE IEDIAN CLAIMS COKHISSION
THE SEMINOEE HATIOE,
Plaintiff.
V» Docket No. 150
THE UNITED STATES OF AJERICA,

Defendant.

‘n-I‘:-"nu-P"Iu-d'\u.aI'\uuf'\-cf‘:-I‘:-n’

Decided: _December 5, 1955

FINDINGS OF FACT

The Commission makes findings of fact as follows:

1. The plaintiff, the Seminole Nation of Indians, is an identifiable
group of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the
United States, and has a tribal organization representative of said
Seminole Nation, recognized as such by the Secretary of the Interior.

Defendant admits.

2. The 320 acre tract, known as the Bmahaka tract, involved in this
suit, was the property at the time of its sale and conveyance, of which
Complaint is made, of the Seminole Nation as established by Article III
of the Treaty of March 21, 1866.

Defendant admits.

3. The following described tract of 320 acres of Seminole domain
was reserved and set aside for the Emahaka School:

The South Half of the North.East quarter and the South East
uarter of Section Seven (7) and the South Fifteen and 78/100
15.78) acres of Lot Three (3) and Lots Six (6) and Seven (7) of

Section Eight (8) East, of the Indian Base and Meridian containing

Three Hundred Lsenty (320) acres more or less, as the case may be

according to the United States Survey thereof, all in Seminole
County, Oklahoma. and the land within T. 7N,, E. SE.

Defendant admits.

9. In 1919 the 320 acre Emahaka School tract was appraised by the

United 5tata3Department of the Interior officials for $16,700.00, which
included $6.00 an acre for oil and gas, and $2,000.00 for improvements

for that part of the school building resting on the Seminole domain.

In letter dated January 23, 1920, to the Superintendent of the
Five Civilized Tribes, Muskogee, Oklahoma, the United States Oil Inspector

stated in relation to this Emahaka School tract:

“* * * Should a well be completed by the Producers and
Refiners Corporation at the above specified location, this
tract would probably sell, at public auction, for $25.00 per
acre, or even more, depending upon conditions at the time."

The test well of the Producers and Refiners Corporation, above

referred to, was being drilled one and one~quarter miles north of the
Emahaka School tract in the southwest corner of NEn set of Section

31-SN.-83., on_the Phiney Bowlegs allotment.
Defendant admits.
5. On may 26, 1920, authority was granted by the Interior Department to the Superintendent of the Five Civilized Tribes at Muskogee,
Oklahoma, to sell the Emahaka School tract at public auction to the highest bidder under the provisions of the Act of April 30, 1908, 35 Stat. 70,

71, at not less than the appraised value. The original appraisal of 1919

was revised and the mineral value of this land was increased from.$6.00
an acre to $25.00 an acre, so as to make a total appraisal of $22,780.00.
On July 31, 1920 this tract was sold at public auction after the giving
of public notice of said sale to Walter Ferguson for $27,280.

The terms of said sale, as disclosed by the notice of sale. dated

June 15, 1920 and other evidence in the record was as follows:

“TERMS: Twenty—five per cent of the purchase price must be
paid on the date of sale, 25% in one year, and the balance in
two years from date of sale; deferred installments to draw 5%
interest, provided that the entire amount may be paid at any
time before the expiration of one year, if so desired. Patent
will be issued immediately upon full payment. Should any payment be not made when due, the sale thereof may be canceled and
the rights of the purchaser therein declared forfeited, in the
discretion of the Secretary of the Interior."

Defendant admits.

6. Ferguson made the onc~fourth cash payments of $6,820.00 at the
time of the sale. and made no further payments, although he had been

repeatedly requested to remit to the United States officials the balance

due on said purchase price.
Defendant admits.
7. Although the sale was subject to cancellation for nonepayment of

the balance of the purchase price, the Interior Department officials failed

to cancel said sale. In the meantime. oil activity in the vicinity of

this property greatly increased, and the value of this property for oil
and gas also increased.
EVlEENTIARY FIHDIHGS UPO§ WHICH BASIC FINDING N0. 7 IS MADE
The witness Collier testified that he lived for many years in the

vicinity of the land involved herein and lived there in the 1920's when

oil activities began and knew of the consideration payed for leases on

land within the vicinity and, in fact, himself leased land in the vicinity

of this tract. He testified to having leased 80 acres for oil for a bonus

of $100.00 per acre and he sold the surface of the same land for $100.00

per acre. He said at the

He said this leasing was done in 1922 or 1923.
time he did this leasing there was a great deal of excitement and activity

in and near the property involved in buying leases for oil and gas.

Mr. Collier was not sure of the dates he made the leases, he testified
about, but said it was 1923 or 192M, "somewhere there." He testified
that the land for which he got $200.00 per acre for the lease and the
royalty was situated one mile distant from the land involved herein.
He testified that, in his opinion, the land involved herein including
minerals and surface was worth $200.00 per acre in 1923.

The witness Criswell testified that he had lived near and had been

acquainted with the land involved since 190” and had been a practicing
attorney in that section of the State for 33 years. He testified that
he and an associate bought all the surface and mineral rights in 10 or
20 acres, located about one~half mile North of the property involved,

either in the fall of 1923 or spring of 19274 and that he paid $210.00

per acre for same. This witness testified that immediately after the
discovery well (Betsy Foster well about one mile or two from the property

involved), brought in on March 17, 1923, that the minerals and surface

of the land involved herein was worth $150.00 an acre. The witness
testified that the tract involved before the bringing in of the Betsy
Foster well, minerals and surface, was worth $100.00 per acre and that
was the valuation he gave for the minerals and surface in l920. He cone

ceded, however, that the auction sale of the land in 1920 for $27,280 was
probably at the market value of said land at that date.

The witness, N. F. Jacobs, testified that he had lived in the vicinity
of the land involved practically all of his life. He testified that he

made mineral leases on a section just North of the land involved herein

in the years 1923 and 192”, getting $150.00 for some and $200.00 per acre

for othersi~ The witness testified that oil activities and leasing within the vicinity of the Betsy Foster well between 1922 and 1923 were very,
very active; that he leased land adjoining the tract involved herein for
$50.00 per acre before this well came in and afterwards for $100.00 per
acre. Witness testified to selling mineral rights in an adjoining section
at $500.00 per acre, but he couldn’t recall the year.

8. Walter Ferguson, the purchaser, could not make the payments in
accordance with the terms of sale. and on November 28, 1922 notified the
Interior Department officials that he was transferring his interest in
the Emahaka School tract to V. V. Harris, of Oklahoma City, Oklahoma,

a banker.

On February 5, 1923, V. V. Harris made final payment of the prinr

cipal and interest on this tract due on the July 31, 1920 sale.

0

Defendant admits.

9. On May 31. 1923. a Principal Chief of the Seminole Nation was
appointed to execute the deed necessary to convey the title of this
Seminole property to V. V. Harris.

On June 26, 1923, the Principal Chief of the Seminole Nation
protested said sale and refused to sign the patent transferring title of
this tract to V. V. Harris on the grounds that the Seminole Tribe had
never agreed to the sale of this property; that the purchaser had neg~
lected the payments on the property and failed to carry out the terms
of the purchase; that the price received was inadequate; that the property
had great oil value and should be retained for the benefit of the Seminole
Nation and further stated in part that

“I an informed a purported purchaser who had neglected
the payments, was intending not to carry out the terms of his

purchase of this property, and was going to permit the same
to go back to the rightful owners thereof, the Seminole Nation,
a Tribe of Indians."

Defendant admits, but says immaterial.

p_l0. On May 22, 1923, V. V. Harris wrote the Commissioner of Indian

Affairs in part as follows:

"‘ * * I was interested with Mr. Ferguson and before the
next payment became due, he and I practically decided to forfeit what we had paid, as it was our judgment that the land was
not worth the balance of the three~fourths that was not paid.
We. however, got an extension of time within which to pay, by
paying interest, and oil was discovered several miles away
which gave the land a speculative value for oil. We then paid
the property out.

“For agricultural purposes the land is worth $50.00 per acre,

or $16,000. The speculative value of the land for oil at this

time would run between $30,000.00 and $75,000.00. There is a

well being drilled on the property now. If it should come in good,

the property would be Valuable. If it comes in dry, it would be

practically dead as an oil proposition. * * ‘"

In this letter Harris requested that a patent to this Emahaka School
tract be issued to him, irrespective of the protest of the Principal Chief
of the Seminole Nation.

Defendant admits but says immaterial.

11. On December 22, 192k, a patent was issued and delivered to V. V.
Harris, signed by the Secretary of the Interior under the provisions of
Section 6 of the Act of April 26, 1906, 31; Stat. 137. and the Act of
April 30, 1908, 35 Stat. 70, 71, notwithstanding the protest of the Prinv
cipal Chief of the Seminole Nation, and without the signature of said
Principal Chief.

This document bears the following indorsement and approval, towit:

"EEPARTMENT or THE INTERIOR
Office of the Secretary

Approred December 22, 192i, under Section 6 of the Act 5:
Congress, approved April 26, 1906 (33 Stat. L.. 137) on refusal

of the Principal Chief of the Seminole Nation to sign this instrument.

Huhert Work
Secretary EPM“

Defendant admits.

12. Thereafter, V. V. Harris had difficulty in disposing of said
lands because the patent had not been signed by the Principal Chief of
the Seminole Nation under the provisions afthe Seminole.Agreement (30
Stat. 567), and he requested the Interior Department to furnish him with
a patent properly signed by the Principal Chief of the Seminole Nation.
However. although another Principal Chief of the Seminole Nation was
appointed to execute a conveyance hf the title of this property to
Harris, saie frinoipal Chief refused to sign such a patent.

The patent to V. V. Harris was never signed by the Principal
Chief of the Seminole Nation.
Defendant admits but says immaterial.

13. Protests by the plaintiff Indians were made to the sale of the
property at the time its sale was contracted in 1920. They thereafter
protested to the extension granted by the defendant to the purchaser for
the payment of the deferred installments agreed to be paid by him. They
refused to join in the execution of the deed that was finally executed
by the defendant. The defendant at al tines refused to consider the
claimed increase in the value of the land as a reason for cancellation
of the 1920 purchase contract. The defendant in its refusal and failure

to cancel said purchase contract gave consideration solely to the treatment it thought should be accorded the purchaser.

The defendant by its conduct failed to discharge its duty to

the plaintiff.
EVIDENTIARY FINDINGS OF FACT UPON WHICH BASIC FINDING 1§ IS MADE

WCharles H. Burke, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by letter to Senator
Robert L. Owen, dated September 2M, 1923, advises that a protest against
the sale of the property involved herein, prior to its sale in 1920, was
made by Mr. Burgess and other members of the Seminole Tribe because of
its possible oil value and urged that it should be retained for the benefit
of the tribe. Mrs. Alice B. Davis while Principal Chief of the Nation in
1923 refused to execute the conveyance of the property to V. V. Harris,
who had been permitted to complete payment therefor. The grounds of_her
refusal that Seminole Tribe had never agreed to sale of the property; that
the purchaserhad neglected the payments on the property and failed to_carry
out the terms of the purchase; that the price received was inadequate; that
the property had great oil value and should be retained for the benefit of
the tribe. The Superintendent of the United States Indian Service by
letter dated November 6, I923 advised the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
with reference to the sale of the land involved to V. V. Harris and with
reference to the protest made by Mr. Burgess and other members of the
Seminole Nation; that said protest had been considered by the Department
"and a conclusion reached that there was no reason why this property should
not be sold"-«that is, why the sale to Harris should not be confirmed and
Deed executed. The letter further states that the question of the advance
in the value of the land on account of its probable oil and gas value by

reason of prospective developments in the vicinity “does not enter into

the transaction so far as thissale is concerned"; that the objections of

Hrs. Davis were not well taken "in view of the fact that everything connected with the sale was regular" and the same was thereafter approved
by the Acting Secretary of the Interior.

In the letter of Mrs. Alice B. Davis, Chief of the Seminole Nation
and Tribe of Indians of June 26, 1923 to Mr. Clark Wesson, Acting Superintendent for the Five Civilized Tribes, with which letter she returned
the Deed to the property which she had been asked to sign, she stated
that the Seminole Tribe had never agreed to the sale of the property-that the land at the time was of great value and before the next twelve
months might be worth millions of dollars-—that an oil well was then
producing at the rate of 650 barrels a day within two and one-half miles
of the land and that other wells were being drilled in close proximity
to the land involved and that for her to sign the Deed would be a grave
injustice to the tribe and not in the keeping of the trust imposed in
her as Chief. In a communication addressed to the Secretary of the
Interior of August 1, 192M by a group of Indians who advised that they
had been appointed as spokesmen for the entire tribe after a meeting of
members of the tribe were called together for the purpose of considering the matter of sale of the property involved to V. V. Harris and

executing a Deed to him—~”that we desire to formally protest against

execution of a.Deed.by the Secretary of the Interior to the said property;“

This letter further stated that though it might be urged as reason for
confirmation of the sale that the property was worth no more at the time
of sale than the amount it was sold; that because of default thereafter
made in at least two deferred payments when they were due and that in

equity and justice to the purchaser and to the tribe that the payments

1:714

received by the Government should be restored to him and the title to the
property be permitted to remain in the tribe.

3? letter of Charles H. Burke, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, to
the Secretary of the Interior, Hubert Work, of December 22, 192”, the
said Commissioner discussed this sale in great detail, advised of the
protest to its consummation by the Indians at various times and the
reason for said protest; that the sale should be confirmed and that a
deed to the purchaser should be executed. This letter called attention
to the fact that the Government in many instances exercised leniency
towards purchasers of Indian lands which it was within the discretion
of the Secretary of the Interior to do. With reference to the protest
of the Indians that the property was worth more than the consideration
and that the extension for payment should not have been granted, the
letter indicates that only the complaint by reason of the extensions
for payment were considered and that the protest because of inadequate
consideration was not even considered and was based on an incorrect
conception of valuations.

1“. The value, including surface and minerals, of the 320 acre
tract known as the Emahaka School Tract between July 31, 1920 and
February 5, 1923, and December 22, 1923 was $200.00 per acre.

(See Evidentiary Findings of Fact supporting under Finding No. 7).

15. (e) The Secretary of the Interior and the other officials of
the Department of the Interior during the period of time between
January 23, 1920 and December 22, 1921; knew or should have known of
the market value of the tract involved herein and of their opportunity

to obtain a substantial increase for same over and above the amount for

which it sold in 1920.

(b) The fai1ure.of the Secretary of the Interior and other
officials of the Government having the responsibility of handling the
sale of the land to cancel the sale of 1920 and re-advertise and resell said land for the benefit of said Indians was a failure to discharge the duty owed; by the Government to said Indians.

EdgarTE¢ Witt
Chief Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

 

1} 76

