R 130

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

PUEBLO do races, )
Claimant, g

v. 3 Docket No. 17h
UNITED srimss OF AMERICA, i
Defendant. ;

Decided: ‘December 13, 1955

Appearances:

Dudley Cornell,
Attorney for Claimants,

Walter A. Rochow, with
whom was Mr. Assistant
Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COEMISSIOE

PER CUEIAM. On July 25, 1955, claimant moved to change the named
claimant to "Pueblo de Jemez, acting for and on behalf of Pueblo de Pecos"
and to amend the allegations of the petition by stating in paragraph VII
the grounds upon which it bases its claim for additional compensation
for land granted the Pecos by defendant on November 1, 1865.

And on September 7, 1955, defendant filed its opposition to claimant's
motion and moved to dismiss the petition on the grounds discussed hereafter.

These tee motions were submitted to the Commission on the briefs:

the last of which was filed on November 3: 1955pThe Act of June 19, 1935, 59 Stat. 1528, sec. 1, "consolidated

and merged into one tribe hereafter to be known as the Pueblo de Jemez"
the Pueblos de Jemez and de Pecos. And section 2 of the act provided

that “all claims and demands of whatsoever kind or nature, now held or
claimed by either of said tribes, or communities shall be, and hereby

are, vested in the consolidated tribe.“

According to the allegations of the petition, the defendant about
November 1, 1865, granted the “Pueblo de Pecos" the 18,763.53 acres of
land for the vabie of which this claim is made. These lands were lost
to the Pecos by non-Indian settlements thereon and for the purpose of

determining losses of land by the Pueblos in New Mexico, of which the
Pecos was one, an act was passed by Congress on June 7, 1923, U3 Stat.
636, by which a Pueblo Lands Board was created to determine the Indian
rights and losses. This Board determined the Pecos land losses to be
all their granted land and recommended an award of compensation at the

rate of $1.50 per acre and the Congress by the Act of February 1”. 1931.
M6 Stat. lll5, l12l~2, appropriated "in settlement for damages for lands
and water rights lost to the Indians of the Pueblos as recommended by

the respective reports of the Pueblo Lands Board * *" the sum of $28,135
for the Pecos, which was paid, in accordance with the 192” act, to the
Bureau of Indian Affairs to be used to purchase lands and water rights

to replace those lost, or for the purpose of making permanent improvements on lands held by the Indians.

The above award was apparently intact on December 21, l933, for on

that day separate resolutions of the Jemez and Pecos pueblos (Exhibits

A and B) were adopted (Senate Report No. 2175, 73th Congress, 2d Session,

It 131

Exhibit C) requesting the Congress by law to merge the two pueblos under
the name of "James Pueblo” and to make the Pecos award of “some $28,000"
available Wior the benefit of the merged Pueblo as created by Congress."
(Ex. B). The two pueblo tribes were, accordingly, concerned about two
things, namely, merger and the use of the Pecos award for tribal benefit.
It is plain, therefore, the Indians in adopting the resolutions did not
have in mind the Pecos claim here asserted, for their claim for the loss
of their granted lands had been adjudicated by the Pueblo Lands Board,
created by the Act of June 7, 1923, an award made and not appealed from,
and paid by the Act of 1931, aforesaid.

Nor can it be said that in passing the merger act of June 19, 1936,
M9 Stat. 1528, the Congress had in mind the Pecos claim here asserted,
for as stated above, it was not then in existence, and did not arise
until the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act nearly ten years
later, which then created the cause of action here brought. Otoe and
Missouria v. United States, 131 C. Cls. 593. decided May 3, 1955. It
cannot be seriously contended that until the passage of the Indian Claims
Commission Act either the Jemez or Pecos pueblos could have successfully
maintained a claim for additional compensation for their lost lands, so
the language of section 2 of the 1936 act is significant in that it is
only “claims, or demands * * §gE.held or claimed by either of said
tribes or communities shall be ‘ *_vested in the consolidated tribe.“
So it is plain this claim was not intended to vest in the consolidated
tribe. Moreover, the legislative history of the act, which is contained

in the Senate report cited above and the House Report No. 2337, Yhth

Congress, referred to and made part of the Senate report (EX. C) shows

1&1:

that the 1936 Act passed pursuant to the Indians‘ resolutions, which
made no reference whatever to contemplated claims of the Pecos.

The bill (H. R. l207u) was evidently drafted by the Interior
Department, and in his letter to the House Committee (Ex. 0), urging
the enactment of the bill. the Acting Secretary wrote: "The proposed
legislation would make it possible to use the money awarded the Pecos
pueblo by the pueblo lands board for the benefit of the consolidated
pueblo." So it is plain that Interior, as well as the Indians, was
concerned primarily with the merger of the pueblos and the use of
the Pecos award and also, as a consequence of the merger, the use of
unexpended funds appropriated for or to be appropriated for said pueblos,
and their existing claims or demands, but not, certainly, the Pecos claim
here asserted which was not then in existence. Had such a claim been
contemplated one would expect specific reference to it or language
which would make it plain that it was intended to vest it in the Jemez.
However, since the conclusion here reached involves matters not discussed or raised by either party, we are not content to rest our
disposition of the motions entirely upon what has been said above, in
fact, there are other questions raised which must also be disposed of
in making a complete disposition of the motion to amend and the motion
to dismiss.

At this place it should perhaps be noted that the proposed amendr
ment to substitute. "Pueblo de Jemez, acting for or on behalf of
Pueblo de Pecos" for the present claimant, Pueblo de Pecos, would seem

to make the Jemez a nominal claimant, while it would seem that if there

was a vesting of the present claim in the entity, Pueblo de Jemez,

created by Congress, only that the new entity could assert the claim.
The defendant’s objection is apparently not directed entirely to the
making of Jemez a nominal claimant, but is also directed to making
the Jemez the real party, so we will discuss this phase of the controvergyaccordingly.

The defendant contends that to permit an amendment making the
Jemez a party plaintiff must be regarded as commencing a new cause of
action and therefore barred by the five—year statute. It will be noted,
however, that the proposed change of the claimant from the Pecos to the
Jemez does not in any may modify or enlarge the facts upon which the
claim is predicated; it would in any event remain a claim for the difference between the value of the land the Pecos lost and the amount the

Government paid them for it in 1931. And this, as will be seen, is an

important fact in the determination of this contention. But the Government‘s contention, as we understand it, is based entirely upon the merger
act which it says vested this Pecos claim in the Jemez Pueblo, and hence
the Pueblo de Jemez had the exclusive right to present the claim as now
pleaded. The Pecos at no time transferred or assigned the claim here
sued. on to the Pueblo de Jemez.

Assuming, merely for the sake of the argument, that the merger act
of 1936 vested the pending claim in the Pueblo de Jemez, there would not,
under the authorities, be a new cause of action introduced by making
the Jemez a claimant, because the Pecos are a part of the Jemez, and as
such have a beneficial interest in the claim; they are therefore not
strangers to the claim now, as we shall show, nor a non—existent party»

as defendant contends. Furthermore, aside from the change in the parties

M 1

31:

claimant, there would be no substantial change in the cause of action

pleaded; we say this having in mind the proposed amendments to the

petition hereafter considered.

A classic statement of the law governing changes in parties, as
well as the rationale of the rule, is found in McDonald V. Nebraska,
101 Fed. 171, l78 (C. C. of Appeals, 8th Circuit), which we quote:

A defendant has an undouhted right to insist that the

person entitled to recover on a cause of action set forth in
a.petition shall be brought on the record as the plaintiff in
the action. to the end that he shall not be compelled to
respond twice to the same demand; and that the one suit shall
bar all others for the same cause of action. But it has come
to be the settled law that where, either by mistake of law or
fact, a suit is brought in the name of a wrong party, the real
party in interest, entitled to sue upon the cause of action
declared on, may be substituted as plaintiff, and the defendant
derives no benefit whatever from such mistake; but the substitution of the name of the proper plaintiff has relation to
the connencenent of the suit, and the same legal effect as if
the suit had been originally commenced in the name of the proper
plaintiff. The name of the proper plaintiff may be brought on
the record at any time during the progress of the cause, and may
even be inserted after verdict and judgment. When a wrong party
has been named as plaintiff, the action will never be dismissed,
and the prooer plaintiff recuired to bring a new action, when
the effect would be to let in the bar of the statute of limitations. Italics added .

 

    

This was a suit against the receiver of a defunct national bank for state

funds deposited in the bank.i It was brought by the State Treasurer withe

in the statutory period but it was determined that it should have been
brought by the State of Nebraska, and after the statutory period of time
for bringing such action had run, application was made and allowed to

substitute the state for the treasurer as claimant. It was contended

before the trial court, and on appeal, that the change in parties constituted a new cause of action and therefore barred. This contention

was overruled b§‘both courts and the large judgment affirmed. This case

is frequently cited in support of the rule.

1+ 13

The case of Missouri, etc. v. Wulf, 226 U. S. 355, further applies

the rule and cites McDonald v. Nebraska, supra. It was a case under

the Federal Employers’ Liability Act.o The suit was brought by the
mother of her deceased unmarried son for his death caused by negligence
of the railroad, ehe being a widow and sole beneficiary under the act.
After the expiration of the two-year period of limitation under the act,
it was discovered that such a suit could only be maintained by the
personal representative of deceased, so the mother was appointed administratrix of her son's estate and was allowed, as such, to be added as a
party plaintiff, the defendant objecting on the ground that a new and
distinct claim was presented, which did not relate back to the commence?
ment of the action by the mother and was therefore barred._ In affirming
the judgment, the Supreme Court, in denying the defendant's contentions
as to the effect of the amendments, said:

It seems to us, however, that, aside from the capacity in
which the plaintiff assumed to bring her action, there is no
substantial difference between the original and amended petitions.
In the former, as in the latter, it was sufficiently averred
that the deceased came to his death through injuries suffered
while he was employed by the defendant railroad company in interstate connerce; that his death resulted from the negligence of
the company and by reason of defects in one of its locomotive
engines, due to its negligence; and that since the deceased
died.unmarried and childless, the plaintiff, as his sole
surviving parent, was the sole beneficiary of the action.

And again, referring to the adding of the personal representative as
a.party plaintiff, the court said:y

Nor do we think it was equivalent to the commencement of
a new action, so as to render it subject to the two years‘
limitation prescribed by g 6 of the e@loyers' liability act.
The change was in form rather than in substance (Stewart v.
Baltimore 8.: o. R. Co. 168 U. 8. 1945, 1+2 L. ed. 537, 18 Sup. Ct.
Rep. 105). It introduced no new or different cause of action,
nor did it set up any different state of facts as the ground
of action, and therefore it related back to the beginning of
the suit. [Eiting a number of cases}.

The Court of Claims has also had occasion to consider the;question
here presented in these cases discussed in 11 C. Cls. 508, 511;

_ * * * In Payan's Casea(7'C. Cls. R., 300,) where one
supposing himself entitled to sue as assignee for the proceeds of captured property, found before trial that the right
of action was not legalgz in him, he obtained leave, after
the expiration of the time for suing, to substitute the
assignor as the party, and to prosecute the suit in his name
for the use of the assignee. In Green’s Case, (7 C. Cls.

3., u96,) where a married woman was the claimant, and it was
found that, by the law of South Carolina, whatever right she
had to the proceeds had vested in her husband absolutely, her
husband was joined as claimant after the expiration of the
time for bringing suit. In Kidd’s Case, (8 C. Cls. R., 259,)
where the suit was brought in the name of a guardian of an
infant, an amendment of the petition was allowed, so as to
permit the guardian to appear also in the character of administrator Of the infant's mother; amdnwhen, after the time for
bringing suit had expired, an application was made for leave
to make further amendment, so as to allow him to appear also
in the character of administrator of the infant‘s father, the
court considered such an amendment admissible, saying: “No
good reason new occurs to us why a single party may not sue
in all the capacities in which it is necessany for him to
appear, in order to reach a fund which the lam intends shall

go to the rightful claimant."

 

 

In all these cases, it will be observed that the court proceeded upon the idea that a claim preferred in due time ought
not to be defeated and lost because of a defect of parties, and
that new parties might be introduced to help a recovery in favor
of the claimant whose suit was timely brought. This is as far
as we have felt authorized to go.

One cannot read the cases (and there are literally scores -— see
8 A. L. R. 2a. 6) without being impressed withthe tendency of the courts
to liberalize the statutes to the laudable end that proper parties may
be admitted after the running of the statutes of limitations. The general
purpose of the Indian Claims Commission Act would seem to justify such
liberality.

We have already stated that the Pecos are not strangers to the claim.

This would seem to answer the contention of the defendant that they are

‘L!

a.non-existent tribe, however, we will discuss that contention specifically. The argument is that bypthe merger and consolidation of the
Pecos and Jemez by the Act of 1936, the Pecos as a tribe passed out of_
existence and can no longer assert this claim. Aside from the fact that
we do not think the claim was transferred to the Jemez, we see nothing
in the act that did more than consolidate the two pueblos for improving their position in dealing with the Government. Certainly, there is
nothing in the act that can be said to abolish the Pecos pueblo. Had
such a purpose been intended, one would expect language plainly indicating such a.purpose. We do not believe the 1936 Act, nor its legislative history, shows such a purpose.

The Government is entitled to be confronted with all parties who
have or claim to have an interest in this claim, so that an adjudication
thereof will bind all parties. To do ghis, the Jemez Pueblo should be
added as a separate party, and if counsel for claimant so desires, it
may be added as the_nominal claimant as requested, but the Pueblo de Pecos
The suggested changes should make

should remain as a party claimant.

an adjudication of the claim final as to all possible claimants.

The suggested adding of other parties will no doubt require new
allegations in the petition but we doubt that the requested amendment
to paragraph I will conform to what has been said above. so claimant
may submit for consideration of the Commission a substitute amendment.

The second requested amendment concerns paragraph VII of the petition. By this amendment the claimant invokes the fair and honorable
dealings clause of our act and makes allegations of fact purporting to

show unfair and dishonorable dealings. There are also incorporated in

the requested amendment the same allegations as now appear in paragraph

VII, with the added words following "lands": "and the water rights

appurtenant thereto.“

The objection of the defendant to this amendment is that it sets
up additional "grounds for relief" and therefore a new cause of action
which is now barred by the statute of limitations.

The claim here asserted is of course for additional compensation
for the lands the Pecos lost. and the allegations of paragraph VII so
state. Those allegations do not state the ground upon which a recovery
is based and would therefore be subject to a motion to make more
specific. We do not believe the supplying of grounds, as the amendment
does, states a new cause of action, but rather is an amplification of
the present pleading. 3“ An. Jur. 217. sec. 26”.

As to the allegedfnilure to obtain an attorney’s contract authorizing the prosecution of this claim our records disclose that on
July 30. 1951, claimant filed a copy of an attorney's contract between
the Pueblo de Pecos and attorneys, Cornell and Mann. This contract
is dated March 5, 1951, and according to the Bureau of Indian Affairs
was approved on March 21, 1951.

It would appear therefore there is no

merit to defendant‘s motion based upon such failure.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

