PaH“E” 'hD'éR RIBS OP OKLAE 45
r t four confederPawnee Indians,
namely: Chaui or Grand Pawnee,
Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee,
Pitahauerat or Tappage Pawnee,
and Skidi, Loup or wolf Pawnee,

)
)
)
)
)
D
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)

Claimant,
V. Docket No. 10
UNITED STATES,
Defendant.
Decided: June l7, 1957

FINDINGS 93 FACT

   

Explanatory Statement

 

lndian Tribe of Oklahoma,

The claimant, the_Pawnee filed a petition

'ith the Commission in which it presented eight separate claims

against

the United.States pursuant to the Indian Claims Commission Act of

3AUguSt 13, l9h6 (60 Stat. lOh9). The first five claims were'for th

recovery of the 'a_ue of approximately thirty million acres of land
located in what are now the States of Nebraska and Kansas, and the remaining three claims were for the value of three em.‘ tracts of Pawnee reservation land in Oklahoma. Khan originally considered, the Commission held
that claimant was entitled to recover certain.amounts on the claims

~ - ’ ‘ I ' I 0 0 1 Q U I Q
nunoered o and 7, out was not entitled to recover on tne remaining six

claims, and they'were dismissed; Claimant appealed to the Court of Claims

in an opinion

0

J" -I-I-H-nu--u -: . .1
one Ccmllssion‘s iinal

J‘ I ‘\
II3, l?53, that Court alfirnes

5 225

determinations on claims 6 and 7, but set aside our findings of fact

and detemiinations on clains l through 5 inclusijve, remanding these

causes to the Commission for further consideration and the making of new

5

findings of fact respecting the pertinent issues. "'(l2_h C. Cls. 32h).

Subsequent to the remandi of this case, a further hearing was held
before the Commission at 'HhiCh additional evidence was received. On
April 29, 1955', a hearing was held upon the claimant's motion that the
case be set for final hearing and detemination, and the 'defendant‘s‘
response and motion to limit the issues to the question of claimant‘s
right to recover,and by agreement of counsel for both parties made in
open hearing, the Comnjiission entered an order on May 2, l9S5', which
provided in part as follows:

'33 -31- *1:-IT.‘ IS HERESBY OFDZRED, that there first be determined
in the above-entitled cause the question whether orinot,
under the evidence heretofore offered and the law, the _
claimant has established its title, interest or rights in
or to any of the areasof land represented by claims one to
five, inclusive, in the petition, or either of them." And,
if such determination be favorable to claimant as to any of
said claims, then the extent of the area or areas shall be
detemiinea, reserving to both parties the right after, such
determination to introduce additional evidence as ‘to th
value thereof and the consideration received by claimant for
the respective cessions. '3?   i ‘ ' °

Thereafter, counsel for both parties filed requested findings of fact

and briefs on the aforesaid issues.

The Comrziission, therefore, makes the followizig findings of fact.

7

1. The claimant herein is an Indian tribe residing within the territorial.limits of the United St tee and as such is authorized to maintain
these claims under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act of.‘

t

August 1.3, l9}.=.é, 60 Stat. 10119. ?he claimant tribe is composed of four

»,"xé.,;F;'

T"

Pawnee lndians,
the Kitkehahki or Republican Pawnee, the Pitobouerat or Tappage Pawnee,

and the Skidi, Loup or Wolf Pan.ee. The Pawnees have also been referred
to in some historical documents as the "Penis."

2. The tracts of land in issue in claims l through 5, as now delscribed in claimant‘s proposed finding of fact ho. II, are as follows:

Claim l. A strip of land in north-central Kansas in what

is known as the "Delaware Outlet,” con isting of approximately
668,800 acres, "extending l0 miles wide and lOh% miles long,"
.assigned by the defendant*to the Delaware Tribe under the treaty
of September 2h, 1829 (7 Stat. 327). This land is alleged to
have been held.under original Indian title by the Paunees at the
'thne it was taken by the defendant.

'Claim.2. A tract of land in south-central Nebraska and northcentral Kansas, bounded “on the north by the Platte River; on the
East by the Meridian between Ranges 5 and 6 East, and the Blue

,...........'-‘;. 1-.-- .:.L..-. O..........1..... tI.:1‘1 D.°--..-.. 0---... .‘.'.L

D-‘var ts 8' ' "' '“'“'+‘"° C: +"'”" A-.L:—-L a-&.t.I'L’-J. .:..:.u;::. .LUD

-I-"-III“ ' W at-I-In-u-If-up -was-uni

mouth to its Great Southern Bend, and from thence to the Great
lBend of ,Arkansas River, following it upstream to Dodge City;
on the west by the Fort Laramie line runnin" Northwest from
Dodge City to the forks of tie North and South Platte." This is
the land claimant non asserts was ceded by the claimant tribe to
the United States under the treaty of October 9, 1833 (7 Stat.
E88), and includes the strip of land covered by Claim 1.

I-D\&\.LhUA-A have vs-so t..na¢\J.f.a.J

4.‘... ,3

‘I35!-9

Claim 3. A.strip of land in central Nebraska "North of and
paralleling the South bank of the Platte River, including Grand
Island, and consisting of approximately llO,hl9 acres.“ This
is the land ceded to the United.States by the claimant tribe
‘under the treaty of.August 6, l8h8 (9 Stat. 9&9).

Claim.h. A tract of land in north-central Nebraska bounded
“On the South by the Platte River and the lands ceded August 6,
l8h83 on the'Hest by the Fort Laramie line running from the
junction of North and South Platte Rivers, Northeast to the
‘mouth of'hhite Earth River; on the forth by the Ponca Indian
lands, being the divide between the Elkhorn and Niobrara Rivers;
on tne East by the lands of the Omaha Tribe, being a line drawn
South from the mouth of the Kiobrara River and Southeast along
Snell Creek to its juncti n wi“ the Platte," excepting therefrom
the reservation set aside to the Pawnees by the treaty of September
2b, 185? (11 Stat. 72?).

5 227

“Claim 5. A strip of land one-half mile wide and l5 miles
long on the West end of the Pannee Indian reservation in
Nebraska, established under the treaty of September 2h, l857,
containing approximately h8OO acres.

First and Second Clahns

 

3. The Pawnees belong to the Caddoan linguistic group of Indians.
This linguistic group also included the Wichitas. -éccording to their
traditions the Pawnees originally lived in the far south or southwest,
possibly near the Gulf of Mexico. They are believed by some historians
to have gradually migrated northward in prehistoric times through
Kansas and Nebraska, but returned and were settled in the Platte and
Republican River Valleys by 1500 or earlier. The Wichitas were a part
rof the Pawnee tribe when the ncrthnsrd.migration began but left the
Pawnees somewhere in southern Kansas.

ha The first recorded white contact with the Pawnees appears to
have been in lShl, when Coronado's expedition reached the country he
called."Quivira" in what is non central Kansas, and was informed.that
the province of "harahey" lay to the north. ‘The Indians who came to
visit Coronado at his request, and informed him they lived in ”Harahey§"
are now'identi£ied.by reliable authority as being Pannees. In any event,
the historic maps and reports made by many'of the Spanish and French
explorers and other'whites who were in the Kansas and Nebraska area during
the 17th and l8th centuries, locate the Parnees in the general area of

the Platte and Eepubli an river vallevs in central Rehraska and ncrthe n

5; Following the Louisiana
began the exploration of the added territory. Prior to that time the
Government had been faced with the problem of removing Indians from the
eastern states which were then thickly settled by its white citizens.

It had become apparent that the lands assi

0’-2

ned to the removed Indians
were not far enough west and that a territory'much farther west would
have to be found for those tribes who had been removed, and for those
not then removed. The Louisiana Purchase was important, therefore, as

a solution to the problem of finding a territory'which might become the

permanent home of those tribes.

-he first major expedition: to the new country was that of Lewis

K

and Clark in l80h. hni_e they did not see the Pawnees nor visit any
Pawnee villages th “selves, they did camp on the Missouri River 10 miles
above the mouth of the Platte river in.present Nebraska. They reported
the Grand Pawnee to be on the south side of the Platte River about
5 leagues above the Otoes; the Snidi or Loup‘Pawnees about 90 miles
farther up on the Loup fork. They did.not mention the Republican
Pannees or the Tappages. Later, however, in a statistical compilation
of Indians inhabiting the territory of'Lcuisiana (Cl. Ex. Th) they referred to the Republican.Pawnees as a branch of the Grand.Paenees who
formerly had their vill“ge on the Republican river where they subdivided

and lived in different parts of the country, on the'waters of

the Kansas river, but had rejoined the Grands. The Grand and Republican

P trading with the merchants of St. Louis on the

arnees are reported as

\IL

I’\)

( .13

5 229

Missouri River below the Platte and at their villages. The Skidi or
Loups are reported as trading at the village of the “Penis.” The Grand
P"wnees are reported as hunting on the south side of the Platte river
and "on the head of the Kansas" river in a country of which a great
portion was said to be open plains interspersed with groves of timber
along the water courses. The Pawnee Loups were reported as hunting on
the Loup.River above their village, and on the Platte River, above its
mouth in the present State of Nebraska. The Republican band are reported to hunt principally on the Republican River in what is now
southern Nebraska and northern Kansas. The Osage Indians were reported
as h nting along the Arkansas and Osage Rivers and nearly up to the
Kansas River in southern.Kansas. The Kansas Indians were reported as
hunting on the u_per*part of the Kansas and.arkansas Rivers.
Lewis and Clark were apparently’unacquainted with the Tappage band_
of Pawnees since they made no mention of them.
6. In l806, Lt. Pike visited a Republican Pawnee village on th

Republican River located near the present town of Guide Rock, in southern
Nebraska. Pike did not go north of the village, but reported that th

Grand and Skidi bands of Pawnees resided on the Platte river and one of
its branches, undoubtedly the Loup river.
In l8ll, Major Sibley visited the Pawnees. He reported villages of

the Pawnees on the Platte, about 200 miles above its mouth, "inhabited

by three tribes of the Pawnees, two of which formerlvwivelt on the north

branch of the Kansee (Kansas) river, about ifty miles in a direct course

above the Kansee village. T.e successive incursions of the "ansees

v .
‘w

' ' 0 In | -u a -I -u 0 " ‘ ‘ . ‘
r-x‘--n*'-22-~'w 1 —" '” .- - ,-F‘ C‘ _. ...“ ':u::>c:""‘*. '.,"'- ":> 'n'."."\ 7“"""""'
...;c...u.--..».. LI'1C:f.3I‘ o.".*3 celeora ted Ci".?_€.. RC1" c:.-r:,.,..-.. .u.CSc aw. .,-.C-_cu

V

now to be firmlv established over then all % %'%.” he did not

mention or locate the Tappage band of Pawnees, but stated that "the
Pawnees hunt over a very extensive country.“

7. Following 1803 and until 1818, there was considerable effort
on the part of the Spanish at Santa Fe and the British from Canada to

exert political and commercial influence on.the Pawnees. This was

L

ended, however, by the treaties of peace and friendship of June 18-22,
1818 (7 Stat. 172, 173, 17h, l7S), entered into at St. Louis by General
Clark and.Auguste Chouteau, United States Commissioner, with the four
separate bands of Pawnees.

By the treaties, the Pawnees acknowledged

themselves to be under the protection of the'Uni»ed States and no other
Nation. \

In their letter of July 9, 1818, transmitting the aforesaid treaties
to the Secretary of War, Clark and Choutean stated that they had concluded the tree ie with a full deputation.of the principal chiefs and

warriors from.the four-Pawnee tribes, They described the Pawnee tribes

‘V

as “warlike and poweriul, and inhabit the country about the river Platte,
stretching immediately hetween.us and the Spanish settlements, rith whom

they are now at war. Their numbers and narlike character, the commandin

3

pos'tion they occupy in.relation to the.Hissouri trade n-e 3 evince the
wisdom and propriety of cultivating industriously their friendship, in
conformity with the general policy of the Government. * %A% we deemed it

best to forgive their injuries, and grant them the protection and friendship of the United.States * %'*."

8. In l82h, Congress was considerinc a proposal to make treaties
with the Indian tribes-west of the Mississippi river for the preservation ‘of the fur trade. -Among the documents comrnunicated to the United

tates Senate on Harch 18, 3.821;, by the Committee on Indian Affairs, were
the answers of R. Graham, United States Indian .13-..g'ent, to questions put

by the Senate Committee on Indian Affairs. He stated that the United '
States trade with the Spanish in Santa Fe wassubject to ‘interruption

on the Arkansas River by the “Comanche, Arapaho, Pamanees, and Csages"

who all crossed the Santa Fe trail in their hunting or war parties and
were likely to steal horses ‘from the Santa Fe traders if they met up
with, them. Mr. Pilcher, another witness before the Committ e, ‘stated’
that he-was personally acquainted with the fourbands of Pawnees, "a ‘
very numerous tribe, whose villages are also on the river Platte, about
one hundred and fifty mHes- front the Council Bluffs." He also located
surrounding tribes, as follows: "The Kanzas, whose permanent resi‘denoe'
is. on'the Kanzas River; the Otoes and Missourians, two srhall tribes who
have:1r.iJ.lages on the River Platte, ashoit distance from Council Bluffs
as -::- 4-; the Hahas (Omaha), residing a little westvof the Council'Bluffs

on the El1~:.Horn,- a branch of the River Platte, say from four to ‘five
hundred men; the Poncas, a small, and, at present, a wandering tribe, who
genera'_Lly.range through the country of the l‘Eau-qui-cours, as far west
as the mountains in which that river takes its rise; and with the different
bands of Sioux, neither of which have any fixed residence, but wander over
-avast section of country on the right and left banks of the Nissouri
river 51' '11- ’-1*.“ Mr. Graham recommended that the assent of the different

tribes through whose countries the traders pass be secured, stating that

II ‘I

--'I-‘ n--- I‘ L‘ .. ,...4n , -. . an 4"‘ . “‘ . .\4"\‘ run u- ‘ '
“shay loom upon their game as we do upon our domestic animals, and no;
"""‘V“.© '‘;V'\ L‘ ‘*1-we :;-. -3-. up-'— ‘ -3-‘ . -1" ¢\1"V"\ 4'9 -1'-L‘.-u on r
on-m _n the Sam- estimation. lo is their means or support, tner hate

nothing else to depend upon for subsistence."

9. Pursuant to the Act of Congress of May 25, l82h, General Henry

Atkinson, U. S. Army, and.Major Benjamin O‘Fallon, U. S. Indian igent,

‘ C

were appointed as Commissioners to make treaties of trace and friendshi

with the Indian tribes "beyond the Mississ'ppi." On September 30, l825,

0

they entered into a treaty (7 Stat. 279) with the Pawnee Tribe providing
in part as follows:

% %-% and they (Pawnees) agree to give safe conduct to all
persons who may be legally authorized by the United States
to pass through their country, and to protect in their persons
and.property, all agents or other persons sent by the United
States to reside temporarily among them; nor will they, while
on their distant xcursions, molest or interrupt anv American

‘a

citizen or citizens, who may he passing from the'United States
to New Mexico, or returning from thence to the United States.

In their report, dated November 7, 1825, to the Secretary of War,
reporting on.the Pawnee and other treaties concluded by then, the Comtmissioners gave certain information-concerning the various tribes with
whom they had.made treaties. Of the Otoes, they said "they leave their

villages twice a year, and go in pursuit of game--sometimes to the south,

5 232

to kill buffalo; but most commonly of latter_years, hunt on the Missouri,’

below the Platte, for elk, deer, etc., as the Pannees make objections to

$1 0
u.-’.'1€.'I.T

W

ill'ng buffalo on their lands." They described the Pawnees as a

numerous and strong tribe, with the villages of the Grand and Loup hands

4!
..'.'''
1

oeing on the Platte, and the Pawnee Republicans on the Republican _orh o
1 -§

-2‘
t

A

-L. ' 0 0 .. ‘
the Kansas river. ’?hey said the Pawnee bands were well armed, and held

I! -an " -'_ 4. 3.‘ .: - a prominent stand an n? chair neianoors, as a tarlike and brave nation.

e e a They leave their villages in the spring and fall, and go far int

the plains to the south, west and northwest, in pursuit of buffalo. % % *“
They reported the Cmahas as'liting in villages on the Elkhorn river, a
branch of the Platte, in what is now northeastern Nebraska, and hunting

to the northwest of their villages.

10. In 1825, the defendant decided to acquire, through negotiation,

a strip of land just west of the border of the State of Eissouri and

north of the.Arkansas river in what is now Kansas for the resettlement

of various emigrant Indian tribes, including the Delawares. This land

was reported by the Secretary of war to be then held "almost entirely

by the Osage and.Kansas Indians," and he reoommended that the lndian title
of the two tribes to said land be extinguished. Accordingly, William
Clark, Superintendent of Indian Affairs, was commissioned for that purpose,

I‘ a

and on June 2, l82S, a treaty ( Stat. 2hO) was concluded with the Great

and.Little Osage tribes by which they ceded and relinquished to the United
States "all their lands lying west of‘hissonri and.Arkansas, north and"
west of the Red River, south of the Kansas river, and east of a line

drawn.from the head_sourees of the Kansas river southnardly' hrough Rock

P

Saline,“ and secured.to said Osages a reservation within the limits of
the said cession.

A treaty :as also concluded on June 3, 1825 (7 Stat. Zhb between.
the dnited.States and the Kansas Tribe of Indians, which provided in pa_t

as follows:

Art. 1. The Kansas do hereby cede to the United States
' te of Missouri, to w

all the lands lying within the

St
the said nation have title or C1314; and do further cede and
relinquish, to the'said United States, all other lands which

. '15 :f:;.".';;',£;3
Mk; ‘

" . g. Q .1 
they not occupy, or to rnicn they have ulu c

,,
lying Rest of the said State of Missouri, and pith
following boundaries: beginning at the entrance o
Kansas river into the Hissouri river; from thence North to

the North4West corner of the State of'Missouri3 from thence
'Westuardly to the Nodewa river, thirty miles from its entrance
into the Missouri; from thence to the entrance of the big
Nemahas river into the Missouri, and with that river to its
source; from thence to the source of the Kansas river, leaving
the old village of the Fania Republic to the test; from thence,
on the ridge dividing the waters of the Kansas river from those
of the-Arkansas, to the western boundary of the State line of
Missouri, and with that line, thirty miles, to the place of
beginning. .Art. 2.i From the cession aforesaid, the following reservation for the use of the Kansas nation of Indians shall be
made, of a tract of land, to begin twenty leagues up the
Kansas river, and to include their village on that river;
extending West thirty miles in width, through the lands ceded

in the first Article, to be surveyed and.marked under the

direction of the President, and to such extent as he may deem
necessary e t e,

at the time the aforesaid two treaties were made, the location of
"the source of the Kansas river" marking the western boundaries of the
cessions and the reservations of the Osage and.Kansas tribes, was not
well known to either the treaty Comnissioners or the Indians.

In the consolidated cases of the Kansas or KaH'Tribe of Indians
v. The United States (Indian Claims Commission, Dockets Nos. 33, 3b
and 35, decided September l7, l9Sl), this Commission found (Finding
No. b) that the lands embraced within the boundaries of the reservation
created for the use and occupancy of the Kansas Indians by the treaty

of June 3, l82§, as described therein, comprised 6,5§9,8hO acres. As

the reservation.measured thirty miles from north to south, its lenttn

I"

4T0m»eaStt test was approximately Bhl mi_es. This tract of land com! 1

prising the Kansas reservation, is shot. by Royce on his Kansas I Map

CQ Q‘ — 1 . " j . ' j
in the lctn Annual neport of the bureau of‘Anerican Ethnolog" (Pals Ii),

5 235

ll. By the Act of May 21;, 1828 (11 Stat. ,3l5), Congress appropriated funds to defray the_expenses of delegations of Indians from
tribes east of the Mississippi who would agree to emigrate west to
explore unoccupied lands outside of states and territories available
for assignment to emigrant tribes. An expedition was organized which
Was accompanied by Rev. Isaac lMcCoy, a Government surveyor. On January
29, 1829, McCoy reported to the Secretary of War that the delegation
approved the country but were disappointed at seeing no buffalo, although
he later learned their Osage ‘guide had not taken them the extra f ex»: miles
to findbuffalo. because of his fear of Pat-mee war parties. I~.'EcCoy also repojrted thatumoust cf the lands visited had already been assigned and but
little remained of the land ceded by the Kansas and Usage tribes for
assigmzent to emigrant tribes. He stated that he considered the assignments previously made were too large, and it might be necessary for the
Government to repurchase "some million of acres" for use of emigrant
tribes. McCoy suggested the Government establish an "Indian territory,“
to be bounded on the north by the Niobrara and Missouri rivers; on the
northeast by the Missouri river;' on the east by the States of Missouri
and Arkansas, and on the south by the ...ed River, which tract he .stated
wbuld be 600 m‘ es long and about 200 miles from east to west and contained what he considered to be "habitable" land, 1»:-'hi..e the countm west

of this tract was presumably "uninnabitable." with respect to granting

emigrant tribes “cutlets“ so they might have access to the hunting grounds

9 W

nat the system was unsatisfactory,

ci_

in the nest, I-EcCcy was of the opinion

and suggested the Gcvernnzent find sc...e wav of accjuiring a large tract of

land in the west from the indigenous Indians to be used as

(11
O
'.J

OIT‘JT'iO~

uh.n1 ntingt

"“~"3'-l~.:s.-3:-i=‘~“

ground for both the indigenous and the emigrant tribes living in the
areas

l2. The emigrant tribes of Indians, including the Delawares, were

resettled along the eastern border of Kansas on land acquired from the
Osage and Kansas Indians under the 1825 treaties with those tribes.
On September 2h, l829, a supplemental treaty (7 Stat. 327) was

concluded with the Delaware Nation of Indians, which provided in.part

as follows:

In

Whereas the foregoing Treaty stipulates that the United
States shall provide for the Delaware Nation, a country to
reside in, west of the Mississippi, as the permanent residence of their Nation; and whereas the said Delaware Nation,

_are now willing to remove on the following conditions from
the country on James’ fork of'White river in the State of
Missouri, to the country selected in the fork of the Kansas

an-4--sun. ..-........g......,u..p Ii§¢I_r 4.; -T.-ha-.LupC’.&.J J. .1. Y\.rJ.. ’ I-NJ

Kansas line, and up the Missouri river to Camp Leavenworth,
and thence by-a line drawn westnardly, leaving a space ten
miles wide, north of the Kansas boundary line, for an outlet; shall be conveyed and forever secured by the United
States, to the said.Delaware Nation, as their permanent
residenceg and the United States hereby pledges the faith
of“the Government to guarantee to the said Delaware Nation
forever, the quiet and peaceable possession and undisturbed
enjoyment of the same, against the claims and assaults of all
and every other people whatever.

4.1.. _
ULAC3

. O
-up-F f\C'\dq -Ia -ulualo ‘Quin
an. 1-! N.aA4\.n..n.-¢p..., nah!
i

T‘ "T?
‘Kiwi at 1 . €t\J,

13. Pursuant to a resolution of the United States Senate dated
‘May'2h, 1830, Isaac McCoy'was appointed to make the survey of the
Delaware "outlet." On June 5, l830, Thee. McKenney, of the Office of
Indian.Affairs in the war Department wrote to General William.Clark

. 3 _ 9
Superintendent of Indian Affairs advising him that Mr. McCoy was
charged with the duty of running and narking the lines by the treaty

with the Delanares and directed Clark to instruct the agents

‘ Q 4‘ " " . ' . -‘-I- III v out. I: ‘ ‘: 3‘ up vs.
charge or the Indians, owning the country over anion nr.IhcCo5'uill have

5 237

occaion to travel" to infom then: of the pumose of his work, and to
require their friendly conduct towards him and his party.

The survey of the Delaware lands was started September 6, 1830.
In locating the "outlet" McCoy started on the Kansas river where the
eastern boundary of the Kansas reservation crosses that river and from
there he ran north along the east line of the Kansas mservation to the
northeast corner thereof. From this corner he ran a line due north
l0 miles to a point he designated as the "I\‘.l=I. corner of the Delaware
lands and commencment of the Northern line of the Dela *are outlet e ~11» -1-.“
This north and south line formed the eastern boundary of the outlet, and
from this line McCoy survejred the outlet west for a distance of lSO miles.

In the report of his survey of the "outlet." made to the Secretary’

Y‘ of war in April, 1831, McCoy reported that the Delaware outlet line :»-as
terminated on the Solomon river about 11:0 miles west of the most western
village occupied’ by the Kansas Indians on the south, and about 140 miles
west of the Republican Pawnee villages on the north, and that thejhhad
“stopped about forty miles within the region abounding with buffaloes,
elks, antelopes, etc."’ ‘With respect to the possibility of assigning

other emigrant tribes "outlets“ to the west to be located north of the
Delaware outlet, PicCo'_',r directed attention to the difficu ty of determining the northern boundarj of the Kansas cession, described in the Treaty
of June 3, 1825, as "the Grand Neznaha river from its mouth ‘to its source‘;
thence to the source of the Kansa river, leaving the old village of the

Pawnee Republic to the west," and stated:

I am of opinion that, from the source of the Great Nenaha
to the source of the Kansa, the course is little, if anjr,

‘_b1:,.e

south of east. It would have been more pr per, therefore,
to have said that the old Pawnee village should be left to
the "North" than to the “West.” in runni g the north rn
line of the Delaware outlet, we barely escaped coming in o
contact with the limits above mentioned, by oassing some six

or eight miles south of the above mentioned hold Pawnee
Village." But should the lin , according to the late treaty
(Kansas-l32S), incline southwardly somewhat, as has been heretofore supposed, then the tennination of our late survey'must
have been within the Pawnee lands; and, if another outlet
should be set off north of our late survey, it would run sti_l
further on to the Pawnee lands.

Mr..McCoy'observed that the Pawnees had never been asked to cede lands
to the United.States, and suggested the purchase of lands from the
Pawnees, because obstacles to extingdishment of their claims'would continually increase.

lh. The "outlet" granted.the Del'ware Nation by the treaty of

Se'Cte:T1b€T' ?}I. ‘[890’, 'r.r::c: 2 c-+-_ ,J . ....l ..-..---..u --~ a-a-v..

1

east and.west, located.immediately north of the Kansas reservation established by th Kansas treaty of June 3, 1825.

At the time of the l829 treaty, that portion of the Delaware "out‘Jr
()
} ll
1....‘
['1
CI
(1.
}.J
C)
,..I
L3
(l'
U
I
PQ:
(B
W
'55
D.
'..I
\}'l
C)
E1
F’
I“
(D
U)
|..J
D
3
Q

\:J1

’2

let" lying west of the Republican river was exclusively occupied, controlled,

and used in Indian fashion by the claimant Pawnee Tribe of Indians.

15Following the treaty of l829 with the Delawares, hostilities

broke out be ween then and the Pawnees. On July 22, l83l, John'Dougherty,

U. S. Indian Agent for the Pasnees, wrote to General William Clerk,

II
no

Superintendent of Indian éiiairs, concerning these hostilities.

ported that in the winter of l829 the Pawnees had killed three Delasares

u‘~ -- ~.~-~.........--..:--' .-.
hlgn up-on the Republican Porn of the Kansas, and within the country

T1
.13 re8

5 239

perhaps had taken them -or Osage Indians who were traditional enemies
of the Pawnees, and that the Delawares were on land claimed by Pawnees
when they were attacked. Dougherty expressed concern over the determination of the Delaware chief to go that fall with a hunting party,

“towards the mountains--which will, if persisted in, certainly lead him

into the heart of the country claimed by the Pawnees as their hunting

ground, and will it is presumed, should they meet, bring him and his
party, in direct conflict with the Pawnees." He pointed out the possibility of a war breaking out that fall between the Delawares and the

P*"nees which could also adversely affect the friendly relations between

the whites and the Pawnees, and suggested that such conflict might be

avoided, "either by preventing the Delawares from going at all on the

?awnee lands to hunt, or by obtaining from the Pawnees\privilege for

them to do so.“ Dougherty observed, however, that the Delawares would it

certainly object to their_being prevented "from.going on the lands of

the Pawnees to hunt," as they had been.promised by treaty, and a tenmile wide outlet had been marked for them Fleading into that very country
and directly on the lands claimed and owned.by the Pawnees, as a hunting
ground, ever since our acquaintance commenced with them." Dougherty
recommended that as soon as possible, "the Pawnees be assembled, and

a perfect understanding had with them on the subject, and the privilege
for the Del wares to hunt on their lands, be obtained, and their differences, whatever they may be, settled and.put to rest."

3
\.r

C

In a letter dated.£ugust 26, 1831, General Clark tran-nitted tr

above letter to the Secretary of her, stating: "I agree with Ezu

F

Dougherty as to the necessity of preventing further serious difficult:

between those tribes,

War, directing his attention to his report of January 1st to the

by a timely interference of the Government, and

think his plan of promising for the Delawaresjpennission from the Panis

to hunt on their land, a good one. %'% %”

16. On August 18, 1831, Isaac McCoy wrote to the Secretary of

war
Department in which he had recommended the extinguishment of the claim
of the Pawnees "to so much of their country as Government will require

in the prosecution of the plan.of locating all the tribes in this

western region." He suggested that the vast country could now be pur"§"T—\e

Hit

chased with little difiicu1ty'and cost, and that obstacles to

extinguishment of their claims would increase every year; He also stated

that Major Dougherty, agent for the Pawnees and other bands, was decidedly

in favor of the plan, and that he believed that an annuity of $1000 to each

of the bands of Pawnees wou1d.purchase all the land needed by the Government.

1?, On October 29, l83l,.Agent John Dougherty again wrote to

General'William Clark advising that he had just returned from.visiting

the Pawnee villages and that the Pawnees were complaining because their

&%

neighbors, the Otoes and Omahas, were receiving annuities from D“

Government for some wild land, and told him "Their great father %‘%-%
had surveyed.off a portion of'Pawnee land and given it to his Delaware

children,“ for which they hoped.to receive an annuity. General lark

Q

forwarded Dougnerty*s letter to'Elbert Herring, Commissioner of_Indian
Affairs in the war Department on.December 20, 1831, stating in the trans"I would recommend that a council be held with the

‘ ' I I 0 5 o In
Reouolican band of Penis for the curoose o?‘extinruishing their
4- ‘I , - -—- -t¢-: Q on

”‘-Clark dated.March 30, l832, he reported as follows:

to such portion of their land as is embraced in the tract assigned

to the Delawares; and that they be allowed a reasonable compensation
therefor." It is apparent that General Clark belieyed at that time that
it would be necessary to deal with only the Republican band of Pawnees.

18. 0n.January 31, l832, Comnissioner of Indian Affairs Herring

wrote to General Clark, stating:

I am.instructed7by the Secretary of War to desire you to
investigate the title of the Panis to the land claimed by
them,'and.conyeyed.by the United States to the Delawares;
and to communicate the result of such investigation, togather with your free and full views and opinion on the
subject matter of your letters, that the Department ma;
afterwards decide on the court to be pursued.

The investigation or the Pawnee's claim to the Delaware outlet land
appears to have been.made by John Dougherty for in a letter to General

\

Sire By last mail I had the honor of receiving your
letter, under date of the l7th instant, on the subject of
the Pawnee lands, embraced in the tract assigned to the
Delawares. *

. 4. .

_ _'In reply, I beg leave to.say, that the portion of land

” embraced in that tract, extends, perhaps, one hundred andfifty miles in length, by ten in width. t must be observed,
"however, that this slip of land leads into the heart of the
country claimed and occupied.by the Pawnees as their hunting
. ground; and over which they regularly pass when going south
for buffalo and other gene. and should the Delawares even
confine their hunts to that narrow tract alone, which can
scarcely be presumed, yet they will be liable to be brought
in contact with the Pawnees, when passing and repassing. But
iu'would seen, from the very shape of that slip, running as
‘it does such a length, with but little width, that it will
inecessarily point ut to the Del wares, if they were not
informed.by other means, that the mere tract itself was only
intended as a road leading to hunting lands. “hose hunting

 

 

4-Ac

grounds through, and to which that slip leads, are, and have
been, since the countr; was first known by the whites claimed

and owned by the Pawnees. Thus it will be seen, that if the

 

       

'-Iain-.0

 
Government sno;io.curchase toe particular slip named. and nag

 

no additional arrangement with the Pawnees, in reaard to their
   

 

hunting lands in that retion, that th evil intended to be
remedied, wili, in great degree, sti_l exist. I would, there--, espectfully recommend, that the overnment extinguish
the Pawnee claim to all lands lying south of the Great Platte.
This would give us an additional tract of considerable extent,
on which should it be thought expedient and proper, to locate
Indians. Until which time, however, it might serve,

penaission of our Government, as a common hunting ground;

 

I

 

fore most r

 

 

1
stoo, in a very great measure, to conflicts between the several
hunting parties.

.As it respects the probable amount of annuity that it would
require to effect the object contemplated, I suppose that the
sum.of five hundred dollars, to each of'the four tribes, for
ten.years, would be'suf°icient to induce the Pawnees to relinquish clai“ to the particular slip assigned to the Delawares;
but that if a purchase is made of all their lands south of the
Platte, which I conceive should.most certainly be done, it mayrequire an annuity of one thousand dollars to each of those
tribes.i Should a treaty of purchase be made with the Pawnees,

I would.nost seriously recommend, that all four of the tribes
be considered as equally interested, and receive equal benefits;

}'\l5(5f}'I‘\f-Ina-5 --‘u-arm-Irv a\d--n-w- at an‘: —-I- -I-4--4--I--I-I J’!--‘L - "'-""'J" ' "" " J‘ .
0-rt-II"|Iu7

‘ O “  V I.

 

 

separated in four distinct villages. They have never failed‘to
make common cause, in all cases of war, or in.any other matter
interesting either of the tribes. They appear to have separated
into four villages for the purpose of convenience and comfort,

in consequence of the great number in the nation; whilst they
still retain their national attachment for each other. Those
tribes have seldom.been known to have'had any difficulties with
each other--they speak the same language; have intermarried with
each other; and in all cases, when an individual of one tribe is
at the village of either of the others, he considers himself at
home. Nor could any particular tract of land be considered as
especially and exclusively belonging to either, but rather as the
common.hrnting ground of all the tribes, claimed and held by the
joint power of all; and I conceive, that in our whole in ercourse with then, so far as is practicable, we should draw no
distinction between t.em, lest we might create a jealousy in the
neglected tribe, which might lead to unfavorable results. Hence,
should we make a purchase of either the slip named, or the whole
tract south of the Platte, all four of the tribes, I conceive,
should be made parties, and equally'participate in the benefits.

-0

 

 

 

Whether they hold claim to the lands in question, by conquest, or by ancient possession, I am not able to determine.

0
P

‘ 0 I I I ‘ I a
- That they had possession of that region of country, and occupied

 

‘.. '0 In 00 . no . no - II - V o
r'\\1y-_-_- _v-new I"'I'U'l -qwv-u V1 1-an 1-5 '1'‘ "V f"'f"‘ ‘rs’,-"'* 1-wt -- 4-.
—» as c nanoing L;Ou“a Cu CL; -i-st ac. :l“uanC9 I_bu cnen, is
l .V'''‘-,_‘' '1-\-pm ‘L-'3-r .-_-_y\"-I‘;-Evao 4-v- ‘ "Ii--"p-0“'* ‘II;-y -gr  -I--_--_-_ '1"-:v-~14-n ‘ 4-. a\--:-"""""' ‘hr... end‘ U " Cw»- V-IQ.-.I_L-3, C1... V&.¢-kl ‘laugh; 4.. 7 -.r  

t i .
I
possession d wn to the present moment, is also equally certain.

J

 

 

And, furthermore, they have ever considere
lands intruded on by other tribes, if foun
in most cases, have treated other Indians, when found
hunting on thoselands, as enemies; except such of the
mall neighboring tribes who obtain permission of them, and
-accompany them in their hunts. I must consider their cla'im
tothat country as resting pretty much on the same base as
the claim of.‘ all other Indians is to the lands on which the
whites first find them; and, consequently, should we obtain
it from then, for the use of other tribes, or for any other
purposes, that we ought to use the same means, and be
~ governed by the same principles, which we are in our purchases from all other Indian ‘tribes. (Underscoring supplied.)

d
d

 

 

 

 

This report from Dougherty was forwarded to the Secretary of War by
General Clark in  -letter datedllpril 25, 1832, in which Clark advised
that -the report containedall the infomation he had been able to obtain
in regard to the Paunee title tothe Delaware outlet land. He explained

that  the absence of the field notes of. the’ survey made of the outlet,

\

ssho could orl3:T'expi=ess -an opinion  to the correctness oi‘ Doughert;.r's
estimate ‘-of the quantity of land  the outlet claimed by the Pa‘:-meesg
He state'd_that he could "see no cession to the Delawares for the slip
of ten miles in width, further thanthe Kansas reservation, which I am
informed does. not extend further west than fii‘t3r or sixty miles from
the northeast corner-of‘ said reserv tion of 1825. I an informed the
lines ‘ran by McCoy extended to about 150 miles west; passing in that
direction, within about five miles of the Panis village." he recommended, ho-.~zever,"that Agent Daugherty be authorized to hold a council

Wibh the bands of Patrnees and negotirte, ”not only for the purchase of

such of.‘ their lands as had been promised to the Delanares, but of that

I 0

portion oi‘ their countr; nhich lies between the Kansas (Reservation)

on

lines and the river Platte," and that "the compensation for 1-:hic.-, shoul ‘

-v‘.;''l :\ ;_\‘_\$ -v-‘-~_"_\::,~
"' .. 3 ..
¢'.......... :7,‘  Ugh!-if ‘ll;-II-v‘:-r—.

(U

0-.
' I
8-D

Q
-3- .'. ‘ .-. - ;'.... -'.'.‘ .;. ; - De to olace them upon the same fosvlz-E nice the other 1:

IF‘

In": C'."‘.T"'_c‘I'l1'I‘: 
ah-In-hurh-I 1*...’ '

the

O Q

19. On February 16, 1832, the Secretary of war reported to the
President on the removal of Indians to the west of the Mississippi
river. He pointed out the Governnent‘s imperfect knowledge of th
topogr”phy of the western country making it impoksible to detennine
precisely the quantity of land previously ceded to the United.States,
the amount already granted.emigrant tribes, or how much remained to
be assigned. He recommended that Government representatives visit
the indigenous tribes of that region to impress them.with the power
of the United States and its determination.to protect emigrant tribes,
and.proposed that the subject be submitted to Congress with a recoumendation for the appointment of three Commissioners “to whom the

whole matter.may be committed," and that “they should examine the

country thoroughly, ascertain and report its extent, e,% % adjust, if

:2:
>3
s‘:
up

P0SSible, the existing difficulties about boundaries, and inquire

whether further cessions from the Indians of that country are necessary
and can be obtained without injury to then.“ On July'lh, 1832, Congress
passed an Act (b Stat. 595) providing for the appointment of the three

9

Commissioners to treat with the Indians. They were to report to the

war Department concerning their activities, and recommend "a plan for

the improvement, government and security of the Indians."

5 245

20. On July l», l832, the Secretary of War wrote to Messrs.
‘William Carroll, Jontford Stokes, and Robert Vaux, advising them they
were commissions‘ to visit and examine the country set apart for the
emigrating Indians west of the Mississippi, and enclosed a copy of the
Act of July lb, l832, and a map of the country referred to. The letter
outlined their duties in detail, and with respect to the Pawnees, the
letter of instruction said:

I enclose you copies of communication from General Clark,
respecting a claim of the Panis to a tract of country which
has been assigned to the Delawares. This subject you will
investigate; and, if you find the Panis claim correct, you
will endeavor to make such an arrangement as will be satisfactory to then. The suggestions of.Major Dougherty are
entitled to weight, and the plan proposed by him.is referred
for your consideration. a»a a Your particular attention is
requested to the existing difficulties tetween the Delawares
and the Panis. ‘T ‘

N

Messrs. Carroll and Vaux were unable to serve as Commissioners and
Henry L. Ellsworth and Rev. Schenmerhorn were appointed and served in
their places, along with.dontford Stokes. Ellsworth and Sche merhorn
‘were sent copies of the same letter of instructions and the enclosures.

tn the same day, July lb, 1832, the Secretary of Ear'wrote to
Col. i. P. Chouteau and to Genersl'william Clark requesting each of them
to assist the Commissioners in any way they could. On July l6, 1832, the
Acting Secretari of Ear also wrote to John Doughertj, awnee agent,

R. W. Cummins, Delaware Agent, and other Indian agents in the area,:making the same request.

21. 0n.August h, l832, the Acting Secreta:y'of oar wrote to the
three Commissioners recommending to them Isaac hccoy, who he said nad

‘N

‘\ 0 3‘ ‘I: ‘I. ‘I. 0 0: 1 Q ‘Q
long oeen engages in n-{ire oUTV8}S in the area, and exoressed v3

‘ '1' . '-“u-‘i-.-'

Department‘s great confidence in hcCoy‘s opinions “upon many of the
subjects entrusted to you."

On October 13, 1832, Isaac McCoy wrote to the "Comnissioners'West”
recommending the extinguishment of so much of the title of the Pawnees,

and of other tribes on the Upper Missouri, as might be necessary to make

room for the emigrant tribes.

22. On September 21, 1833, Commissioner Ellsworth, on behalf of
the United.States, concluded a treaty (7 Stat. h29)'with the Otoe and
Missouri Indians whereby in.Art. I they ceded and relinquished all their

right, title and interest to the lands lying south of the following line:

Beginning on the Little Nemohaw River, at the Northwest

Corner of the land reserved by treaty at Prairie du Chien,

on the 15th July, 1830, in favor of certain halfbreeds, of

the Qmahas, Ioways, toes, Zancton, and.Santie bands of

Sioux, and running'Nester1y with said.Litt1e Nemohaw, to the

head branches of the same! and thence running in a due nest

line as far'West as said Otoes and Missourias, have or pre;
tend to have any claim. '

S I
.-. nu..- ’ --a-..«-nu on;-on-p

In his letter transmitting the treaty to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
on September 23, 1833, Ellsworth said that he found the Otoe's title good
"much farther south than the line marked as the northern boundary of extinguished land title,“ which was the northeastern boundary of the cession
made in 1825 by the Kansas Tribe. He also stated that "as the Little

Nemohaw runs a northwest course, this treaty, together with the treatyI nope to make with the Pawnees, will ewtin ish the Indian title to a

large tract of rich land though much deficient in timber. * *-w” He
described t‘

4»
.
an. 5-.\J--r

ne Otoes as particular friends 0‘ the Pawnee who hurted to5 2&6

5 24723. On October 9, l8§3; Commissioner “llsworth, assisted by
John Dougherty, net in council with the Pawnees, and on that date
a treaty was concluded between the United States and the four confederated hands of Pawnee Indians, which provided in part as follows:

.Art. I. The confederated bands of Pawnees aforesaid
hereby cede and relinquish to the United States all their
right, interest, and title in and to the land lying south
of the Platte River.

.Art. II. The land ceded and relinquished hereby so far
as the same is not and shall not be assigned to any tribe
or tribes, shall remain a common hunting ground, during the
pleasure of the President, for the Pawnees and other friendly
Indians, who shall be permitted by the President to hunt on,

the same.
In the council preceding the signing of the treaty, Commissioner
Ellsworth told the Pawneesr

1 05-07‘? -IIAINJII $'\O'\WFa'% 1 d'Ia"U'5oIi 1F\d'ld'|bV§ I-Q‘ -Ir-Iva-scan -v-as-D9

gr‘\'|1s~¢"r\1":l'r\.H Ava/Q 4-‘Au-In T‘-9'5 ,
....-..- 5...... ......-..a..... . -our Eu-4a\A. 0...-»-..p a-o\..o-—L.g..Ia\--4.. ~.oq.a a..u..— 0 var -but--b I-I‘\-a|-.9-A-& 6- at (.64.... Q «I-\-I I-A

have claimed that the Delaware trespassed upon your lands.
When your Great Father gave the Delawares their land he did
not know that you clahned any part of it. He is very anxious
to remove the difficulty, and is willing to aid you in agriculture and give you goods if you will cede to him the land
lying-South of the Platte River. You have land enough that

is good.without this. Your Father will permit you, during

phis pleasure, with other friendly Indians, to hunt on the land
you cede, while it remains unassigned to any tribe.

The statements of the Pawnee chiefs made in the council show that they
‘were willing to and understood they were giving up all their land south
of the Platte river including that portion thereof assigned to the
Delawares in I829, in return for the annuities and other considerations
provided in the treatyu They'were also willing to make peace with the
Delawares and the Osages;

2h. On Eovember 2, l833, Commissioner Ellsworth forwarded the

Pawnee treat to the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs with a letter ezolairing

f 
=1‘; 
'-'-| .‘_,  _ -I


rthe south % %-%," and that the trouble between th

is herebv extinguished to a large section of coun ry

% % % the Platte river now forms a natural boundary for the Pawnee on

Pawnees and Del wares

CD

would be ended, "as the land ceded by the United States to the Delawares

and claimed by the Pawnees is with much other embraced in this treaty.

"The country ceded by the Pawnees and Otoes must contain several millions

of acres as the Platte extends even to the Rocky Mountains."
25. Beginning on November 8, 1833, Commissioner Ellsworth met in

council at Fort Leavenworth with the Pawnees, Delawares, toes, Kickapoos, and other Indian tribes, for the purpose of'makine peace among

said tribes. .At the opening of the council, Ellsworth referred to the

trouble between the Delawares and the Pawnees ov r the “outlet” land,
and said “When the United States gave the Delawares their land, they did

not know the Pawnees claimed it. I therefore went to the Pawnees and

bought of them the land in dispute. The difficulty is now removed.

a % %‘I have too obtained a good.common hunting ground for all the red

‘men who conduct well and.preserve peace. You can now, if pennitted

C CBC
1‘-' ,% go with safety on the land south of the Platte, where the Pawnees

and Otoes have hitherto claimed the right to hunt alone."
t a council of peace held with the Pawnees, Otoes, and Piankeshaw

tribes on November 21, 1833, Commissioner Ellsworth stated that "many

differences have been settled by a purchase of land from the Pawnees."
And, in a later council held on December E, l833, with the Pawnees, toes
and Osages, Commissioner Ellsworth stated: '"Let me say to the Osages
that I have purchased of the Pawnees and Otoes a large hunting ground

south of the Platte river % % %."

5 2&9‘

26. On Pebruary l0, l83h, the "three Commissioners'West" submitted a report on their activities to the Secretary of War. ‘With
respect to the 1833 treaties with the Pawnees.and the Otoes, they
stated that the failure of the Government "to extinguish the rights of
the Pswnees and Otoes to land between the Kanzas and Platte Rivers" before
assigning lands to the Delawares and.Kickappos, caused war among the
Indians and to remove that cause and quiet the titles or the emigrant
tribes, they had.made the treaties by which the United States had

acquired cessions of "several million acres” of land from the Pawnees

and Otoes.

In.the report, the Commissioners described the areas in Kansas
and in Nebraska south of the Platte river they considered had been

ceded to the United States by the indigenous tribes, which in re“*‘“““*

. . . . # _ .- .-..-.. 1.» ac... u-"--.4\wn..v'
part, is as foll'ws:

"%-%~% The Osages ceded all the lands between the Arkansas
and Canadian rivers to the highlands which divide the waters
of the Maria de.Aygues, Neosho, and.Arkansas, from the Kanzas
river. The Kansas ceded all the land north of the Osages on
the waters of the Kanzas river, and to the Great Namaha on the
southwest side of the hissouri; % %-% the Pawnees, toes and
Missouria have ceded the lands north of the Kanzas country,
between the Great and.Little Namaha (Otoes), and (Pawnees)
from.the waters of the Kanzas river to the south side of the

Platte and from the Otoe and Hissouri reservation.west to its
the Platte‘s) source.

S

The Commissioners also estimated the population and quantity of land then
held by each of the indigenous tribes in the area. They'estimated the
population of the Pawnee tribe at l2,000, the Omahas at lhOO, the Poncas

at 800, and the quantity of land (all north of the Platte river), then

held by the three tribes to be approximately l6,000,0CO acres.

""‘1=:r;'»:‘-.4’!-*'

They estimated the population of the Kansas tribe at 13496, then holding
6,l:.00,000 acres, and the Otoes and E-iissourias at 1500, then holding
1,536,000 acres. The Commissioners reported that the unassigned land

"north of the country of the Delawares and Kickapoos" and south of the

Platte river, acquired by the United States, comprised about 10,000,000

,acres.

27. Between 1829 and 1833, the population of the Pawnee Tribe

was reduced considerably as a result of disease. In 1833, the tribe‘s

population was approximately 12,000 and it was much larger and stronger
than any of the immediate neighboring tribes.
28.

In 1829 and in 1833, the permanent villages of the Pawnees were

located along the Platte and Loup Rivers in central Nebraska. These

v&lages were the centers from which they engaged in agricultural activities

and hunting for about four months out of each year. The other eight months

of each year were spent on two extended hunting expeditions, one
summer and one in the winter, in which the tribe moved in a long
to the south and west of their villages, taking them as far west
forks of the Platte river and south into the Republican river drainage.

29.

The lands held by the Otoe and Missouria Tribe under original

Indian title adjoined the lands claimed by'the Pawnees south of the

Platte river. Claimant has filed a stipulation and agreement with the
Otoe and I-Eissouria Tribe fixing the western boundary of the Otoe lands

as a line beginning on the south bank of the Platte river at the range
line lying between Ranges 5 and 6 Est of the Principal. Meridian of
Nebraska, and running south along said range line to the Big Nemaha river

in Nebraska. In Docket ho. 1.1, Otoe and Missouria Tribe ‘=2’. United St.ates

U1

l\)

U1

5 251

the Commission found this line to be the western boundary of the Otoe

‘II

lands; The claimant tribe has also filed a stipulation and agreement
with the Chevenneearapahoe Tribes fixing the line established by the
Fort Laramie Treaty of'September 17, 1851 (ll tat. 7&9) as the western
boundary of the Pawnee lands south of the Platte river, which line commences at the junetion of the north and south forks of the Platte river

H

and runs in a southerly direction to the lower crossing of the.Arkansas

river by the Santa Fe Trail at Dodge,_Kansas.

30. The Commission finds, based on the evidence now of record,
that at the time of the October 9, 1833 treaty with the Pawnees, and for
many'years prior thereto, the c1aimant-Pawnee Tribe held original Indian

title through exclusive occupancy and use, the lands south of the Platte

\

river in southern Nebraska and northern Kansas lying within the fol_;eing boundaries:

Commencing at a point on the south bank of the Platte River

- at the Range Line between Ranges 5 and 6 East of the Principal
Meridian of Nebraska, thence south;along said Range line to the
Big Blue River near’Beatrice, Nebraska, thence southwest to the
point where the Republican River intersects the northern boundary
line of the Kansas Reservation established by the June 3, 1825
Kansas treaty, thence west alongxthe northern boundary of the
Kansas Reservation to the line established by the Fort Laramie
Treaty of-September 17, l8Sl (ll Stat. 7&9), thence Northwest
along the Port Laramie Treaty line to the forks of the North
and South Platte, thence East along the south bank of the Platte
River to the place of beginning.’ Q

The Pawnee Tribe did.not actually occupy and exclusively use the lands lying
south of the northern'boundary of the Kansas 1825 Treaty Reservation..
Third Claim.

-31. Although reouired oy the 1833 treaty to remove north of the

*0
[.4
113
ft‘
(I
(D
*1
‘.3
<4
(
w
u

9
h
C)‘
0)
,3
0O
* '3
"U

aunees continued to reside in a village on

the south side of the river. In l83h, Government officials had under
consideration the need for establishing a military post on the Platte
river near the Grand Pawnee village to provide protection for the white
emigrant route through the area west to the Rocky Mountains, and to
protect the Pawnees, Omaha, toes, tnd preserve peace among the Indian
tribes west of them.

By l8h3, the majority of the Pawnees residing south of the Platte
river had removed to villages located north of the river nhere the
Pawnees were subjected to numerous attacks by the Sioux Indians. The
Omaha and Otoe tribes were also being attacked by the Sioux, causing
a great deal of unrest among the Indians in the area. They complained
that the government restrained them from retaliating, while the Sioux
were permitted to wage war "with apparent impunity."

In August of l8h3, the Pawnee Indian agent wrote to the Superintendent of Indian ffairs stating that the Omahas claimed a country
bounded by the Missouri river on the east, by the river Platte on the
south, and by the Pawnee country on the west. That the Pannees claimed
"a country bounded on the south by the Platte river, by Shell Creek on
the east and by undefined limits on the north and'west. Their country,
except the islands in the streams, is almost entirely prairie.“ He also
stated that the Sioux had resolved to exterminate the Pawnees and Cmahas,
and told of the destruction by the Sioux in.June of l8h3 of a new Pawnee
village which had.been built north of the Platte, but stated the Pawnees

had indicated they intended to remain at their new locations.

Our border Indi -s frequently complain that their father
' 3. -3‘4 L:

an :4
will not permi them retaliate. As it is, the Sioux seem

O

5 253

to be waging a war with aopar

has been no fonnidable retal

gives the Sioux fresh corfidenoe, and.makes them the

more fierce.

As a result of the Sioux ttacks on the villages north of the Platte,
those Pawnees who had remained south of the Platte refused to move north,
and.many of those who had moved returned.

. 32. On September lO, l8hS, the Superintendent of Indian.Affairs
at St. Louis recommended.to the Commissioner of Indian.Affairs that
"for the safety of'emigrants, and the tranquility of the Indians” a
right of way through such sections of country needed for laying out
roads to Oregon "be purchased.of the Indian.tribes owning the country,"
and that one of the routes cross the Missouri river at Council Bluffs
and pass through Pottawatomie, toe and Pawnee lands.

33. On.May'l9, l8h6, Congress passed an.Act.(9 Stat. l3) providing
for "raising a Regiment ofjhounted Riflemen, and for establishing military Stations on the Route to Oregon." Section 6 of the.ACt provided
for an.appropriation of a sum not exceeding two thousand dollars "for
making compensation to the Irdian tribes which may own or possess the
ground on which the said station may be erected, and for each station."
Pursuant to this Aot,.and for the purpose of carrying out its provisions,

a requisition 'as made upon the tate of Missouri.for a battalion of
mounted volunteers. On June l, l8h7, the Secretary of her also issued
an order in the form of a letter of instructions to the Adjutant General,

to be communicated to the Commanding Officer of the battalion, and to the

several "Chiefs of Staff Department for their information and government,"

H
Li
(I
U
(D
0)
H

directing the establishment of two military stations, "the fi

5

Grand island where the road to Oregon encounters the Platte River, and

J.

the second at or near Fort Laramie." The order recited

.at:

5*‘

The act referred to appropriates a sum, not exceeding
two thousand dollars, for the purchase, from the Indian
tribes, of each of the sites to be selected for military
posts. This money will be disbursed by the Assistant
Quarter Master, under the direction of the Commanding
_Officer, who is authorized to enter into a treaty with
the Indians for the purchase of the ground for these
sites, which will be as exten ive as the appropriation
will procure.
A copy of the Secretary of I-?ar‘s instructions was forwarded by the
Adjutant General. on June 3, l8l17, with a covering letter addressed to
the Commander of.‘ the Missouri Mounted Battalion, directing him "to be
strictly governed" by the mstructions of the Secretary of war.

On June l5’, l8h7, the Commissioner of.‘ Indian Affairs communicated

to the Secretary of War certain complaints regardingthe conduct of the

\
R ‘Q

Pctrnees south of the Pl"tte river, *ith a_ recommendation that 1'.‘ rcezul
measures be taken by the military to punish the I-rrongdoers and remove
theirvillages north of the Platte. On June 16, 18147, the Adjutant
Generallforwarded copies of the complaints to the Commanding Officer
of the Missouri Volunteers w'th instructions for him to visit the
Pawnee country and compel those Pawnees who remained south of the
Platte on lands ceded in 1.833, to remove at once north of the river.
In a letter to the Secretary of War, dated January 214, 131:8 ,
Lt. Col. Powell, Commander of the hissouri Battalion, acknowledged
receipt of the Secretary‘s letter of instructions of June I, 1814?,

and suggested that he be permitted to purchase and deliver Indian

goods to the Indians in payment for the military sites instead of

5 255

WONQY; since the lndi

..:.'.'g,, ,* " .. Had .:. ..'.,.,,., .1. h .:.' " ..
ans sic“ who: ne he b0 Uiaab _cr the land were

?0tall* ignorant of the value of money and he could procure more land

that way than with payment of the $2,000. The suggestion made by Lt.

Col. Powell was approved by the Adjutant General.

3h. On.August 6, l8h8, at Fort Childs, t. Col. Powell, on behalf
of the United.States, concluded a treaty (9 Stat. 9&9) between the
United States and the confederated bands of Pawnee Indians, which treaty
was ratified on January 8, l8h9. The treaty provided in part as follows:

Art. 1. The confederated bands of the Pawnees hereby

cede and relinquish to the United States all their right,
title, and interest.in and to all that tract of land described as follows, viz: Commencing on the south side of
the Platte River, five miles west of this post, "Fort Childsg"
thence due north to the crest of the bluffs north of said
Platte River; thence east and along the crestcaf said bluffs
to the termination of Grand Island, supsosed to be about sixty
miles distant; thence south to the southern shore of said

latte River; and thence west and along the southern shore of
the said.Platte River to the place of beginning.

Art. 2. In consideration of the land hereby ceded and
relinquished, the United States has this day paid, through
Captain.Stewart Van Vliet, assistant quartennaster United

tates Army, under an order from Lieutenant-Colonel.Ludwell E.
Powell, commanding battalion Missouri.hounted Volunteers, to
the said four bands collectively, on the execution of this
treaty, the amount of two thousand dollars in goods andznerchandise, the receipt of which is hereby acknowledged.

The treaty contained a map of the area ceded within the lines on the m p.
The latitude and longitude of a point a little south and east of the southwest corner of the ceded land is noted as "Lat. hO° 35‘. Long. 900 nearlys”

The designated point was anoare tlv Fortchilds.
‘ ' - *.-. .:..:.*- ° .:.. ....:.... L ’
35. The Commission finds that at v38 tine the treaty oi augus. o,

l8E5 was concluded, an‘ for m ny years orior thereto. the ?awnee Tribe had

owned, cccupied.and used to the exclusion of other Indian tribes, the lend

Q 1 V A 4-. —u .1-‘ ll‘. 3 *‘ ".:_T

ceded under nrticle I c. said treat’.
In negotiating and concluding the aforesaid treaty of Rucust 6,

C .:.‘ ' '.;. ~ .-. - .: - .. * ,. 1,. -." ‘ ...‘ J-1...-4. 4.» ""3."
lbhc, the URlu€Q States recognized and aCm§Owl9Cg:Q buGu the raanee
‘I“'v§-.u~D 15$]-‘ J-‘I-._»_3 V51‘.--p-S owl ‘-:4-u '-:4-12 -L -t‘y--.c: -1 ‘ ‘.3:  1 ‘71  -I.-.._,.,Qo-;-3--r

A.-'— '9 x~-- Q taxi»; O.-...g.__.I"£c. ..LI'1C‘..Lc:.I'1 T,_1.u.;.... L.O 11.. ...E.IlC. C1.....C;...-_ 3C 3... S<:..:.....'. bl ecu].

The area ceded by the Pawnee ?ribe in the treaty of.August 6, l8h8

-comprised llO,hl9 acres of land, for which they received goods of the

‘=»:'r;x;;§é*

value of $2,000.

Fburth Claim

36. The population of the Pawnee Tribe had been further reduced
to about hSOO by l8h9 as a result of disease.

In October of l8h9, John Barrow, Indian Agent for the Pawnees,
recommended the purchase by the Government of the Pawnee lands north
of the Platte river and their removal “to a country where game is more
abundant, and does not lie in the midst of their enemies.F \

In Cctober of 1850, Agent Barrow reported that the tide of white
emigration to the west was pouring through the fields, villages and
hunting grounds of the Pawnees, toes and Qmahas, destroying their crops"
and driving off the game, and.suggested.that either the emigration
through their lands be stopped.or-money be expended for their support.‘
Again, in October of l8Sl,.Agent Barrow reported.that the Pawnee, Omaha
and Otoe tribes, being without annuities, were in dire need of assistance,
and were anxious "to dispose of their lands.” He suggested that "all
the lands inhabited by the Ottoes and.Missouris and Qmahas, extending
from he noutn of the ‘Big Kemahaw' up the hdssouri, about ‘no hundred

and filty'miles, can be purchased for a small annual payment in cash

U1
U1

5 257
and gfoodeo By the addition of a part of the Pawnee lands a territory
could be forned,:qbich, for agricultural purposes, would rival any of
the rich lands of Missouri and Iowa."

37. By l8S3, the Government had recognized that Nebraska and Kansas
could no longerVbe'used as Indian country because such use interfered
with w-ite emigration to California and Oregon Territory, and prevented
the expansion of white settlements, By a provision of the Act of Congress,
dated.March 3, l8S3 (10 Stat, 225, 238), the President of the United
States was authorized to negotiate with the Indian tribes west of the
States of Missouri and lone for the purpose of "securing the assent of
said tribes to the settlement of the_citizens of the United States upon
the lands clained.by said Indians, and ior the purpose of extinguishing

the title of said Indians in whole or in part to said lands." Pursuant

\

to that act, the President design“ted.the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,

gr. Eanypeniy, to conduct the necessary negotiations, and in the summer'of

l8S3 the Commissioner paid a visit to the Indian country in.question "to
explore it, and obtain such information as would.be useful and necessary,
in preparing full and detailed instructions as to the terms and conditions
of the treaties to be negotiated.", On this trip the Commissioner visited

and held.councils with:most of the tribes immediately west of Missouri and

Iowa, but reported that for want of time he had not visited the Pawnees,

Q

Kansas or Osage Indians, "with whom, although their lands are not continuous to the boundaries of either of these States it is desirable that
c: J

0
(B
3-1
pa
0»
(D

‘-0
tn
1'!‘
O
E»
:3.
na
0
H

‘vi. government he established and the
country opened for settlcment." He reported that at first the Indians

“"' ,5 -up ‘I -u-— . rising‘: on; ; p ; ' 15-. *1 QC; qv . Q“-p
Kc? generally opposed U0 selling an» ?§rH oi Duel? lands buu Iina*='

has expressed a willinrness to sell if the? could retain tribal reserF
" I-— U‘

. J_:_ ‘ _¢_\ - , , I. ' p I " ‘ii. nos 4zaoions on their present tracts of land, shicn arrangement he cie not

('3
(C)
F3
U}
‘I in
Q.
(U
H
g‘;'“
9
f—«
F’
D.
0‘
([3
C}.
(I)
U}
' in
H
m.
(13
}...J
(I)
F")
O
H
(I)
|.J
Cl
' 1
(I)
w
(‘I
{'7'
(D
I-I

3'1 Eli .;. <::.I’1EE5 CI) IIT' ta 1 a if? E§;{C3 \I ii? If‘ - .1! 1 E§3II'}. La

\

and so had deferred making treaties until the next spring with the hope

A

re uired

up an

cl‘
:3)
(1)
<7?‘
(‘?“
:1).
(I)
I-1
.3
I1} J
ii)
(1)
CT‘
e:
C“*'
III‘
{1}
<71‘
E
h
E3
}.;.
E‘)
III‘
(‘I
£3
L3
FL
(I)
W
(1)
cl“
D.)
:3
D<:1‘
:;J.
(I)
}.:.
w
NJ.
5
cl’
(1)
H
(I)
(I1
cf’
(I)

an entire transfer of all their lands and their removal to a new home.

it

He was of the opinion that the original plan for locating emi .ant

("1
I

tribes west of the Missouri had."measurably failed? principally because the acquisitions of Texas, New Eexico, and the Pacific possessions had brought about large emigrations of white settlers through

0

this Indian.countrv and over the reservations resulting in unexpected
changes in conditions that were unfavorable to the Indians continuing
to live in their present locations.

38. In.l8Sh, the Committee on Indian.Affairs, House of Representatives, had.unTer consi‘eration the terms on which proposed treaties
should be made with the tribes of In'ians then located south of the
Missouri river-and‘west of the boundaries of the States of Iowa and
Missouri. In connection with the proposed treaties, the Indian Office
Submitted a report containing a table showing the names of the diiferent
tribes, the country from which they came if emigrants, their population,
the quantity'of land held.by each, the title by'which each tribe held,
wheth r'by'trea*y guarantee from the government or by "Indian title”
in the case of indigenous tribes, and the approximate share of land

allocable to each Indian, based on the acreage owned.by the tribe and

the tribe‘s total population.

5 259

For the Pawnee tribe, this table showed a population of h§OO Indians
residing on 12,800,000 acres of land held by Indian title," with 28hh
acres per Indian. The table shows the Pawnee tribe as “indigenous to
their present country,“ and gave the "locality and boundaries of present
residence" of the tribe in l85h as "North by Platte, east by Omahas."

fter the l833 treaty cession the remaining Pawnee lands were bounded
by the Platte on the south, and the Omaha lands which bounded the
Pawnees on the east were all north of the Platte.

For the Omaha Tribe, the table showed a population of l3OO Indians
residing in l8Sh on.h,h80,000 acres of land, with hlh8 acres per Indian,
held by Indian title, and gave the “boundaries of present residence” of
the tribe as "H. by Eau-qui-court river (Niobrara), E. by Missouri, 8. by’
I. my longitude 95 degrees West.f \

It is apparent, therefore, that in l8Sh the Indian Office and the
House Committee were infonned as to the location and approxin te quantity
of land the Government officials considered was owned and held "by Indian
title" at that time by the Pawnee Tribe.

39. On May 30, l8Sh, Congress passed the Kansas-Nebraska.Act (l0 Stat.
27?), providing in.Section l for the creation of the'Territory of Nebraska,
and in Section 19 for the‘?erritory of Kansas. Both sections contained
a provision "that nothing in this Act contained shall be construed to
impair the rights of person or property now pertaining to the Indians in
said Territory, so long as such rights sha_l remain une"tin"rished.by'

treaty between the United States and such Indians."

ho. Pursuant to the 1553 Act, supra, Comnissioner.han'penny on
behali or the United Stat=s, concluded treaties with the Nebraska
indigenous tribes immediately west of the Missouri river. The first
treaty was made with the Otoeéhissouria Tribe on March lS, 185k 10 Stat.
lO38) wherein they ceded all their lands west of the Missouri, except
for a small reserved area on the Big Blue river. A treaty'was concluded
with the Omaha Tribe on.March 16, l8Sh (10 Stat. lOh3) wherein they
ceded their lands west of the Missouri River, except for a reserved
area. Shortly thereafter white settlers began to move on to these
lands. As a result, di_ficulties arose between the settlers and the
Pawnees who claimed that the land in the western portion of the l8Sh

Omaha cession belonged to them.

On October 28, l8S6, Samuel Allis, the Pawnee teacher and inter‘ta

preter, reported to the Su_erintendent of Indian.Affairs on a visit he

had made to the Pawnee village near the Omaha cession to investigate

‘com laints of white settlers against the Pawnees. Allis reported that

he was satisfied the Pawnees had.a aood.claim to the strip of land
settled on by the whites and included in the Omaha cession, stating that
he had been in "this country“ for 23 years and had always understood that
Shell Creek was the dividing line between the Omaha and Pawnee countries,
although the Omahas had sold the land west to Beaver Creek, a distance of

L0 mi_es further up the Platte river. He recommended that a treaty be

made with the Pawnees.

held a council with the P*wnees to discuss with them the comnlalnts of

5 261

white settlers, and the claim of the Pawnees to the disputed land north
of the Platte river. In the council, the Pawnee chiefs admitted that
some young Pawnee warriors had committed depredaoions on white settlements, but insisted the Pawnees were “justly entitled to the land we
occupy, but have been encroached upon by the whites.“ They said they
believed they "had a right to do as we pleased with our land," and complained of being abused by the whites who trespassed on their lands.
They also complained about "the treachery of some of the other tribes
in appropriating our lands to their own uses, which they have no right
to do." The Pawnees expressed.a desire to make a treaty with the Government, one chief stating: “we are willing to make a treaty %<% %»as we
have a great deal of land, hope that if we succeed in.making a treaty
with our Grand Father, that it will be such a one as will afford us a

living for many years to come; we received but little when we made our

last treaty and now that lands have become increased in value, expect to

receive a much larger*anountL“ Agent Dennison assured the Pawnees he would
convey their wishes to the "Great Father."

eh2. On May 23, l8S7, J. W. Denver, Commissioner of Indian Affairs
wrote to the Secretary of Interior recommending that the Pawnee.Agen
be instructed to bring a delegation of Pawnees to Eashington who would
be authorized by the tribe to negotiate for the extinguishment of the
title of the Pawnees to their lands north of the Platte river and accept

a small area for their pe nanent home. In the letter.Er. Denver referred

to.Agent Dennison‘s council with the Pawnees in A rii, and also to the
‘ 0 o -5 - -'0 o a an q -. 1
previous reports of the Commissioner o: In ian.Affairs in the years lESa.

"r"-’ /
1?"--q "‘VF\‘  --. -y-,p-::y-;z- A -3- ;--.a---'----- ---:-'--u--- -3- .- "‘ .- ---g:‘ 1:...--‘:; -.‘_\..‘/‘._ J ‘=_"€L.(.":I'.‘_'T‘.€».n.. .:.....5-: <3 'vr:c'.-4 v 'u'¢.;.'..... "oz";-.: 1' H‘? I’-.€‘:Se

L3. On Auyust l5, lS5?, the Secretary of Ear wrote to Commissioner
J. W. Denver, advising him that he was authorized to
enter into negotiations with the Indian tribes west of Missouri and Iowa,
and was to act in accordance with the provisions of the Act of March 3,

l853, supra. He was instructed to make a preliminary ViSiU to the Sioux,

Ponca and Pawnee Indians, among others, and to examine their country'and
obtain all the information_necessary to the preparation of full and

detailed instructions as to the terms and conditions of any treaties

to be made with them. He was told, however, that if, on his preliminary

trip of inspections and investigation, he deemed it expedient and proper
to actually negotiate any treaties f r the extinguishment of a tribe's
title to the lands now claimed by them, or to secure their assent to the

of white citizens on their land, he was fully authorized to

hh. Pursuant to his instructions of.August l5, l857, Commissioner
Denver concluded a treaty (ll Stat. 729) on.September 2b, 185?, with

the four bands of Pawnee Indians at Table Creek (Nebraska City),Nebraska.

This treaty provided in part, as follows:

rt. l. The confederate bands of the Pawnees aforesaid,
hereby cede and relinquish to the United.States all their
right, title, and interest in and to all the lands now owned
or claimed by them, except as hereinafter reserved, and which
are bounded as follows, viz: On the east by the lands lately
purchased by the United States from the Onahasg on the south
by the lands heretofore ceded by the Pawnees to the United
States; on the west by a line running due north from the
junction of the North with the South Fork of the Platte River
to the Keha-Paha River; and on the north by he Keha-Paha
River to its junction with the Niobrara, L‘eauqi Court, or
Running4hater River and thence, by that river, to th western
boundary of the late Omaha cession. Out of this cession the
Pawnees reserve a tract of country thirty'miles long from east

to west, by fifteen "iles wide from north to south, including both anks o h
the east line of whi
east than the mouth

shall be at a point not further
f Beaver Creek. % * %

Art. 2. ln consideration of the foregoing cession, the
United States agree to pay to the Pawnees the sum of forty
thousand dollars per annum, fbr five years, commencing on
the first day of January, A. D. eighteen hundred and fiftyeight; and, after the end of five years, thirty thousand
dollars per annmn, as a perpetual annuity, at least cne~half
of which annual payments shall be made in goods, and such
articles as may be deemed necessary for them.

And.it is further agreed that the President may, at any
time, in.his discretion, discontinue said perpetuity, by
causing the value of a fair commutation thereof to be paid

to, or expended for the benefit of, said Indians, in such
manner as to htn shall seem proper;

On November 9, l8S7, Commissioner Denver forwarded the Pawnee treaty
in a letter to the Secretary of the Interior. His letter reads in part,

as follows:

I have the honor to send up herewith articles of agreement
and convention, entered into on the Zhth of Sept mber by me
with the confederated bands of Pawnee Indians, that they be
submitted, if you concur, to the President, and laid by him,
if he approves, before the Senate for its constitutional
action thereon. '

There have been acquired hereby all the lands which these
Indians own or claim, except a reservation of 288,000 acres;
the number of acres acquired will reach, by approximation, the
amount of ll,5h2,9§O acres. _This acquisition is bounded on the
east by'a line drawn from the mouth of the hauvaise river to
the mouth of Shell creek; on the south by the lands heretofore
ceded by the Pawneesg on the west by a line running due north
from the junction of the north m; h the south fork of the Platte
river to the Keha-Paha river; and on the north by the Keha~Paha
to its junction with the 3‘eau qui Court Zfiobrara river;
thence by that river to the western boundary of the late Omaha
cession. "Within the limits aforesaid the reservation of the
Pawnees is locateda

I could here remara that the Pawnees claimed much further

4-eanq-L J-"v"_‘_'!‘V'\ 9-0%_p— ‘Was-2 .  “.52 ~r\‘1-;- I -ffhc  pup: J—.\-u ° '1.
G-\...¢LH blaunai r.1-'4-‘D a............Y.'-...au ” -'.‘..-r" J-u.'.°J 1.:-uT:'.n..q._.r ‘Jun 4_ ' 3; j

 

 

3- -. .. -.' -'
.‘*"s;;;;~£%"'

. ‘F v- v. I‘ .. ' H ‘ cu‘ —: ~ . 1 n ‘
Jusu 3 owned us to Shell creex which in rudes a so

‘.---'--a-"-..- -~ '.:— '. “-2acouo u?”*f "*Io~ in oreacch on “»oe” 1“

  
  

   

--.—... U ......_.-_......,_ .. 04'. ' --¥--‘-"'-"""* -'-"' ‘J

 

the Cnahas in 125k.

up “'\'1

The treaty :as ratified by the U. S. Senate on March 3;, i858, and
proclaimed Roy 26, l8S8.

H5. The western boundary of the l8S7 treat“ cession by the Pcwnees
was described as a line running due north from the junction.of the North
and South Fork of the Platte River to the Keha-Paha River, which is
some distance west of the eastern boundary line of Sioux.lands as
established by the Fort Laramie treaty of l8Sl (ll Stat. 7&9 . The
clahmant agrees to accept the Bbrt Laramie line as the western boundary
of the 1857 cession, and has filed in this case a stipulation and agreenent with the Sioux Tribe of Indians, isclaiming original Indian title
to all lands in Nebraska west of the Fort Laramie line.

The eastern boundar* of the l857 Pawnee cession *as described as
the western boundary of Omaha lands ceded by that Tribe under the treaty

of'March l6, 185k (10 Stat. lOh3), In Docket No. 2254A, Omaha Tribe v.

United States, decided January l8, l957, this Commission found.(Einding 28)

 

that the western boundary of the lands in.Nebraska to which the Onahas
had exclusive use and possession in l8Sh, was as follows: "Commencing
at a point where the West line of Range ‘3 West of Principal Meridian,
Nebraska, intersects the Kebraska-Dakota State line, thence south along
said range line to where it intersects Shell Creek near the northern

boundary line of Tp. 2l, N., R. S, dest thence along the:meanders of

\.o

0 9 "'
I

said street to its junction‘w;tn the Platte River in T9. l7, N.R. h E,

-claim any right.to recover b‘

5 265
The northern boundary of the 1857 treaty cession was described as

the Keha—Paha River east to its junction with the Niobrera River,-and

thence down that river to the western boundary of the 185k Omaha cessiono

In Docket No. 322, The Ponca Tribe V. The United States, now pending before

 

this Commission, the Ponca tribe claims that prior to the treaty of March 12,
1858 (12 Stat. 997) with that tribe it held original Indian title to at
least the northern one-third of the lands included in the 1857 Pawnee
cession lying south of the Keha-Paha and Niobrara rivers. The Pawnee

tribe has filed in the instant case a stipnlation and agreement with the
Ponca Tribe, petitioners in.Docket No. 322, fixing the northern boundary

of Pawnee lands in Nebraska as a meandering line beginning at the
Laramie treaty line and running generally east and southeast to the Omaha

cession, which line is shown as the northern boundary line of the lands

identified as claim h on Claimant's Exhibit No. lhh, and the Pawnees disreason of the 1857 cession of any lands

'--1

lying north of said line,

he. The Commission finds, based on.all the evidence now in the
record, that at the time of the September Zh, 1857 treaty, and for many
years prior thereto, the claimant Pawnee Tribe exclusively occupied,
possessed, and used in Indian fashion, that part of the lands in northw
central Nebraska described in said treaty, which are bounded as follows:

On the south by the Platte river and the tract of land pre'viously ceded by the Pa<hees in l5h8; on the west by the
Eastern boundany line of Sioux lands, as established by the
Fort Laramie treaty of September 17, 1851 (11 Stat. 7h9)3 on

the north by the line shown as the northern boundary of the
lands identified as Claim h on Claimant's Exhibit no, lhh,
‘which begins at the Fort Laramie line on the'West and runs

generally east and Southeast to the Omaha 185k treaty cession3
and on the East by the western boundary line of the Omaha

-'-5.,-,;.:'..=-r

 
 

cession of 1.1::-.:-::‘:~ 15, 1351;, as fixed by this Corw....iss1or: in
3 -L "‘ I .-. "" " '1" 3' -7' ' " -"9 :4 co‘? ‘
DCC£Eo 425-a, Cmah Lrioe V. .he uR;3€G 5va~v5: anegvvv
_ ‘ ‘. -an :5: -‘: \_"_I
forth in oaraaraon 2 of the orececing linc-ng hO. hp.
3 5 * é

hT. Under the first Article of the treaty of Sept nber 2h, l8S7,

there was reserved to the Pawnees outcaf the cession made by them "a
tract of country thirty miles long from East to West, by fifteen miles
wide from North to South, including both banks of the Loup Fork of the
Platte, the East line of which shall be at a.point not further East
than.the mouth of Beaver Creek," or a total of 288,000 acres. The
reservation was surveyed. In October of l8?2, the Pawnee Indian.agent
reoorted that white settlements were apparently encroaching on the
eastern boundary of the reservation and recommended that the reservation

lines he resurveyed and marked. On November ll, l8?2, the Secretary of

the Interior ordered a resurvey; The reserve; U35 started on Xpgil 2?,
I673. The surveyor_was instructed to commence at the southeast corner

of the reservation and run'west 30 miles, thence North IS, thence East’
30 and South 15, observing the offsets of the original survey. Upon
completion of the resurvey on.May 8, 1873, it was discovered that the
original survey ran west only 29%-miles and a tract of land, one-half
mile wide and fifteen miles long, immediately adjacent to the western
boundary of the reservation as originally surveyed, comprising h800
acres, should have been included as a part of the Pawnee reservation.

‘\

In a letter dated June ll, l873, the Superintendent of Indian

5'0.-a

rlairs at Omaha reported the shortage of the h800 acres on the west end

0

‘I ‘L1  . 1 -In ‘-1 __ u o g
_ the reservation as en en oy one resurvey, to the Commission r of

(U)

‘ O
-F‘.-"\r"1‘1::v\ 5.-F‘-T‘.-.-25......
J-china-4.\-54‘ 

'\I"4I  ‘—a-u  “D¢£""  H ‘*1: up I$""‘O '.'_‘   In
, c.u;C Sn..c:u'::.... 1.1:’ :a<:'..... .......1 ....a.:..:.~2......€G S<::......C.‘. .L<'.=.;..G Ne:-S a.a SeLn.:.LeC1

S 267

0-0

by whites, suggesting that as "the Indians already have an excess of

‘H

_and, and there appears to be no occasion for interfering with the

settlements on said strip of land" that the Government should pay the

"0

arnees “a full and just consideration" for the “deficiency of land."

On December 20, 1873, the Acting Commissioner of Indian.Affairs wrote

to the Secretary of the Interior enclosing the Superintendent‘s June llth

letter, which he said show "the facts in the case," and suggested that
Congress be requested to provide indemnity to the Pawnees for the h800
iacres at $1.25 per acreg "the minimum price of Government land." On
January 5, l87h, the Secretary oi’the Interior recommended to Congress
that $6,000 be appropriated to indemnify the Pawnees for the h800 acres
of land erroneously excluded from their reservation.

By the Act of'harch 3, l87S (18 Stat. h20, hh8), Congress appropriated the sum of $6,000 to indemnify the Fairness for the heoo acres
of land, which sum was paid to claimants.

h8. The land excluded from the Pannee reservation in Nebraska by
the error in the original survey was a strip of land one-half mile wide
and fifteen.miles long from north to south located inmediately adjacent
to the western boundary of the reservation as origi.ally surveyed. ‘we

find this land was taken by the defendant in 1875.

Edgar S. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. O‘Harr
Associate Commissioner

Wm. H. Holt

Associate commissioner

