 

BEFORE TY? INDI£N CLAIKS COMMISSION

THE YAKIMA TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Petitioner,

V. Docket No. 161

THE UNITED STATES,

Defendant.

o..,__,1\___;c.___/~.___/\.,_z~.._./m.../"-.../\.._J

THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE
COLVILLE RESERVATION as the
Representative of the Moses Band,

Petitioner,

v, Docket No. 22h

THE UNITED STATES,

u.../s..z~.../\..u-./\../\../\../\-/\~—l‘-a’

Defendant.
,%Decided: July 28, 1959

I FINDIIES _0_E: 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. In Docket No. 161 the petitioner is the Yakima Tribe, which
is more fully described in its abproved contracts employing counsel,
dated July 20, 19h8 and December 10, 1958, as the Yakima Tribe of
Indians of the Yakima Indian Reservation in the State of”Washington.
The petitioner is a recognized tribe o£.American Indians residing.
within the territorial limits of the United States.

2. ‘In Docket No. 22h the petition was originally filed by the Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation as the successor to the

7 Ind. 01. Com. 79!; 795

claims of and as the representative of the Hoses Band and by two named
individuals as representatives of the Moses Band. The petition wast
subsequently amended to include the constituent tribes of the.Moses
Band, which tribes were alleged to be the Columbia, Chelan, Entiat,
and'Wenatchee. Iithout determining at this point the correctness of
the petitioners’ characterization of its relationship as successor to
or representative of the Moses Band or of the alleged composition of
the Moses Band, the Commission finds that the Confederated Tribes of
the Colville Reservation is an identifiable group of American Indians
residing within the territorial limits of the United States. I

3. By order of the Commission dated May 23, 1957, the two Dockets
Nos. 161 and 22h.were consolidated for the purpose of trial, and it was
therein ordered that a separate trial he had to first determine:

“(l) whether the petitioners, or any of them, have
authority, under the Indian Claims Commission Act, to

present claims for the taking of the area described in
paragraph 8 of the petition in Docket No; 22h; as amended;

h(2) whether the petitioners, or any of them, held Indian C
title to the said area, or any part thereof; ;J_

,;5~ (3) the date of the taking, if any, of the said area,
or any part thereof by the defendants." - I

The area referred to in paragraph 8 of the petition in Docket No.

33b is a northern portion of the area ceded under the Treaty of June 9,

1855 (12 Stat. 95l) (called the Yakima Treaty) which ceded area is described by Charles C; Royce in his compilation of Indian land cessions
33 ROYCE area 36h, shown on.Map l of the tate of Washington.

At the conclusion of the hearings on the limited issues referred

t9 ab0VC, the petitioner in Docket No. 161 filed a motion to dismiss

‘. y;4‘.:~‘.#L*‘-i’

 

Docket No. 22h insofar as Docket E0. l6l is concerned.

Exploration Party, under the leadership of Isaac Stevens.

the area.

7 End. Cl. Com. 79b

in this matter is a motion filed by petitioners in Docket No. 22b to
intervene as petitioner in Docket No. 161.
h. The area claimed in this proceeding was visited in l853 by
George Gibbs, a member of the staff of Captain George B. McClellan,

Commander of the Western Division of the Northern Pacific Railroad

"The country of the Pisquouse lies immediately north
of that of the Yakimas, and we entered it next upon our
route. Under this appellation are here included the
Indians on the Columbia between the Priest's and Ross
rapids, on the Pisquouse or Winatshapam.river, the Ente-at-kwu, Chelan lake, and the Mathew or Barrier river.
The name of Pisquouse, however, properly refers to a

.single locality on the river, known to the Yakimas as

Winatshapam.

"The Pisquouse themselves, as has before been remarked,
are so_much intermarried with the Yakimas that they have
almost lost their nationality; These bands were formerly
all united under one principal chief, Stal-koo-sum, who is
said to have been a man of great note among them, He was
killed a few years since in a fight with the Blackfeet,
since when there has been no head of the tribe. Stal-koosun's son, Quil-tan-ei-nok, or Louis, was an aspirant for
his father's throne, and came over to Ketetas to recommend

himself to Captain HcClellan's patronage, under the tuition

of Ow-hai, who seemed to be interested in his promotion.

It was considered desirable to unite the scattered fragments

of the empire under one head, if possible, and he was therefore engaged as a guide, the better to ascertain his character.
It should be remarked, that though the chiefdom.of the petty
bands, or villages, seems to be hereditary, it does not always
follow that one who has placed himself at the head of the tribe,
or confederacy, transmits his power. Quil-tan-ei-nok had, as
we learned, used great efforts to succeed in this object of

his ambition; having gone to the Sound, and even to the

willamette valley, to procure a paper from some agent recogDizlng his rights, on the strength of which he might silence

Also pending

On March h,

After describing the Klikatats and Yakimas, he reported:

796

l8§h, Gibbs submitted his report of his trip among the Indian tribes of

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79k 797

O
I

all cavillers. In this he had been hitherto unsuccessful, and
he was doomed to further disappointm nt. On reaching the mouth
of the ?isquouse, Captain Hcclellan nformed the Indians that
it would be well for them to choose, in concert with their
neighbors, a head chief, who would represent them all, and who
might talk for them with the chief of the whites; that if they
would agree among themselves upon a proper person, the Governor
would give him a great writing, signifying his consent. In
the mean time some presents were distributed; that to Quiltan-ei-nok being the largest, that he might have honor among
his own people at least. ‘When the election came off, however,
he was beaten, and by'a candidate whose name had never previously been mentioned. % % %“ (Pet. Ex. hlé, pp. L11-hi?)

e
i

5. On August 30, 185k, the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs
gave written instructions to Governor Isaac I. Stevens of Washington
Territory, directing him to negotiate treaties with the Indian tribes,
bands and groups of Washington Territory for the extinguishment of their
claim of title to lands within the territory. The instructions provided

that:

“In concluding articles of agreement and convention ,
with the Indian Tribes of'Washington Territory, you will
endeavor to unite the numerous bands and fragments of
tribes into tribes, and provide for the concentration of
one or more of such tribes upon the reservations which

may be set apart for their future homes.
-29-2-re

“It is desirable also that the stipulations to be’ is
fulfilled annually on the part of the United States, be*d
few in number, and that the Department retain the authority
to apply the funds to a variety of objects, such as the I
circumstances of the Indians as the time of payment may
require. I

"This suggestion you will regard, particularly if you
are unable to effect the combination of all the Bands into
six or eight Tribes, or to arrange half a dozen treaties
or less, so that every one of the tribes shall be a party’

to one of them.

-if--1.‘-€$

"-5,, ,.' '

7 End. Cl- Com. 79¢ 798

men of Washington Territory, showing

m

at your early convenience, furnish to this
Office a sL leton
the location of the different tribes and hands, and the
boundaries of the regions respectively claimed by each;
and as treaties are concluded from time to time, in your
reports accompanying them, furnish a description of the
reservation provided for the occupation of the Indians,

with such precision, that it may be marked on the map here."
(Pet. Ex. h7bl C

6. James Doty, Secretary to the treaties in'Washington Territory,
visited, among others, the "Piquose and Yakima Tribes of Indians" and
secured their agreement to meet Governor Stevens in council in'Walla
‘Walla Valley. On May 21, 1855, Governor Stevens and General Palmer,
United States Treaty Commissioners, arrived at the council grounds at
'Walla'Walla. -lso present at the council was Mr. George Gibbs, who
actually wrote the treaty. ’

7. The official proceedings of the treaty council recorded that
Yakima Chiefs Kamaiakun, Owhi and Skloom came to the treaty council
grounds and that the "Yakimas were also accompanied by delegates from
the Pshasnwappam, Pisquouse,‘Wenatshappam, and Palouse Indians--all
Tribes and Bands acknowledging Kamaikun as their Head Chief, and there_
were present representatives from the Bands living on the Columbia
River doan.to the'White Salmon River," (Pet, Ex. h7§, p. h), The record
further reported on Chief Kamaiakun‘s statement "of the Indian Tribes
and Bands who considered him their head Chief, viz--the Yakamas proper,
the-Palouses, Pisquouse, Okinakanes, and Methows, the Pshawnwappam.and
all the Bands on the Columbia below Umatilla as far as the White Salmon

River and them he would undertake to goveli." The report continued:

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h

"During the interview several Headmen of the Palouse,
Pisquouse, and Methows were present and unanimously
assented to Kamaiakuns decision.

“Kamaiakun was present at the General Council during
the day but did not speak; and in the evening immediately
after the Council he called upon Gov. Stevens for the
Treaty and signed it: Owhi and Skloom did the same, as
also the Palouse Chief Kahlatoose, and all Chiefs present,
named by Kamaiakun as being under his jurisdiction."

(Def. Ex. D75, pp. 6-7)

(a) The preamble of the Yakima Treaty of June 9, 1855, stated

in part:

“the undersigned head chiefs, chiefs, head~men and
delegates of the Yakana, Palouse, Pisquouse, Wenatshapam,
Klikatat, Klinquit, Kow-was-sayaee, Id-ayauas, Skin-pah,
‘Wish-ham,'Shyiks, Oche-chotes, Kah milt-pah, and Se-ap-cat,
confederated tribes and bands of Indians, occupying lands

hereinafter bounded and described and lying in Washington
Tr='r-1-1‘+.nr-u- whrg f'r-rr- *l:.h_9 1jn_j_'f-nnczn-:-. r-sf‘ -i-‘n-3:: +,-r~a::+-rr or-a +n Ra

.-......-...yJ . ......... - ‘.71....’ g_,—. gg-if qr—p1-run-nag." goons. are-p -var

considered as one nation, under the name of *Yakama,"with
Kamaiakun as its head chief, on behalf of and acting for
said tribes and bands, and being duly authorized thereto
bfthem.“ (2 Kapp. 698)

9(b) the lands which the confederated tribes and bands ceded, relinquished and conveyed to the United States were:

6 _ Commencing at Mount Ranier, thence northerly along

“'the main ridge of the Cascade Mountains to the point where ;;s

,,the northern tributaries of Lake Che-lan and the southerni
itributaries of the Methow River have their rise; thence
southeasterly on the divide between the waters of Lake
Che-lan and the Methow River to the Columbia River; thence
crossing the Columbia on a true east course, to a point
whose longitude is one hundred and nineteen degrees and

‘ ten Winutes, (1190 lO*,) which two latter lines separate
the above confederated tribes and bands from the Oakinakane
tribe of Indians; thence in a true south course to the

forty-seventh (h7°) parallel of latitude; thence east on
said parallel to the main Palouse River, which ‘we latter
lines of boundary separate the above confederated tribes
and.bands from the Spokanes; thence down the Palouse

River to its junction with the Hoh-hah-ne-she, or southern
tributary of the same; thence in a southesterly direction,

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h 800

to the Snake River, at the mouth of the Tucannon River,
separating he above confederated tribes from the Nez

Perce tribe of Indians; thence down the Snake River to

its junction with the Columbia River; thence up the

Columbia River to the "White Banks” below the Priest*s
Rapids; thence 'esterly to a lake called “La Lac;“ thence
southerly to a point on the Yakama River called Toh—mah-luke;
thence, in a southwesterly direction, to the Columbia River,
at the western extremity of the “Big Island,” between the
mouths of the Umatilla River and Butler Creek; all'which,
latter boundaries separate the above gonfederated tribes and
bands from the walla4Nalla, Cayuse, and Umatilla tribes and
pbands of Indians; thence down the Columbia River to midway
between the mouths of'White Salmon and Wind Rivers; thence
along the divide between said rivers to the main ridge of
the Cascade Mountains; and thence along said ridge to the
place of beginning. (2 Kapp. 698)

(c) Article II of the Treaty "reserved, from the lands above ceded
for the use and occupation of the aforesaid confederated tribes and bands
of Indians, the tract of land" therein described and provided that the
tract “shall be set apart and, so far as necessary, surveyed and marked
out, for the exclusive use and benefit of said confederated tribes and
bands of Indians, as an Indian reservation; . . . . And the said con—i
federated tribes and bands agree to remove to, and settle upon, the
same, within one year after the ratification of this treaty."

8. The lands thus ceded included the territory allegedly occupied
in aboriginal days by the Colurnbia, wonatohao, Entiat and choian Tribea.
.Although these four tribes were not named as such in the preamble to
the Yakima Treaty, the evidence clearly indicates that the four tribes
were represented at the treaty council and included among those tribes
which formed the confederation of tribes and bands into the Yakima
Nation.

The Wenatshapam named in the preamble to the Yakima Treaty were

synonymous with the Wenatchee. The Pisquouse named in the preamble

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h 801

to the treaty was a general term which was used to include the'Wenatchee,
Entiat, Chelan and Columbia. As Gibbs stated the Pisquouse included "the

Indians on the Columbia between Priestfs and Ross rapids, on the Pisquouse

‘or'winatshapam river, the Enute-at-kwu, Chelan lake, and the Methow or

Barrier River.“ (Fet. Ex. hlo, p. hll). It was Gibbs who actually wrote
the Yakima Treatv. Further, Governor Stevens used the term.Pisquouse

in the same collective sense as did Gibbs, and with his letter transmitting the treaty to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Stevens included a map depicting the ceded area and clearly including the claimed
territory of the Entiat, Chelanand Columbia.

Both Quiltaneinok and his younger brother, Moses, then members of

the Columbia band, attended the treaty council. As Edward S. Curtis
WT0t9;;Qui1taneinokn?attended the treaty council in the Walla'Walla ,

valley in 1855, and spoke favorably for the treaties although he did

.not sign, at least not under this name. ‘His people, and all other

Salishan tribes as far up the Columbia as the Okanagan, were to be
P1a9§§ on the Iahina reservation." (Pet. Ex. hlS, p. 67) iQuiltaneinok's
“if? V§§ a_member of the Wenatchees (Pet. Ex. hlS, p. 6?).

The Yakima Treaty was signed by $e—cole-kun (Tkoluhn), a Wenatchee
Chief (P8t.'Ex. hi5, p. 69). Also signing the treaty was La-hoom, a
chief from the Pisquouse area (R. L07, L09, L17, L18, L23, LZL; Pet,

Ex. h62).

9. The Yakima Treaty'was ratified on March 8, 1859. Thereby t-e

9°nf0derated tribes or bands as named in the preamble to the treaty

b?°“m° m9T8¢d into the newly formed Yakima N tion. The confederated

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h 802

Yakima Nation thus became the successor in interest to the formerly
separate tribal entities and all of the rights of the former separate
tribal entities were merged as of Harch 8, 1859.

10. By the terms of the Yakima Treaty the confederated tribes
and bands ceded, relinquished and conveyed to the United States all
their right, title, and interest in and to the lands occupied and
claimed by them as described in.Article I (see Finding of Fact No. ?(b)).
Thus the United States on March 8, 1859, the effective date of the
Yakima Treaty, extinguished the Indian title of all the tribes, bands,
or groups within the area described.

11. .Following the ratification of the Yakima Treaty the United
States commenced its efforts to locate the Indians within the ceded
area upon the Yakima reservation. However, the government officials
had no great success with their efforts as many of the Indians remained
off the reservation.

There was no movement as a tribe by either the Chelan, Entiat,

‘Wenatchee or Columbia on to the Yakima Reservation although individual

I members of each of the four tribes did remove to that reservation. IMany

of the members of the four tribes continued to live uninterrupted on

A their ancestral lands. In fact Chief Kamaiakun refused to move onto the

'YakimaIReservation or accept any of the treaty benefits.

12. In about 1862 Moses became a leader of the Columbia Indians,
and in the succeeding years he grew in influence among the Indians of
the area.’ His followers included members of various bands or tribes

within the area ceded by the Yakima Treaty including the Chelan, Entiat,

and ‘rlenatchee as well as individual Indians from other neighboring tribes.

7 Ind. 01. Com. 79h 803

13. On April 18, 1879, Chief Hoses entered into an agreement by
which, in consideration of the establishment of a reservation in
‘Washington Territory, he and his people "relinquished to the United

tates all right, title, and interest, possessory or otherwise, in
and to any and all lands now or heretofore claimed by himself or people
in Washington Territory" (Pet. Ex. 3&9). By Executive Order, dated
August 9, 1879, a tract, known as the Columbia Reservation, was
"withdrawn from sale and set apart as a reservation for the permanent
use and occupancy of Chief Moses and his people, and such other friendly
Indians as may elect to settle thereon with his consent and that of

the Secretary of the Interior." (Pet. Ex. h8S, p. h50)

lh. However, Moses remained dissatisfied and refused to go on
the Columbia Reservation although some lhh Methow and Chelan Indians
were living there in 1882. To settle the claims of the Indians on the

Columbia reservation, Moses and Sar-sarpukin together with Ionasket

up and Lot were invited.to Washington, D. C. On July 7, 1883, a memo” Tandum of agreement was signed by Chiefs Moses and Sar-sarp-kin for

1 the Indians living on or assigned to the Columbia Reservation and by

Chief Tonasket, an Okanogan Chief living on the Colville Reservation,
and by the Secretary of the Interior and the Commissioner of Indian .
Affairs. The agreement'was ratified by the Act of Ju1y'h, 188k
(23 Stat. 76, 79~80).

15. The Columbia Reservation, excepting allotments selected by
the Indians, was restored to the public domain by Executive Order of’.
33Y'1, 1886. .Hoses_moved onto the Colville Reservation where he cone

tinned to reside until his death on March as, 1899.

I 1

 

7 Ind. Cl. Com. 79h 80b

16. The Commission finds that the so-called Moses Band was coma
prised of certain members and descendants of members of the bands or
tribes which were merged by the Ya ima Treat, into the Yakima Nation.
The members or descendants of members of the constituent bands of the
Yakima Nation who refused to move onto the Yakima Reservation, but
instead followed Moses, finally were located on the Colville Reservation
where they or their descendants presently reside aspa part of the
Confederated Tribes of the Colville Reservation.

17. A majority of the members or descendants of members of the
constituent bands or tribes of the Yakima Nation did remove to the
Yakima Reservation and are included in the organization known as the
Yakima Tribe of Indians of the Yakima Indian Reservation in the State
of'Hashington.

l8.i Neither the petitioner in Docket No. 161 nor the petitioners
in Docket No‘ 22h is the full successor to the Yakima Nation as it was
created and existed pursuant to the Yakima.Treaty. iBoth petitioning
organizations contain members or descendants of:members of the bands
or tribes comprising the Yakima Nation and are,therefore, entitled to

present claims for the taking of Rovce.Area 36h.”p;ih

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Wm’. M. Holt
Xssociate Eommissioner

