1,-__' '

BE‘.FORE THE I1x’DI.5.N CLAI}';S COB}-EISSI ON

B~ZIG1-'iA1‘ET 1*:’:"3i~.? roe: nznmzvs :22. rel. , )
JU'I..IUS n:.1:-zszrcara, oscsaa Ancsiousrrs, )
SI~’.‘3R.M.A}.’ SIrE'~.3E-I1l«"=.NDOR_E, MAMIE SMITH, )
ARVID E. 1~iI_LL-ER and  L. Roenzsou, )
THE‘. OLTEIDA. TRIBE or I1~:D:.:.2-Is or )
wiscozsssm and T 3 STOCKBRIDGE-}EUIwBEE )
cciv:~1UN:Tr, )

Petitioners, )
)
)
)
)

-vs, Docket No . 75

THE UNITE STATES OF AEERICA,
Defendant.
Decided: Novemfoer 1, 1957
Appearances :

Ely IE. Aaron,
Attorney for Plaintiffs

James J. Manogue, ‘
with whom was

Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perrjr 1'3. Norton,

Attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION 9: E COEIHISSI ON

 

W'tt, Chief.‘ Commissioner, delivered the opinion of.‘ the Commission.

Petitioners in this case are seekmg recovers’ of defendant for the

value of.‘ one-half interest in an estin-“ted 3,931,000 acres allegedly
acquired by their ancestors from the I-Eenorninee Indians under a treaty
’oetween the I-Eenominee and the Stockbridge Nation, the First Christie.

Party of the Oneida Nation, the Tuscarora hetion, the St. Regis Nation

and the Hunsee Na cion on Septewfoer 23, 1822.

1’
-a-""7
\..'\.I|

Petitioners call themselves the Emigrant N 1 York Indians and suit
‘was filed on their behalf by certain individual members of the Oneida
Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin and the Stockbridge~Hunsee Community who
allege themselves to be descendants of the New York Indians who emigrated to'wisconsin following the treaty of September 23, l822. Petitioners further state that there is no tribal organization recognized by
the Secretary of the Interior which is capable of representing them in
this action.’ However, counsel for petitioners moved the Commission for
the entry of an order joining the Oneida Tribe and the Stockbridge~Hunsee
Community'as additional petitioners. They state in their'motion that_
the individual.members of these two groups are also the members of the
alleged entity known as the Emigrant Hen York Indians. The attorneys‘
sntracts under nhich this action is brought by the firm of Aaron,.aaron,
Shimberg and Hess are sith the Oneida Tribe and t.e Stockbridge—Hunsee
Community and have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. This
Commission, by order of even date herewith, has granted the motion of petitioners and admitted the Oneida Tribe and the Stockbridge-Munsee Community
as additional parties plaintiff, and therefore is of the opinion that the
objections of defendant to the validity.of contracts of co“nsel for the
purpose of maintaining this a tion are not sufficient and petitioners will
be permitted to continue u.der said contracts.
The Treaty of September 23, l822 under which petitioners claim their
ancestors acquired one-half interest in the Henoninee lands reads in part

‘If

as follows:

AI-ETICIES I

The I-’;er.c:::onee nation of Indians, in consideration of the stipulations
herein made on the part of the Muhheconnuk or Stockbridge, and the first
Christian party of the Oneida, and the Tuscarora, and the St. Regis,
and I-iunsee nations, do hereby cede, release and quit claim to them, the
people of the said Stockbridge, Oneida, 'i‘uscarora, t. Regis, and
Munsee nations, forever, all the right, title, interest, and claim oi’
them, the Iéenomonee nation of Indians, to all the lands and islands
comprehended within and described by the following boundaries, viz:

Beginning at the foot of the rapids on Fox river, usuauy
called the Grand Iiahaling thence southeast (or on the lower
line of the lands last season ceded ‘:3.’ the Henomonee and
Winnebago na uiOI'lS of Indians, to the Sk Nations, t. Regis,
Stocézhridge, and Iéunsee nations ,) to or equidistant with the

la a".-rahhiah river, emptying into lake Michigan; thence on an
easterly course to and down said river to its ::_1outh; thence
116; 'Cu1'ac.'.l_;_, Uu. Lin: LUL‘Llr:1‘:: v: laIn.e1~Iichig:an, ‘LO é-:.1‘1C1 ‘cLCI'US2:3 the
mouth of Green Bay, so as to include all the islands of the
Grand Traverse; thence from the mouth of Green.Baj,', aforesaid,
northeesterly course, to a place on the nortlr.-rest shore of lake
Michigan, generally knotm and distinguished by the name of
I'3eych:;aator.3:-: by the Indians, and Bay de Iioque by the French;

° thence a westerly course, on the height of land separating the
waters running into lake Superior and those running into lake
Michigan, to the head of the Manor.-zones river; thence continuing
near 3.’ the sazne course, until it strikes the northeastern
boundary’ line of the lands ceded as aforesaid by the Ivienomonee
and ‘i-.’i.n.ne‘::sago nations to the SE Iiations, St. Regis, Stockbridge, and I-hunsee nations of Indian in eighteen hundred and

-went-y~o e ; thence southerly to the place oi‘ beginni- g.
ARTICLE II
The Stockbrddge, Oneida, Tuscarora, ate Regis, and Hunsee nations

aforesaid, do promise and agree to and with the said Mencmonees, that

hey, the said henononees, shall have the free pemission and nr:I.‘=r:..."‘ege
of occupying and residing upon the lands herein ceded, in con .on with

.x.~...,._. .24.. ~

»,;..,.. t-.e Stoc‘."oric;::e, Oneida, Tuscarora, St. Regis, and I-Euzzsee nations;

is

provided, nevertheless, that they, the Mencmonee nation, shall not in
any :-rzanner infringe upon any settlements or improvements whatever, which
may ‘Le in any manner made by the said Stookbridge, Oneida, Tuscarora,
St. Regis, or Iéunsee Nations.

ARTICLE III

 

The tockbridge, Oneida, Tuscarora, St. Regis, and Iiunsee nations,
do further promise and agree to and with the said Menoznonees, that,
according to their request, all the French and other inhabitants who
have just and lawful claims to, and are now settled and living upon,

any lands herein ceded, shall remain urmolested by them the said Stockbridges, Oneidas, Tuscaroras, t. Regis, or Iviunsees. It is also ex»
pressly understood by the tockbridge, Oneida, Tuscarora, t. Regis,
and I{u.nsee nations, that the Menomonees do not herein cede to them, the
St-oc}:.‘orid.ge, Oneida, Tuscarora, t. Regis, Munsee nations, any lands in
-he vicinity of Fort I-Toward, or near the mouth of Fox river, the title
of which may have been heretofore extinguished by the American Government.

ARTICLE‘. IV

 

In consideration of the cession herein made by the 1'-Eenc-nonees, the
tockhridge and }-Euneee nations of Indians aforesaid have, by the hands of

'‘''*'':c:.-2 7*

...,-...-- deputies, paid to the chiefs and head men of.‘ the 2-iencnonee nit-ion,
;.-.-.~..s da", the sum of one thousand dollars in goods. in full of.‘ all demands
in this treaty on their part, the receipt whereof‘ is hereby acknowledged

J‘ ‘(A A ‘ i an ‘ ' '1 4-» r- -5 --u‘ ' .-. 4-. -.3 _
by the 1-.-enomonee nation. -r-*.u.:1 the Oneida, iuscazora, &u’.'.‘. St. ..~€g'.1.:> n.-.3... ens

of Indians, do pmmise and agree to and with the I-‘Zeno-mcnee nation, to no-'»*

4-.1
' u&‘ '' ‘ ' .7 -3
to -fl‘-""‘....;, the lienoznonees, the sun of one thousand dollars in one year zr-on

3-1..
U

ecf, and also one thousand dollars in two years from the

he date her
date hereof--the whole to be paid in goods; the which respective sums

are to be a full and complete recompense and compensation for the lands
hereby ceded, released, and quit claimed to the S'cock‘oridge, Oneida,
'I“.1scarora, St. Regis, and Munsee nations.

In testmony whereof, the said deputies, and the said chiefs and
head men, have hereunto set their hands and seals, at the place and on
the day and year above written.

Witness, John Sergeant, jun., Agent on the part of the Goverzrnent
of the United States.

Under the description as set forth in the above treaty the Emigrant
New York Indians iwould have claimed a one—half interest in approx‘ .-ately
7i,h80,0% acres. However, "petitioners have formally disclafuned any
interest in the land included within the above description to n1Z‘ch the
United States did not recognize 2-Eencninee title under the Treaty of
Prairie du Chien of August 19, 1825' (7 Stat. 272). ‘cfhen the area of the
Menominee lands is thus reduced, it-is estimated by petitioners‘ expert
witness to contain.3,93l,OO0 acres and petitioners‘ claim is reduced
to a one-half interest in that anount of land. This estimate of acreage
is supposed to exclude all major water areas within the recognized area.
with regard to the Treaty of Prairie du Chien as constitntmg recog,rn.ition
of title to the areas claimed by the respective tribes who were parties
thereto, attention is invited to the decision of this Cornrrzission in 

consolidated case of toe and Iviissouria Tribe of Indians. v. United State s,
Docket No. ID.-.11 and the Iowa Tribe, etc., v. The United States, Docket No.

, wherein it $585 been held that said trea.'t:,* did constitute a recoer.iticn

\-‘

O--5

a .
‘J...--—

Fetiticners construe the terns of the 1822 treaty as entitling
their ancestors to a one-half interest in the land because of the

reservation by the Menominees of the right of use in common; of the

land. This appears to be the only practicable construction of the
grant. The Menominees ceded, released and quit claimed the area

*-"described to the Emigrant New York Indians and then in Article II they

reserved the right to use that area in common with the migrant New
York Indians. Since nothing was passed by the treaty but the right of
use and occupancy, any reservation of use and occupancy rights amounts
to reserving the same rights granted. In other words, the Menommees

reserved the same rights which they passed on and the only way possible

to construe such a grant and reservation is by calling it a tenancy in

’ -3‘- - -qua: an —¢Iu9o-IuaIuIIIIu.l\"I-CI Q 0- ‘ ‘ . .

‘\

Government, could not have been passed. This wouldgive the Emigrant
New York Indians a one-half interest in the I-icnominees’. lands to whatever extent they held such lands. As stated above the Emigrant New York
Indians have disolaiced any interest in lands to which title has not
been recognized in the Ivienominees.

Withc-ut going into too much backgmund, the facts involved in this
litigation are that certain of the Indians of ‘Ken York who were nerioers
of the Six Nations mcuested pe ..-.ission of the Government to remove to
the west and locate on new land. This memori.=_l included a request for
assurance by the C—cverr.rnent that whatever area the ‘New Yo r":< Indian

succeeded in acquiring would be recosnized.

mission to remove and agreed that the title of the H-1: Yer}: Indians to

1'4nanner as it was held by those from who‘. they purchased ......

given help in their quest for a new home by equipment and provisions
for the members of the party.
While the New York Indians were on their way to Wisconsin to select

land it was learned a Col. Botyer had taken a cession of part of the

area which they had wanted. At the insistence of Governor Lewis Cass oi‘

Michigan Territory, which included what was to "become E-Eisconsin, the

War Department disapproved the Bctwr cession. The New York Indians

again went to Green Bay and with the help of the United States officers
entered into an agreement with the I-iencm:°.nee and Winnebago Indians on

August 18, 1821 in which they acqnired *ppro::imately 80lL,OOO acres of

7 -31-ur-?_

4::-vr-11$:-7s1'rcs (‘HP ‘nu
1*" J 0'1: '- Is.

as follows :

Beginning at the foot of the Rapids on Fox. River, usually
called the Grand l~Zaccz=_'Lin; thence up the said River to the Rapids
at ‘afinnebagc Lake; and from the river extending back, in the
width on eash side, to the North West and to the South.E8.st, equidistant with the lands clamed by the said Iienomini and 1-Jinnebagc
nation of Indians.

The Iéenominees and wmnehagoes reserved the right to hunt and fish on

the land ceded. The corsideration was $2,000.00 in money and goods.

President Honroe appmved the treaty on Febraary 19, 1822 and stated that
the lands were to be held by the New York Indians in the same manner as th.

I~‘.»'.eno:ninees and 'i«Ei_rme‘oagoes had held the... .

90 q
I V50!

I-on ' \ gag: 7-, . -3-‘r-Q "34-.-. LL,
 I'~..-<.~...O...S Luis. l‘:."1 ..'.. .'..t\.. '

For Indians were not satisfied with enpurchase of 1821 and the Secretaxw oi-‘.‘_ ‘.-Ear approved their mquest to negotiate

for more land and gave assistance again. On Sectember 23, 1822 the deouties

of the New York Indians and the Menozninees entered into a treaty
underthe supervis ion of John Sergeant, Jr. The area ceded was the
one described above as being the area in which petitioners claim

their interest in this case. The Eéenomonees reserved the right of
occupancy and use in common with the New York Indians and the purchase
price was $3,000.00 in goods. The area of this cession was some

7 ,h80,000 acres, exclusive of major water areas. President. Monroe
approved the cession on March 13, 1823 with the following qualifications:

The foregoing zlnstruznent is approved, so far as it conveys
to the Stockbridge, Oneida, Tuscarora, St. Regis, and E“:-'unsee
tribes or nations of Indians., that portion of the country therein described which lies between Sturgeon Bay, Green Bay, Fox
River, that part of the former purchase made by said tribes or
nations of Indians of the I-Eenononee and I-Iinnebago Indians, on
the 8th of August, l82l, which lies south of Fox River, and a
line o.ra1,~_*n fmn the oouxirr.-:estern e:ctre:n.itj.* of said purchase to
the head of Sturgeon Bay, and no further; that-quantity being
deemed sufficient for use of the first before-mentioned tribes
and nations of Indians. * 5% ‘I-1' 4?

This approval covered about l,SST,OOO' acres. See petitioners‘ Ebchibit 11:25
When the New York Indians protested this partial approval the decretary of War assured that that it in no way invalidated their title to all
of the land acquired from the I-Eenominees, including that to which the Government had not given its special sanction. The Secretary also offered two
million acres of land in exchange for that which the New York Indians already
had, but they did not accept the off er.
On January 8, l82S.the Brotherton Indians entered into a treaty with
the Stockbridge, St. Regis, First Christian Party of the Oneida Nation,
Tuscarora and Iflunsee Tribes under which they paid a consideration and

acquired an interest in the land purchased fr-on the I-feno:-;i.na-es,

Ch
l .I
‘~--‘.Cn August 19, l875 the Treaty of Prairie du Chien between the United

States and the Sioux and Chippewa, Sac "dd Fox, h-noninee, Ioway, Sioux,
Winnebago, and a portion of the Ottawa, Chippewa and Potawattomie was
entered into. This treaty was for the purpose of establishing boundaries
between the signatory tribes. The Menominee area could not be desori--d
defi.itey, but onlr generally, because the'Eenominees were not sufficiently
sure of their boundaries and because of “some uncertainty existing in consequence of the cession made by ttst tribe upon Fox River and Green Bay,
to the New York Indians.“

On August ll. l827 the Treaty of Butte des Morts (7 Stat. 303 was

held between the United States and the Chippewa, Menominee and Winnebago

tribes for the purpose of settling the boundary question left unsettled

""“"" ‘LA fT“"I"II"\"\‘1v (up 13¢:-9-5:-an-"|.{'~ A91 (“H-3. an-an O"\V'\F: '9':-s-n $1»-r'\ "'\‘*"5Q"'\f"b¢""'f"'\ 1"-‘P  V‘\v"'- ""’d"‘s
E-1

‘''’J ‘’*‘‘'I‘' —"- “-""'II-' VJ upon an .5 —-.1_... .—u.i' an-5 ‘Va-.—hp.pg’ h-.5.-nun. up 3‘. @¢..pq..r r in-nu :9 -r Iluv-I-r ‘I---1-:-u-In-—--u-5° nu-A-u
'5

oessions already made to the United States. The New York Iniians were not

a party to this treaty although the Brot ertons had permission to send a
delegation and the Munsees were present, according to the Jourra . The
claims of the New York Indians were placed before the Commissioners, however.

I 0 0'0

The treaty set the boundaries be ween the Chippewas, henominees.and.einnebagoes. t also mentioned the existence of difficulties between the heno.inee

and Hinnehago tribes and the Raw York Indians and the former tribes agree
let the President of the United States settle the question of boundaries
with the New York Indians. The third article of the treaty was a oession
of land by the Henoninees to the United States in the vicinity of Green

5 3; There was a proviso added to the effect that if the lines of the

In

cession interfered with the just oia‘es of the Raw York Indians, then

6 0 .

.‘aI- . ___'_'_‘ I 1 «In ‘I an . I ca 1
the President snouid.oe tree to cna.ge the cession boundaries any any

4,-R-_ . 1 hi 7 1
on area of land remained the same. The new iork

Indians protested the action under the Treaty of Butte des Morts,al—

F-‘
(D
01
E:
(M
r*'
:3.

at the cession to the United States thereunder was a part of
the land which the Menominees had ceded to them in I822. The said treaty,
however, was ratified by the Senate on February 19, l829 with the proviso
that "The said treaty shall not impair or affect any.right or claim which
the New York Indians, or any of them, have to the lands, or any of the
lands, mentioned in said treaty.“

In the meantime the New York Indians had requested of the Senate

that commissioners be appointed to settle the boundary question. Cn

iJune 9, 1530, pursuant to Article 2 of the Treaty of Butte des Morts,

President Jackson appointed commissioners to investigate the alleged

new LOTK

V

controversy between the Eenominee and Rinnebago tribes and the

aton instructed the commissioners to select

'F'\

Indians. Secretary of'War

a suitable area of land for the New York Indians and establish its boundaries. Ee further stated that the President wanted any question as to

Q ‘Q

the validity of the Treaties of 1821 and l822 waived. He further instructed the commissioners that the New York Indians were an agricultural

and

people consequently needed a smaller area of Ian than the hencminees

einnebagoes who were still in the hunter state.
July and August of 1830 the commissioners met in council

-taeen them.

after extensive hearings the commissioners established boundaries for

about 300,000 acreas of land for the Raw Kerk Indians. at the conclusion

of the Council on September l, lS3O the Commissioners, certain Henoninee

Q

'-'1‘. . - -_ .3. _.'- .-....L‘ ,'1 "-' 4.‘. _‘ .6“:
C349; and interested hhlte settlers assanoien in 933 cuarters C; col.

in

C‘4--... ....,_.....~,..
a...oi..r€'..‘.... .231...Dn, he Indian Agent at Green Bay. It was decided, without the

--..«z' In “lg” -"L:|::.i‘ '

presence of the New York Indians, that tamhaugh should take a delegation

of Henoninees to Eashington for further negotiations. when the delegation arrived in Washington, Secretary of War Eaton and Col. Stambaugh

were directed by President Jackson “to enter into some amicable arrangement with the Menominee Tribe of Indians now at the City of Washington

for a settlement of their dispute with the New York Indians, and to ohtain
from.them such cession of country as may appear just and reasonable and

also such portion of their country as they may be disposed to cede to

the United States.“

t of these negotiations, and over the protest of the New York

Indians, came the so-called Stambaugh Treaty of February 8, l83l (7 Stat.

342) betteen the Hencminees and the United States. Under this treaty the

?’.Q'!"'I.f"\U"|"I:.'v't.QQ gm‘-_-3:-3.a¢-1 on (19-13": rs? C/W1". (\!'\f‘t -u-u.-—a-..- -l-.-. 4-\----n 77--'---34----3 Q-5-g_-4---— 9-— 4-'--» 73-’'| ‘ .......... ‘-.... -5... 1...... us.’ go...-.p \u'¢.¢..- Bursa I-is-M-b HIM-II-J‘ ub\J& hrs-4&9 «Oh: ‘V

066"-I---—a---r-.‘ v..'.'q-n-q.—4. "nun.-'1--par I-I-Inc. ‘Vi-0

\

York Indians. The Government paid $20,000 for the land. The terms of the

Treaty specified that the land should be for all Hew York Indians'who

‘wished to remove to and settle thereon within three years, at the end of

that period the President was empowered to apportion the land among the

actual occupants at the rate of 100 acres for each settler, with:the

remainder to revert to the United States. The Kenom°nees also ceded

9

all of their land on the southeast side of Einnebago Lake, Fox River

and Green Bay. The area of this cession was estimated at 2,500,000

acres in the Treaty and it covered the greater portion of the area anHew Lcrk Indians by President Monroe in lE23. The Treaty

proved for th

‘T ‘C

q. . pa ‘ an : ‘ .\‘4-out .5 an A --u.-- - . -...
also pro;idao that if the nca £o-k lniians reidsed to accept the provisions

made for then the rresident‘Vct.o direct their immediate removal from

S 618

the Menominee country. The President was given the right to ext'nguisz
the title of the Henominees to the remainder of their country for additional annuities in an amount to be set by the PresidentOn February 17, 1831, the Treaty was amended to eliminate the requireient of removal in three years and make it discretionay with the President
and to make the apportionment of the land on a just and equitable b38159
instead of 100 acres per individual. Another amendment said that the balance of the land should be the property of the United States should the
New York Indians refuse or neglect to remove to it. It was also provided
that the removal of those New York Indians who may not have settled on the

Wisconsin land at the end of three years should be discretionary with the

President.

On February 23, 1331 the Treaty was referred to the Senate Committee

on Indian Affairs. Secretary of War Eaton had written a letter to President.
Jackson in which he stated that the treaties of 1821 and 1822 were invalid
because not ratified by'the Senate under the 12th Section of the Trade and

Intercourse Act of 1802 and because .e deemed the consideration paid by the

New York Indians to have been inadequate. Based upon that reasoning he

J-4-..&.

stated that in negotiating this Treaty; 9It did not occur to me as
proper to present the demand of the New York Indians as a matter resting
upon right and justice." This letter accompanied the Treaty to the Senate
Committee. The Senate adjourned without acting on the Treaty.

‘when Congress reccn*ened the next fall a delegation of Ken York
Indians went_to Eashington to protest the ratification of the Treaty.

I T
S '\ Lewis Cass rte been aooointed Secretary of aar and Governor Porter had

 aitrf-_ "'9'

taken Cass‘ place as Governor of Kichigan. Cass appointed Porter to
negotiate with the delegates of the New York Indians and extensive meetings were held but without result because the New York Indians would not

accept the 500,000 acres which they had been granted in the Treaty. They

wanted to exchange 200,000 on the south side and this was refused on the

grounds that the land belonged to the Eenominees. On June 25, 1832 th

Senate ratified the Stambaugh Treaty with certain amendments which granted
three townships to the Stockbridge, Munsee and Brotherton Indians on the

east side of lake Winnebago. The Senate also altered the boundaries of

the 500,000 acre tract granted to the Six Iations and St. Regis Tribe to
conform.to their demands.

Governor Porter was directed to obtain the consent of the Henominees

\
4

to these changes or to the closest practicable arrenvement nossible and,

also to obtain the consent of the Rev York Indians to any arrangement

made with the Menominees. This resulted in a supplementary Treaty on

October 27, 1832 between the Eenoninees and the United States. After_
much persuasion Governor Porter fine Ty obtained the consent of th
parties.

The result of the Stamhaugh Treaty of February 8, 1831, its amendment of February 17, 1331 (ratified June 25, 1832), ard the supplementary
Treaty of Cotoher 27, 1832 was to provide a total of 569,120 acres of
land for the E w York Indians; of which b6,C80 acres, or two townships,

- I‘ ,...,.. I’ 4.1, ""' ‘ ' ‘,_, 1.‘ H-1 _-_1 4': '.{
here lor the use 01 the DtOCkD?lC5€ and nunsee irlnes, 2,,0e3 acres, or

one township, were for the Brother.on Indians, and 530,000 acres were

for the remainder of the New York Indians.

S 620

On January 15, 1838 the Treaty of Buffalo Creek ? Stat. 550) between the New York Indians and the United States was concluded. Under

this Treaty the New York Indians who remained in the State of New York

relinouished their claims to the land in Wisconsin, except for a tract

&

gs

upon which the Emigrant New York Indians were then residing. In return
for their relinquishment the United States granted all the New York
Indians 1,824,000 acres in what is now the State of Kansas. The New York

Indians since have been paid for the Kansas lamdunder a.3pecial jurisdictional act. See New York Indians v. United States, 1 O U.3. l #2 L.
9

 

Ed. 927.
Based upon the foregoing essential facts the Emigrant New York Indians

contend that defendant is liable to them under Sections 2(1), 2(2), 2(4)
and 2(5) of the Indians Claims Commission act {so Stat. ioa9).~ Defendant.
in its answer presents five defenses. The first challenges the jurisdiction of the Commission, the second is that of accord and satisfaction, the
third is that of release, the fourth is a general denial and the fifth is
hat of offsets.

Defendant, in its attack on the jurisdiction of this Commission over
the subject matter of the claim, alleges this to be a dispute between
Indian Tribes and not between a tribe or group of Indians and the United
States. Based upon this contentionmdefendant says that the Indian Claim
Commission Act does not confer such a jurisdiction upon the Commission.

were this in truth a dispute betveen two Indian tribes, then this
question of jurisdiction would be a serious one. H never, this Commission does not interpret the present case as one between tribes, but it

‘+e+=...;»..e«~

is rather a case by a group of Indians against the United States lor
alleged wrongs committed against it by the United States, as the petition alleges. The fact of negotiations between tribes as the source of
the land, for which claim.is here made, cannot have an effect upon the
jurisdiction of this Commission over parties and subject matter, falling
within its statutory sphere, as alleged. In other words the jurisdiction
of this Commission over the parties and subject matter involved cannot

be defeated by the fact that plaintiffs‘ title, if any, was derived from
another group of Indians. The crux of the case lies in the question as to
the effect of the actions or lack thereof by defendant on the rights of
plaintiffs. The dispute between plaintiffs‘ ancestors and the Menominee
Indians becomes only a side issue to the basiccquestion of whether or not

defendant has acted prone ly'in its course of dealings'eith plaintiffs before and during the negotiations of the series of treaties involved herein,
or whether those actions were such as to give rise to a liability on the
part of defendant as alleged. t nust be borne in mind that whatever
rights the plaintiffs’ ancestors had were already in existence at the,
time the dispute be ween the Indians arose. Those rights grow out

of the Treaty’%f 1822 and, as stated before, the question before us

is the role played by defendant in its connection with the transactions
znarratedd The moment defendant became interested in the settlement of‘

the difficulty'betaeen.the Indians, itzmust account for its actions. In

accounting for those actions the defendant‘brings itself an‘ plaintiffs

squarely'within the jurisdiction of this Commission as set forth by Congress

The second point in the defense of lack of jurisdiction deal with
the "Green Bay Settlement” and the consent given by the Menominees and

Winnebagoes in the Treaty of Butte des hcrts to the President to establisth boundaries between them and the Rew York Indians. Defendant contends that the “Green Bay Settlement“ resulted in settling the di pute
‘whether it be called an arbitration under the Treaty of Butte des Morts
or a modification by and between the tribes themselves and that this
Commission has no jurisdiction over settled claims. This contention involves the actions of defendant throughout its dealings with these Indians.
In other words, if the settlement was just and equitable, then the plaintiffs have no case, but on the other hand if it was not a just and equitable settlement, or if it was no settlement at all, then arises the question as to whether or not the defendant should be held liable.‘
as to the section of the Indian Claims Commission act under which that
liability might accrue has been somewhat confused by plaintiffs in their '
reply brief. They have brought suit Lmder Sections 2(1), 2(2), 2(a)

and 2(5) but in the reply brief they appear to rely primarily on Section

2(5).

The first proposition to bear in mind in regard to this contention cf defendant is that the facts in this case show'plainly that
the §ew fork Indians who went to wisconsin did so with the f‘ approval

and assistance of defendant. The dealings had between the Indians were

superuised by officers of defendant and these officers wi nessed the

treaties. The defendant even canceled a purchase made by Col. Bowyer in

the area so that the Eew York Indians could nerotiate for the land. when

The question .

~¢_:'_. ' . '..'.' :'F
I.§._.\fi‘g-'

0

President hoaroe appr ved only a part of the area purchased under the
1822 treaty with the Menominees, the New York Indians protested an the
Secretary of War assured them that the approval of only a part of the
area had no effect on t eir title and that the defendant acquiesced in
the arrangement with the Menominee in its entirety. In every way the
Secretary reassured the New York Indians as to their richts under the
Treaty of 1822 with the Menominee. So far as the Treaty of 1822 is concerned it apeaks for itself. It shows plainly'what was agreed to between
the Menominees and the New York Indians. The facts all show'that the New
York Indians acted ingpod faith and with the blessing of defendant. This
conclusion is inescapable and carries with it the obvious connotation of

be faith on the part of defendant in its later actions which culminated in
the Stambaugh Treaty Supplement of October 27, lo;2. .

After the winter of 1822 and 1823 there began to develop bad feeling
between the Henominees and the Eea'Ycrk Indians over the question of what .
the Treaty of l822 had conveyed. During this period the defendant decided
to have various tribes in Wisconsin set their boundaries and entered into
treatices for that purpose. One of these was the Treacy of Prairie du Chien
of august 19, l825 (7 Stat. 272) with different tribes in the area of the
ikencminee. The boundaries of the Kenominee were set by this treaty in
Hencminees had made a cession to

general and it was recognized that ththe New York Indians. In 1827 defendant decided to hold another treaty‘

slbudunu \-D
Q

to finish establishing the boundaries left inccrnlete by the Prairie du
Chien Treaty and to take a cession cf_whatever land it could get. Cn

éugust 27, 1827 the Treaty of Butte des Ecrts (7 Stat. 303) was conclude

with the Chippewa, Menominee and‘Rinnebago tribes. The New York Indians,
although having their side of the story presented to the Commissioners,
were not parties to the treaty. This treaty established the boundaries

between the Indian parties thereto and noted the difficulties existing

‘between the Henominees, winnebagoes and New York Indians with regard to

boundaries. The Menominees and Winnebagoes agreed with defendant in the
treaty to accept the decision of the President eith regard to the boundary
question between them and the New York Indians. Defendant also took a

cession from the Menominees and provided that the President could change

the boundaries of the cession if it interfered with the just claims of

the New York Indians, just so the land area remained constant.

In 1830 Commissioners Root, MoFall and Mason were appointed under

n .‘GET

‘VT-¢

 u1'\';"+-fu. r3:-u-_~ ‘if:-sdu-:54-1-— fps-gp-5454--my

 -tvunan-‘--un-saiu-L-.I’r an-U-I-F! :'1u-no-sq-— C'.‘.-.4-.a.-.4-.-Les-.-we 5-up
-!-.--: purchasing» -9-‘. .-uh... var —q. \---up.’ 6 \l4u.

d-och-.—..¢.. 19.1.! up. \A.\.a qrgnnhuraat-I an... Ivan-A lunfuurinniqu -n win‘ .1 \

I

Eaton were plain1y'detrinental to the interests of the New York Indian .
Their “settlement” of the dispute consisted of granting the New York
Indians some 300,000 acres. This was less than they had acquired under
the 1821 treaty with the'l*Eenorrdnees and '&u‘innebagces. ‘while the Commissioners had instructions to ignore the question of the validity of the
1821 and 1822 treaties, they nevertheless concluded in a majority report
that the treaties were valid.

Immediately following the decision of the Commissioners it was decided to take a delegation, excludilg the.Rew York Indians, to rasnington.

This was done and the Stambaugh ireatv of February 8, 1831 ‘as entered

4' P A 4- .-. -1 UN -1" .’‘'a f'\!'\ I‘ J. X‘,-' .. ..'.'
lnuo. De_en.ant took a cesslon oi 2,5u0,uuO acres &rCm'Lh nenomlnees
and stated in the treaty that un_ess the Key York Indians accented the

FD G...‘ A 4- in . ‘at Q «:5. ‘av .' Jr ‘I-0 I. ~ ‘
/u .0cd acres set aside lor than under the treete they would be removed

5 ‘ '.
 «L5. 55*‘
. ‘itfrom the Xencminee count 3. without goin
are set forth completel" in the findings made herewith and in less detail
at the beginning of this opinion, it seems apparent that the ultimate ac»
ceptance by the Emigrant New York Indians of the final treaty as ratified
by the Senate on June 25, .832 and the Supplementary Treat; of October, 1232
was under duress, and that action of defendant through its officials did
not comport with the standards of fair and honorable dealings required of

1"!
i

it as a result of its previous actions toward the emigrant New York Indians.
It is the opinion of the Commission that defendant was under a duty to the
Emigrant New York Indians to recognize the terms of the Treaty of 1822 with
the Menominee Indians after it had promised to do so in the beginning and
that having failed to do so.by arbitrarily depriving them of their one-half

' .--J--.—- «-4-  I‘--a-I--- ‘'-'.-'--4'* ‘''-1'‘‘''''' F.  t"V‘\!"\ an-u-your-h JR: UHHIDI1 Lhww . up ‘. s-I ‘*4-...  
l1J.L;'~':."l"e::M.o ....n C.-1‘:..J£..a’1'.~O.4’..:‘..:.::<:.‘tt.7..'....)' _:|,7_}..:.._.uvv 3.2.4. G-.3 La.-. cauu. L13 eJ\.Cl..1 H53 Ivl‘ ,n..z,3,..a..a'-..O

8

acres, 500,000 acres of which belonged outrig‘t to all the New York Indians,

and not to the petitioners alone, must now be held accountable for these

actions.
The third point in the defense_oonsists of the allegation that petitioners lack the capacity to “aintain this suit. This Commission feels
that the facts do not warra.t that conclusion. The original purpose of
the purchase was to provide homes for those Haw York Indians who wished
to participate in the purchase and remove to Eisconsin. The group presently bringing this action are the descendants of those haw York Indians
who paid the purchase price and emigrated to Wisconsin.

The Brcthertons

are a part.of this group because they entered into a separate treaty with

the groups of hen York Indians who had already removed to disconsin “nd

562

who had paid the requested price for tie lands. The Brotherton Treaty
of l825 gave the Brothertcns a share in the land when they paid their
proportionate part of the consideration. What we have here is a group
of plaintiffs who became an identifiable group by virtue of acquiring

a common claim in the Green Bay lands under t.e arrangement approved by
defendant. Unquestionably their group unity rests upon an agreement
with defendant. It would seem that the deliberate act of bringing theme
selves together as a distinct group by their own actions back in the
l820‘s would make them as eligible to be classed as an identifiable group
as some of the groups where it is necessary to depend upon ethnological
facts which had been dimmed by the passage of years. ‘We think it well

within the intent of the Act to admit these plaintiffs into court as an

identifiable group having a common claim.

   

See Thompson V. United States,

l22 C. Cls. 3&8.

Tlnsofar as the matter of res iudicata ty'virtue of the case of t.e

 

New York Indians v; United States (30 C. Cls. hlh, l7O U.S. 1) is concerned,

 

it does not appear to have any bearing upon this claim.or the parties
asserting it in this litigation. That case arose from the1Treaty of

Buffalo Creek of 1838. The Treaties of 1521 and 1822 were involved only

as facts and not otherwise. The l838 Treaty was an entirely different

transaction involving all the New York Indians and not petitioners only,
and their claim to Kansas-land gotten in exchange for the 569,120 acres

granted them.when d-iendant deprived the Emigrant New York Indians of

I 5

their lands by the Stambaugh Treaty. admittedly the ancestors of petitioning Indians were involved in this litigation, as a part of all the

1'-‘ ' ’ ‘ . ‘ P‘ 4-»... an ab. 45 --sa- up. an . ' '
hen lork indians, and they should ha.e a:n, because the» had an wnzereqt

r’

O

in the land in disouce. It appcars to this Commission that the plaintiffs
herein are the descendants of those New York Indians who had interest
in the land acquired under the Treaty hf 1822 taken from them under thtambaugh Treaty of 1832. The fact that they, along with others, were

does not wipe out the unlawful taking by defendant under the 1832 treaty.
The Court of Claims held only that the nine New York Tribes were involved in
the Treaty of Buffalo Creek, not that they were involved in the Treaties of
1821 and 1822. That was the finding upheld by the Supreme Court in the

case of New York In ians v. United States, 170 U.S. 1

 

Defendant‘s contention in the second part of point three to the

\

effect that the ird‘vi " l nerhers ct +he Oneida and Stookbridse-”““s e

t 3.. -n..'uIu-an-ui -QQA-$44-I

groups cannot file the petition herein appears to have been disposed of
by the admission of those groups as parties plaintiff. Defendant f'rther
contends that there are duplicate claims filed upon some of the land involved in this case. Should that be true those claims will be disposed of
at the proper time.

The contract with the attorneys under which this claim is brought

so;

was entered into with the Oneida Tribe of wisconsin and the tockbridgeMunsee Community and has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

So far as is known these two orga-ized groups contain all of the descendants

of those new York lndians who had a claim to the land purchased from the

on ‘*5

Menominee Indians, and constitute the emigrant New York Indians, who have

no tribal organization which is recornised by the Secretary of the

D

interior. it is stated by petitioners in their original brief and in

their motion recently filed that the members of the Oneida Tribe and the

\
o

no

Stockhridge-Hunsee Commu.ity are the same individuals as the Emigrant
New York Indians. This being the case then it appears that the function
of having the Secretary of the Interior approve the contract of the at—
torneys has been performed. No useful purpose would be served by having
another contract with the same people and the interest of the Indians
would be no better served. The primary purpose of having the attorney
contracts approved was not to establish jurisdiction in this Commission
but to safeguard the interest of the Indians. we feel that the purpose
has been accomplished by the approral of the contract with the Oneida Tribe
and the Stockbridge-Nunsee Community, since they are the sa.e people as
the Emigrant New York Indians.

;Under Point IV defendant maintains that the New York Indians had

3 00

only a licezxse or "float." and so acc_;_u.E.r=:<3. no cuisspeuaable .1.nLe‘.c':.-:.-at in 1.11";
Green Bay lands. This is not compatible with the permission and ass" ances given them by defendant when they purchased the land; nor with language

of the cession treaty; They were‘tcld that their title would be held in
the same regard as that of their~grantors. A description of the area purchased was furnished.defendant inla copy of the treaty sent to the War

Department.

The fact that the Menominee title was not recognized until 1825 and
the purchase was made by the New York Indians in 1822 cannot affect the
title acquired by the New York Indians as against both theIMenori.ees and
defendant. It has not been questioned that the title recognized ‘as the
same g neral area which the New Iork Indians had purchased in IEZZ. and
petitioners limit their claim to the area which was recognized in the

Q

-''~ -- 4-.‘ .3 ‘ "an '  . .159 It 2 . --A .
Treaty of Prairie cu Cnien in lcij an the Treat; of autte des.£prts in

-A- . "' ‘T ' .. ‘ ' Iron: 1-» -0‘ ‘---r -II.I- .5-.-ta-nu‘--. an: .2
Ltd? unen the nenoninee boundaries wc?= iinailg escaoilsned. t is a fair

f\)
C’)

assumption that the Menominees had Indian title in 1822 to a certain area
of land in Eisconsin, or the defendant would not have recognized their
title in the Prairie du Chien Treaty in 1825. Upon the assurance of
defendant that it would recognize the title of he Emigrant New York
Indians as being the same as that held by their grantors, the Emigrant
New York Indians acquired one-half interest in the Indian title had by the
Menominees. When defendant refused to honor its promises to the Emigrant
New York Indians, while at the same ti e it recognized the title of the
Menominee, it was less than fair to petitioners‘ ancestors. The recognition by defendant of title in the Henominees renders it unnecessary for
the petitioners to prove aboriginal title, because under the facts the
Emigrant §ew'York Indians acquired the recognized title of the Menominees
by their purchase undcr the Treaty of S-pt nbcr 23, 1822. Under: this particular situation we held that the recognition of title in the Nenominees in?
1825 as evidence that they held aboriginal title at the tine of the Treaty
of September 23, 1822 and that as a result of that treaty a one-half interest
in the aboriginal area of t e Henominees passed to the Emigrant New York
Indians and that defendant should have honored its promises to acknowledge_
that title in them.

The defendant also claims that the prior legislative action taken on
this c1aim.constitutes a bar to the recovery sought herein. Defendant
presumably refers to the consideration received by the Stockbridge-Hunsee

911 0 ‘I 1 u 0 1 _ _ F. A 0 :
L?lb€ and the Brotherton Tribe under the 1832 Treaty. That considerati

O
.5

‘went for improvements which the respeotiveigroups had placed on.the;r laid.

Also in the Treaty of Buffalo Creek in 1838 the Cnei as in Eisconsin war

L for the expense of removal to Nisconsin.

reimbursed $35,500 an§ the Cneidas in New York were reimbursed $5,000
The Stockhridge and Munsee
Tribes got $10,000 in l€h8 and 1839 and an additional $20,000 which the?

were supposed to get was relinquished at a later dots. The St. Regis

0 Tribe was also reimbursed for their expensesin connection with the Green

Bay purchases. There was also a release given by the Stockbridge and

Munsees for the $5,000 paid them in 1849.

The payments given the Stockbridges, Munsees and Brothertons were
for their improvements and not for their interest in the land. The
$5,000 paid for the release by the Stockbridges and Hunsees is unconscionable on its face and should be disregarded except as a possible

setoff against any recovery. See Creek Nation v. United States, 2

 

Ind. 01. Conn. 98. ll}-llh (1952); HcCaulev v. United States, 1 inc. Cl.

 

Comm. 608, 6l7, 638e6h3 (1951). The reimbursements made for expenses
were an.attempt to make the Indians whole again but they cannot make up
for the loss of their interest in the Green Bay land.

The Government also raises the question of accord and satisfaction.

c alleges t t the Green Bay Settlement was a matter in controversy

within the meaning of U.S. Code, Title 28, Section 285 (2517) an‘ 286

(2519) and that the payment of the judgment entered by the Court of Claims

on the mandate of the Supreme Court (170 U.S. l) constituted an accord

and satisfaction at Common Law and a statutory bar to the present claim.

The facts upon which defendant relies to establish accord and satisfaction are not sufficient. An accord and satisfaction presupposes the

voluntary action of hothjparties on entering into the arrangement in

I..r§_,hJ"good faith. The Emigrant New York Indians accepted the 569,120 acres

under the Tre ty of l832 because they had no choice in the matter.

The later litigation in Court of Claims No. 1786-1 (30 3. Cls. 413) did
nothing to change the situation. The New York Indians had made the
best of the situation as they were faced with it when they accepted the
land in Kansas in exchange for the Wisconsin land. It was the Kansas
land for which the judgment was ordered by the Supreme Court in reviewing
the Court of Claims decision in No. 17861. The question of res judicata
has already been disposed of and will not be discussed further.

I’

The last point raised by defendant is that there has been no showing
by petitioners that there was a lack of fair and honorable dealings on
the part of defendant in its treatment of the Emigrant New York Indians.
Based upon the findings of fact it is the opinion of this Commission
that the petitioners have established that the actions of defendant
throughout its course of dealing with the ancestors of petitioners were
less than fair and honorable as demanded by the previous actions of
defendant, as set out, which led to the purchase of 1822 by the Emigrant
New York Indians.

It was also a contention of defen‘ant during the trial of this case
that the boundary of the southern line of the l€Z2 purchase from.the
Kenominees was the Hanitowoc River and not the Hilwaukee River. Based
upon the evidence in the record, as set forth in the findings, it seems
far more likely that the hilwaulee hirer is, in fact, the
River and that the southern boundary of the Menominee lands extended to

Q

what is now th *ilwaukee River. This being so, it is obvious that tne

"an.reference to the southern boundary of the purchase of 1822 in article

I--I
(.4.

of the Tree y between the Kenominees and the Emierant New York

ta;

5 5
1".".I‘..'.1.E3.I'lS 8.8

3-4

the hanawahkiah River was, in fact, to the present Miiwaukee
River.

Petitioners assert that their ancestors had one-half interest in
the area described in the 1822 treaty. However, they disclaim anything

outside of the area u1tinate1y'reoognized as being Menominee lands. In

the 1822 purchase there was estimated to be ?,&80,000 acres as originally‘
described in the treat". when the area purchased was reduced to that part
of said area which lay within the boundaries recognized, it was then esti“ated by petitioners‘ expert to contain 3,931,600 acres. That'wou1d mean

r+

hat peititioners claim a one—ha1f interest in a total estimated area of

Md

.93l.0O0 acres.

T.is land we" d a‘‘ b

the boundaries of the
Kenoninees as recognized in the Prairie du Chien and Butte des Morts

treaties.

‘When the petitioners waived any question as to the northern boundary’

of the area they removed the contention concerning that boundary. The

difference over the southern boundary has been decided in favor of petitioners on the evidence and it will be considered as being thejhilwaukee

River. This would make the grant under the 1822 treaty extend to the

southeast to Lake Kichigan as depicted on petitioners Exhibit Bo. 1&2

instead of stopping at Einnebago Lake as defendant alleges and as shown

ary of the area recognized as being Eenominee land. (See the«description

in t.e Treaties of 1821 and 1822, petitioners‘ Exhibit No. 142

T_.““T‘1..'

'1" . .5‘ 3-! ‘''‘''‘'°_-_ .
he aiiis nae (de-endant s Hvwwbit “§")

1-. Q4!-P

J‘ ", 4,,‘ -I-._s .1: -1‘-_ ‘'
deiendanc s ninio- ’?u")

H101-W

contrary to the evidence in the record when it shows the line of th

1822 cession as being the Nanitowoc River instead of the Milwaukee

‘lira

-inn-un-uh &\u-I

relied on by defendant in making its ExBy 'ay of summation, it is the opinion of this Commission that the
ancestors of petitioners who complied with the requirements of payment
and removal to Wisconsin acquired a compensable interest in the lands

purchased in 1822 from the Menominee Indians. That interest only can

In

be described as a joint tenancy for the reason heretofore stated.
the face of'the action taken by defendant when the New York Indians requested permission to purchase the land and remove and requested assurances

4-4.:..v

of title, cannot be denied that the later actions of defendant were

Hi‘- _ '1'\ 0 8 ‘:1 _ ‘V? i

..x- .a.x.... ....-.L.l-'1...... .. , -__ . 
Inc: um.:.5.1. ass» Licwx J..Ll.L r.

M Qjw M  - .
9549 use u 9.5%; Do

---"-rt-I ‘I-'09-I--6 -—n¢\-M-av‘. not-IE9 -i—'-qpan-.1. \u5¢u--Iv Mod4‘...-.... 4.3.... ...-......
J-it

Indians reserved, and were entitled to, un er the law as set out in the
Indian Claims Commission Act (60 Stat. lOh9), a better protection of their
interests than was given them by defendant after its original assurances.
When defendant determined that it was necessary to enter the dispute over what was granted in the two treaties involved, it was its duty
to foll w its prior commitments to the New York Indians. Defendant used
its superior position to acquire for itself.at the expense of the Enigrant
New York Indians, and without compensation to them, the very lands which
it had assured them it would recognize as belonging to them.under whatever

\

title it was held sy neir grantors. Petitioners‘ ancestors were not en-I

lands because they received 500,000 acres for the

L’- ‘f- _ ‘ .1 ‘T"‘1:'~ 1 ‘in 0 5 ‘I. ' on an o -.
tne new fora Indians wno wished to occun it, plus three townships

‘I!

U

or 69,120 acres to the StocVhridge and Hunsee and the Erothertons.

an-I-J4-. -1This, however, differed from the original understanding wherein the

parties who paid and removed to Wisconsin were the only ones en4oh

titled to an interest in the lands. The same situation as to
taking would prevail with regard to the cession taken by defendant
under the Treaty of Butte des Morts which was ratified on February 19,

1829, except for the express provisions placed therein by the Senate

to the effect that the treaty should not impair any right which the

New York Indians might have in any of the lands mentioned in the treaty.
t seems evident that the actual deprivation of their interest in the
1822 lands took place entirely under the Stamhaugh Treaty upon its

ratification by the Senate on June 25, 1832.

—I-II

The area or land in which petitioners‘ ansestors had acquired
their interest under the 1822 treaty with the henominees was much larger
than the area which petitioners claim on the basis of recognition of

title in the Menominee in 1825. The area to which they c1aim.their onehalf interest in this case is described as follow :

Beginning at the foot of the rapids on Fox river, usually
called the Grand Kakalin (Kauhauna) and running southeasterly along the lower line (northerly) of the purchase
made in 1821 by the §ew'York udians from the Menominee
and Winneba o Indian , to a point thereon north of the town
of Waukeca %3auhaka} on the hilwauhee river, thence south
to said Milwaukee river at said town of waukeca (Wauhaka)
and continuing down said iver to where it empties into
Lake Michigan; thence northerly along the shore of Lake

Hichigan to and across the mouth of Green Bay so as to include the islands therein as shown on Royce cessicn 16 ,

Wisconsin 1; thence southerly on the Bay shore of said islands and the eastern shore of Green Bay towards the present
ci‘" of Green Bay and con inning along the western shore of

4-D:
said Bay in a northerly direction towards the city of nscanaha,

1''!

I -u v. A f"' Q 0 _-_ '_"!_
so as to excluae he waters c: creen say, to the point enere

J.
b
the said shore int

ersects the northern line of Royce cession
219, Eisconsin l; thence following said cession line along

its length until it intersects the lower line of the land
ceded under the aforementioned Treaty of 1821; thence southeasterly along said line to the point of beainnirg; and con;-J-——d-Ana-ha;
tinuing approximately 3,931,000 acr s. All as shown on Petitioner‘s Exhibit No. l42.

It is the opinion of this Commission that petitioners are the desT

cendants and successors in interest of the nmigrant New York Indians,
and that their ancestors were deprived of their one-half interest in the

above described land and that defendant is liable for it under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act. Said liability shall be
subject to all proper credits and offsets which defendant may be able to
show, includi.g, but not limited to, all lands retained by or accruing

to petitioners‘ ancestors under the Stanbaugh Treaty of June 25, l832 and

its supplements. . ‘

An interlocutory order shall be entered in accordance with the above

opinion.

mar E . Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Concurring:

Louis J. C'F*rr

 ;.2jn

Associate Commissioner

 

Associate Commissioner

