ll Ind. Cl. Comm. 1

BQEQEE THE 1KDlA§ CLaIMS COMMISSION

THE 1~es-‘NI or (one ssia=r;:ea) "'.:~~'.:*:>.'3:{_=:e I.::ze:A1~Is,
on the relation of Eorothea Gwen, Thomas
Roach. Ellis Crowell Bunean, Elizabeth
Sohrimsher—Lewiss Alice Elourneyusmith and
Maxine woodall;

and

)

)

)

3

)

)

)

e )
THE ERSTERN (EMIGRAYT) CHEROKEE INDIn3Sq )
on the relation of Florian H. Sash: Junior, )
Francis.A. Nash, Henry C. walkloyg Rachel )
)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

)

3

Davis«Drivera Roll Stopler~Bradshaw, Nannie Docket No. 2

R. Hayes and Ellen Morgan—F1eetwood,
. Plaintiffs
vs.
THE §ITED STATES OF AMERICA:
R Defendant

Mr. Woodsen E. Norvell and Mr. George E. Eorvell for the plaintiffs.

Mr. Ralph A. Barney and Mr. Jules M. Sigal, with whom was Mr. Assistant
ttorney General A. Devitt ?anech, for the defendant.

E33? 1 5 1348

O‘Marr. Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

This claim. as indicated hy the title set forth above; is 8SS€Tt€d

$3
9
'.J
(D
F11
H?
E5
Q;
go
S.
9.:
[D
1-"
P‘
G)
1'3
0
('3
f1
‘.1:
‘:11
L3
2”?‘
U}
{D
{‘5
§—‘-:3“
C?‘
P.
"1
74')
I
93
cf1
1"’
Q
0
“J
' I
(T)
J
(T
('3
H
(1
O
H)
O
L5
(D
O
*1
C1"
33‘
(D
O
C?‘
'3‘
{'9
H

Of Such groups. we shall not determine the status of such inéividuale in
this action nor decide wh ther they are neseosa-y or even.pro§er yartiesi
they allege no in iviouel right: and it is agrsrent thev are acting on te—

1

...t‘-'.. ._ . ,_1._'._
In-ians and are aSSB1biL£

I -- I \ . 1 "'

‘'l'‘'‘(‘].1r & 1' H‘ 1' 1 C‘ 3-+7 ‘ L‘ "‘ 4- - ‘Ix T“ '1-"zvvr 1 L4 ._" 9 U--8 H53... uCT.- §O..Q ea *4 »..i.CI' ?.'".C. on?‘ ...J'‘.''‘ o‘: TI‘ {V5, _‘__£'~;'1",,I'1t Ii -_ ."_'"_":‘tCE‘€ ..uCi....r M... 5
'.’.I'.---. ‘A -5-! .L‘,_,_ I! - a n I a , . ., n ‘t
. ,.. ."'  -g -u-— -. a.‘-.— -— -< _. ..-_ .. . _ . f __ ' - -LL ..‘4.— .. 1-. 4 A. F?‘
”" ‘?*""“""”-"': '-'-:47-5-E-'7-5-3-'---’-’-5-'3 Q--'-i‘-}_-.-":.:".a' ‘OJ-. Ll-3'  ‘I-’ V’; in '._..rIi:‘...'..'..:.‘ 3.‘; ... (1.3 J-.—‘...’..-L 3... -...E.!.'.

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1

_ 2 a

After plaintiffs amended petition was filed herein the defendant
filed its motion_for a summary judgment under section 11 of the Rules
of Procedure of the Commission. The motion was orally argued before the
Commission and taken under advisement.

This case was sutmitted to the Commission on the motion of the
defendant for a summary judgment asking that the amended petition herein be dismissed “on the ground that there is no genuine issue as to any
material fact and that defendant is entitled to judgment as a matter of
Faw in that the issues contained in the petition have been herebefore
fgdicially determined and the matter is res judicata by reason of former
inecisions of the Court of Claims and the Supreme Court of the United
States." Accompanying said motion an affidavit was filed (Exhibit Va")
the facts therein set up being undenicd.

In support of its motion the United States maintains that
by express provisions of the Act it may interpose all legal and equit—
able defenses, including res judicata. save only those of the statutes
of limitation and laches.

Plaintiffs make no objection as to the manner in which the
question is raised. but contend. in substance. that under the provisions of
the Act creating the Indian Claims Commission (60 Stat. 1049; 25 U.s.c.s, 70)

jurisdiction is vested in the Commission to hear and determine their

1 Ind. c1. Comm 1
.. 3 ..

claim “without reference to any former 1itigation..any action of the

Congress. or other department of the defendant Government relating thereto.

And they argue, in effect. that to permit the defense of res judicata would '

/
be to contradict or limit the plain and unambiguous language of the statute

giving the Commission jurisdiction to hear and determine claims against
the Government of the character specified in the Act; of which plaintiffs‘
claim is one.

The positions of the parties, as briefly stated above, require
us to determine whether the defense now, for the first time, asserted by
the Government is permitted by the terms of the Act creating the Commission
and fixing its jurisdiction.

Paragraph 1 of Section 2 of the Act gives the Commission jurisdicu
tion to hear and determine five classes of claims against the United States
which may be presented by any Indian tribe. band. or other identifiable
group of American Indians residing within the territorial limits of the
United States or Alaska. It is not necessary to specify here the several
classes of claims which may be considered.

In paragraph 2 of said Cection 2 we find the following:

“All claims hereunder may be heard and determined

by the Commission notwithstanding any statute of limitations or lachess but all other defenses shall be avail—

——-1-u—.——u-.9-:.——-—_——-—.--n.——--u——-ub—ur-—-I----é

able to the United States."
(italics ours)

 

   

Here is plain and unambiguous language giving the Government the

right to assert any and all available defenses it may have, save only the

I?

1 Ind. C1. Con. 1

O-Ill’!-I

defenses of laches and the statutes of limitation. The use ognthe words

“All other defenses". is comprehensive and includes the defense of res
judicata. It is'a well established rule of interpretation of statutes

"that an exception in a statute amounts to an affirmation of the applica—
tion of its provisions to all other cases not excepted." Bond V. Hoyt.

l0 U.S. 263, 13 Pet. 263: 30 Am. Jur. 455. sec. 434; cf.9 Kendall V. U. S..
27‘U.S. 123. Then. there is the rule stated in Am. Jur., supra. which reads:
“Where express exceptions are made in a statute, the legal presumption is
that the legislature did not intend to save other cases from the operation
of the statute. In such case the inference is a strong one that no other
exceptions were intended, and the rule generally applied is that an exception
in a statute amounts to an a firxatien of the application of its provisions

to all other cases not excepted? and excludes all other exceptions or the

D

enlargement of the exceptions made."
Applying these rules to the provisions quoted above, the conclusion is
irresistible that the Commission is without jurisdiction to hear and determine

a case between the same parties which has been determined on its merits by

"any court of the United States.

We need not. however, rely entirely upon rules governing interpreta—
tion of the statutes to divine the intent of Congress in respect to the
effect of former adjudications of claims. for the following legislative
history of the enactment creating the Commission. which was introduced as
He 3» 4497: plainly shows a.purpose to exclude from consideration by the

Commission any claim by the same parties which has been decided on its

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 ‘ I 5

merits by any court of the United States.
H. R. 449?. as introduced, contained this provision:

"No claim shall be excluded from consideration
on the ground that it has become barred by law or any
rule of law or equity. or that it is barred by any statute
of limitations or by laches."

While the bill was being considered on the floor of the House Congressman
Taber raised the question as to whether the above clause barred the consideration of claims which had already been adjudicated by the courts. On this

subject the following discussion was had:

"MR. HALLECK: Mr. Speakers will the gentleman yield?

MR. TABER: I yield.

MR. HALLECK: First of all I would say my understanding
about this proposal is that it is designed to
give the Indian citizens of the country their day
in court in respect to their claims.

Now, if any one of those citizens has had
his day in court and has had an adjudication of
his claim, that should end it. While I support
the rule and this bill. I certainly would support
such language in the bill, by amendment or otherwise. that would definitely provide that there le
no reopening of claims where it can be shown or
where. in truth and in fact. the claimant has had
his day in court and has had a decision by a
competent tribunal authorized to hear and determine

the case.
MR. MUNDT: Mr. Speaker. will the gentleman yield?
MR. TABER: I yield.
MR. MUNDT: In response to the gentleman from Indiana

MR. EALLECK) the committee has a committee amen —
ment which has been unanimously agreed to: to meet
the specific objection which has rightfully been

$

raised by the gentleman from New Yorx (HE. TaBER).

pl Ind. C1. Comm. 1

MR. E : That amendment has been submitted to me.
Frankly, I do not think it does exactly meet the
situation. but I would hope that something might be
worked out overnight that might meet the situation.

MR. MUNDT: Mr. Speakers will the gentleman yield?_

.MR. TABER: I yield.

MR. MU’ T: I would like to read the amendment at this
point and then perhaps some suggostion.will be develop—
ed overnight.

MR. TABER: I would like to see it put into the
RECORD at this point.

MR. MUNDT: The amendment is offered by the gentleman

from Washington (MR. JACKSON) in behalf of the
committee: “

Page 3. line 3. substitute a colon for the period
and insert the following; ‘gggyided. éQ§§X§§}
That any final determination upon an issue
of law or fact involved in any claim that
has been made upon the merits of such '
issue by any court of the United States in
a prior proceeding with respect to such

claim shall be binding upon the Commission.‘

It seems to me that states very clearly the fact that
where a competent court has made a ruling, that claim
shall not be reopened. Certainly that is the intention_
of the committee. We have never departed from that idea.
The record of the testimony in the hearings. the record

of the debate on the floor of the House bears that out.
The amendment bears it out. But if the gentleman wishes
to tighten the language to achieve the same goal, certainly the committee will be glad to go along with him."

(92 Cong. R. 5409-10. May 20. 19u6)
During the above discussions there was inserted in the RECORD
a letter from the Comptroller General in which he referred to the provision

set forth above as follows:

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1

“As hereinbefore suggested. another feature of the

bill which appears open to objection arises from the fact

that the exceptionally bTua3.p3w9?s to be conferred upon the
Commission to hear and determine ‘all claims of every nature
whatsoever’ against the United btatesc together with the prou
vision that inc claim shall be excluded from consideration on

the ground that it has become barred by law or any rule of law
or equity‘. might be regarded as authorizing the reopening of

all Indian claims and suits heretofore adjudicated by the courts
or otherwise disposed of. In this connection, attention is invited to a table printed at pages l6? to 170 of the hearings be~
fore the Committee on Indians affairs. House of Representatives.
on H.R. 1198 and H.R. 1341, Seventyuninth Congress—~bills to create
an Indian Claims Commission. The said table. which summarizes
the results of suits by Indians in the Court of Claims. shows
that the total of amount allowed by the Court of Claims in such
cases was $b9,u0l,5l8.7l and that against this amount the court
allowed offsets amounting to $29:387.2l7.74, thus reducing the
net total amount of the judgments to $2o.o1u,3oo.97. If H.R. M9?
-is enacted in its present form. it might be anticipated that many
of those suits would be reopened before the Commission and that:
in view of the very liberal provisions of the bill. many of the
amounts heretofore set off against the claims of Indians would
not be allowed as offsets by the Commission."

The.Attorney General also commented on the provision as contained in
his letter which was inserted in the RECORD. He wrote:

"The bill provides in section 2 that ‘No claim

shall be excluded from consideration on the ground that it

has become barred by law or any rule of law or equity * * *'.
This provision would seem to be subject to the interpretation
that a Claimant night sue again upon a claim which has already
been adjudicated or upon a claim which has been satisfied by
compromise or settlement. It is even possible that this
language mig t be interpreted to mean that a claimant would be
entitled to seek from the Commission an additional recovery
upon a claim which had been successfully prosecuted in the
Court of Claims." (Cong. Rec. 54lOul2, May 20, l9Q6)

when the bill was read for amendments (Cong. Rec. 5421) Congressman

Jackson offered the following amendment:

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1

I-—.  {-9

"Amendment offered by Mr. Jackson: On page 3: line 3:
strike out the period, insert a comma and the following: "But no
claim shall be considered by t.e Commission where a final
determination upon an issue of law or fact involved has been
made on the merits of such issue by any Court of the United
States in.a proceeding with respect to such claim.‘“

The amendment was adopted and the bill containing this amendment went to
the Senate. (Cong. Rec. 5423 and see page 2. Senate Hearing on H.Re 4497:
before Committee on Indian affairs, 79th Gong.. second session.)

The 12:11 having been referred to the Committee on Indian Affairs of
the Senate. its Chairman. Senator O'Mahoney. requested the views of the

Attorney General with respect to the bill and on May 31. l9U6. he wrote the

Senator as follows:

3As‘nointed out in the enclhsed statement. the bill

provides in section 2 that no claim shall be excluded from

.consideration on the ground that it has become barred by law

or any rule of law or equity, or that it is barred by any

statute of limitations or by laches. but no claim shall be

considered by the Commission where a final determination upon

an issue of law or fact involved has been made on the merits

of such issue by any court of the United States in a proceed»

ing with respect to such claim. ‘This provision may be subject

to the interpretation that a claimant would be permitted to sue

upon a claim which had been settled. Indeed in View of the broad

language to the effect that no claim shall become barred ‘by law

or any rule of law or equity‘ it is not clear just what defense the

Government might have against the various claims permitted to be

filed before the Commission. In order to avoid unnecessary litiga—

tion it would seem highly desirable that this language be clarified.

It would seem that this might be done by striking lines 24 and 25»

page 2 and lines 1 to 6, inclusive. page 3 of the bill and substitut—

ing therefor the following:
‘All claims hereunder may be heard and determined
by the Commission notwithstanding any statute of limitation
or laches but all other defenses shall be available to
the United States.‘"

(Page h. Heari
Senate Comm t
C

it
Affairs: 7;th

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1-: — 9 -Congressman Stigler. a member of the House Committee on Indian
Affairs. to which H. R. Mk9? had been referred, testified before the Senate
Committee. and with respect to the clause we are discussing here. said:

"In conclusion. I might add this: when our Committee in
the House considered this measure. it was unanimous in this that
they did not want to exclude any Indian claim on its merits but
where a court had considered it on its merits they thought the
claim should be barred. Since this bill has passed my attention has been called to the Osage claim as well as that of another
tribe and it should be liberalized so as to permit these claims
to be entertained."
" (Page 8——Hearing before Senate
Committee on Indian Affairs.
79th Cong. 2d. Session.)

The Senate Committee adopted the amendment suggested by the

pattorney General and in its report made this explanation:

“It is understood.that the bill as it passed
the House was intended to permit all defenses to the

Government except the plea of statute of limitation or

V—UlIn-I u..-no-.--5.4.154--A-\..p' nun. -at nu —§ 0--Laval-\-i in-rd-u\..o€.n.n. &¢.L Una-Q-P ‘I-7'-5--.#.qbj

(Report of Senate Committee on
Indian Affairs on H.R. 4497,

Page 6, par. 2.)
When the bill went to the Conference Committee of the two Houses
that Committee agreed upon the Senate amendment respecting defenses of the
Government and the House members of that Committee attached a statement to

the Conference Report. which among other things read as follows:

“Amendment No. 5: The House bill provided that no

claim should be considered by the Commission where a final
determination of such claim had already been made on the merits.
The Senate Amendment, made upon recommendation of the Department
of Justice, provided that all defenses. except statutes of limitation and laches. should be available to the United States. This
amendment was accepted by the conferees. It is implicit, however.
from the purpose, history, and language of the entire bill. that
this amendment does not permit the Government to plead as a defense
to any of the five enumerated classes of claims that such facts
constitute only a political and not a justiciable wrong for the

‘E Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 W 10 _ In

bill expressly makes such wrong justiciable by authorizing

suit thereon. As stated in the Senate report, this amendment
does not permit the raising of legal defenses in cases based

on standards of ‘fair and honorable dealings,‘ for the bill
expressly authorizes suit on such claims. Nor is this amendment intended to preclude the adjudication by the Commission

of any claim authorized to be heard and determined under

this section'whioh has not been in.fact previously adjB@iC3t9d
or settled on its merits, or as to which it has been previously

'-held that.the court had no judicial power_to determine." . _ _ ,.

(See page 6, Conference Report
on Hod; 4b97.)

The bill, as finally passed, contained the provision suggested by

the Attorney General.
The above makes it unmistakably clear that the Congress by the Act

intended that the Government should not be deprived of any of its defenses

to Indian claims, except the two specifically mentioned, namely, laches and

O

the statutes of linitation.
« Counsel for plaintiffs vigorously contend that since the provision

in question is plain and unambiguous it is improper to consider the legislative history of the Act to determine whether the Congress intended to bar the
defense of former adjudications. we agree with courssl that the provision

is plain and unambiguous and for that reason.we could very well rest our
conclusion as to the legislative intent upon what we said above and without
referring to the legislative history of the enactment; we have done so.

however. to show that the expressed intent of Congress conforms to the

Judicial construction of the provision. of. Earrison v, Northern Trust Company.
31? U.S. M65

During the oral argument on the motion: counsel for plaintiffs frank—

ly conc dad that the pending claim and that decided by the Court of Claims

-u-L

1 Ind. C1. COITIIII.  - ' ' 

...]_]_...

(N . #2080: 88 Ct. Cls. 452) involve the same parties and the same land

and that the facts are the same in both cases; but he contended the Court

of Claims’was restricted by the terms of the jurisdictional act and therefore
could not grant the relief the plaintiffs were entitled while, by the Act of
August l3. l9H6 the Commission has been granted much broader jurisdiction
and. therefore. may consider issues and grant relief denied the Court of
Claims by the Act under which the former case was decided.

Before discussing the jurisdictional question raised by the
plaintiffs we shall now compare the pending action with the case. Eastern
or Emigrant Cherokees and Western or Old Settler Cherokees V. The United i
States. No. @2080 (88 Ct. Clsg U52). decided by the Court of Claims on
April 3, 1939. It is the judgment in this case that the Government pleads as
a bar to the prosecution of the pending case.

In the former case (No. @2080) as. according to the allegations in”
the amended petition in the pending case. the plaintiffs claimed the value of
lands in Nee Mexico; Indian Territory and Texas. lying West of the 100th
degree west longitude (the total acreage claimed in the former case was some
lU,O00,000 acres. while the acreage claimed in the pending case is alleged
to be ll,7h0,000 acres, the difference being one of computation). In both
cases the plaintiffs based their claim upon the facts: shown in the first
case and alleged in the pending case; that in 1808-9 the Cherokee Tribe
resided east of the Mississippi river; that a part of the tribe. which
became known as the Western or Old settler Cherokees, wished to move

west of that river in order to Wcantinue the hunter life”.

1 Indo C19 COME. 1 I ’ '

1?

...12..

and as shown by the recitals in the treaty of 1817, hereafter to be referred
to: the.President enceuragea the nove anl permitted the Cld settler group

to send an exploring party to the ooantry on the waters of the Arkansas and
White rivers in what is new the State of Ar;_

As a result of the errlor.tions the ‘whole Cherokee Ration" on July 8,

ll"

lh17 (7 Stat. 156) enters; into a treaty by which certain lands lying east
of the Mississippi were ceiei to the Unites States and: in exchange there~
for. the United States ceded “to that part of the Cherokee Ration on the
Arkansas as much land on said river and the White river as they may have
or may hereafter receive from the Sherokee Ration east of the Mississippi,
acre for acre * * *a“

no mention of an “outlet” was mentioned in this treaty, but after
its proclamation on December 26, 1817, the Secretary of War wrote the
following letter to his official representative:

"Department of her. 8th Eayr l8l8.

Ii

“Governor wag Clarke
3 t o I1'.'J'Q".j. 3
Missouri Tery

Sir: Ehe Cherokees are anxious to have an outlet to
the west to the game country. and it seems fair that the Osagesg
who hold the country west of their Settlement, and have been

i their conntr as mix»
to erant teem an'un&isturbe& passage to ans from their hunting
.1
LI

. q

3
£?0vnds; You wills as 13? as hraetixasle ani consisten‘

L5
‘L93
0‘?
; 4
“-1.
o
E}
(D
O
L'+‘
;.. J
(I)
C +‘
0
w
9»
I-*-‘
(D
n 
13'}
C1”

3nstiee3 make the arrangement favorable to the Cherokees;

as the President is anxious to hold out ever? iniucement to the
Cherokees. an& the other Southern nations of lndiansg to emigrate
to the west of the Kississiepi.

I have the honor: eta,
J -_. C o  3 

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1;
_ 13 H

And later wrote a letter to another representative. which reads:

“Department of War. 29th July. 1818.

“His Excel1y..
Joseph McMinn.
Murfreesboro»
Tennessee.

Sir:_ The President. in order to add as much as
possible. to the permanent prosperity of the Cherokees on
the Arkansaw. has given them an indefinite outlet to the

west. which will continue their independence as long as
is practicable.

I have. etc.
J. C. 0."

(Finding No. 3 in case No. @2080 and paragraphs 14 and 15 of

amended petition in No. 2).

On May 6. 1828 (7 Stat. 311). the Western Cherokees and the

United States consummated a treaty by which the United States ceded to

I

the Western Cherokees seven million acres of land in the Indian Territory

and in this treaty. and for the first time. the Western Cherokees were

granted

“In addition to the seven millions of acres thus
provided for. and bounded. the Unitedostates further
guarantee to the Cherokee Eation a perpetual outlet, west,
and a free and unnolested use of all the Country lying
West of the Western boundary of the above described limits.

and as far West as the sovereignty of the United States. and
their right of soil extend.”

But by amendment of the Senate it was provided that the northern
boundary of the "perpetual outlet west" shall not extend north of the
thirty—sixth degree of north latitude.

Subsequent to the 1828 treaty and on February lb. l833 (7 Stat. 414)

the defendant herein and the Western Cherokees concluded a treaty by which

13'

1 Indy Cl. Com. 1- .. 119  - I _'§_,5

the boundaries of the cession contained in the 1828 treaty were definite(‘.3

1y located and the "outlet" was referred to in substantially th same

language as in the 1828 treaty. The 1833 treaty also required the United
States to issue letters patent for the lands by the treaty "guaranteedt"
And on December 29. 1835 (7 Stat. 478) the defendant and the Cherokee

tribe of Indians made a treaty by which the lands and "outlet" ceded by the
1828 and 1833 treaties were recognized and in addition the Government ceded
800:000 acres of land located in southeastern Kansaso In this treaty the
Government agreed to include in "one patent executed to the Cherokee Nation
of Indians" the lands heeded by the treaty of Feb. 10, 1833, including the
outlet“ and said 800.000 acres. The patent was executed on December 31;
1838. and conveyed l3,5?Q,l3S.lU acres (exclusive of said 800,000 acres

of Kansas land to the "Cherokee Nation of Indians." The l3,57Qal35.l4
acres included.the 7,000,000 described in the treaties of l828, 1833 and

1835 and.the “outlet” lands, the latter being located between the 36th and

37th parallels of north latitude and extending west from the western

yboundary of the ?}000,000 acre tract to the "line dividing the territory

of the'United States from that of Merico." (Finding no. 14 in case No.'@2080.
Paragranh 21 of Amended Petition. Incidentally. the patent shows the

acreage of the 7,000,000 acre cession.p1us the "outlet" to be as stated
above. and not 13,610,’/93..3e  alleged by plaintiffs.)

The United States. the Cherokee'$ation, a portion of the Cherokee

‘tribe of Indians known and recognized as the "Treaty Party", and the

portion of said Tribe of Indians known and recognized as “western Cherokees“

Or "Old Settlers". concluded a treaty on August 6, 1846 (9 Stat. 871) by

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 1 .- 15 -. 15

which it was agreed all the lands covered by former treaties of 1828. 1833.

1835 and the patent "shall be and remain the common property of the whole
Cherokee people.“ (Finding 13, Case Hoe 820800 Par. 23 Amended Petition.)
By this treaty all lands west of the Mississippi river ceded to the Western

Cherokees became the common.propcrty of "the whole Cherokee people."

the Western Cherokees includede (Finding R0; 13; Paragraph 2@, Amended Pet.)

Prior to the treaty of 1828 and on February 22. 1819 (8 State 252) a
treaty was concluded with Spain by which the western boundary of the United
States was fixed at the 100th degree of west longitude, and the United
States therein renounced its "rights. claims and pretentions" to lands
lying west of that line. By subsequent treaties between Spain and the
United Mexican States (1824). the United States and the United Mexican
States (Jan. 12, 1828), the United States and the Republic of Texas. and
the Act of December 29, 1885 (9 Stat. 108), admitting the State of Texas into
the Union, said lCOth degree of West longitude was recognized as the western
territorial limits of the United States insofar as the issues of this case
are concerned. (Findings 4, 5, 10. 12. 15 in he. M2080. Paragraphs 29:

31. 32, Amended Petitione)

On the foregoing facts alleged in the pending case and found in
the former case the Court of Claims decided:

“Plaintiffs have no legal or equitable claim
arising or growing out of any treaty or agreement or act
of Congress which entitles then to compensation from the

‘United.States for which they have not been paid in full."

and dismissed plaintiffs petition.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1

....16...

The plaintiffs, by the allegations contained in paragraphs numbered

1-‘

16 and 26 of their amended petition ask us to reform the p'0ViS0 contained
in the treaty of 1828 (7 Stat. 311) by which the "outlet" was not to extend
north of the 36th degree of north latitude and make the proviso read that
the "outlet" shall not extend ”south” of that parallels Suffice it to sar,
as we have already pointed out, the "outlet" was very iefinitely located
by the treaties of 1833 and 1835: and the patent of December 319 1333: as
being between the 36th and 37th parallels of north latitude and thus made
the proviso contained in the 1828 treaty inoperative;

The plaintiffs would also have us "regard as revised, reformed and
so ameliorated as to effect substantial justice" (par. 27 Amended.Petition)
the treaties which fixed the western boundary of the United States, at
least that seems to be the effect of the allegations of said paragraph 27.
Neither of the claimants in this proceeding were parties to such treaties
and we find nothing in the Aet creating the Indian Claims Commission permitting
us to reform, revise, or regard as reformed or revised, such treaties.
United States v. Old Settlers. lQ8'UaS. 468, and Eastern Cherokees V.
United States. 88 Ct. o1»-.3. L552. LL67. The ultimate question before the Court of Claims was whether the
United States had in any way becone obligated to code the Cherohe
Indians; or arv of its groups. lands lyin: west of the lOCth Meridian as a
tperpetual outlet west". Chat court encountered no difficulty in determining that question on its merits adversely to the plaintiffs under the

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1

1.7
provisions of the jurisdictional act {M7 Stat- 137), which provided:
“That all claims against the United States of the

Eastern or Emigrant Cherokees, and the Western Cherche

or Old Settler Indians, so~called¢ who are duly enrolled

members of the Cherokee Tribe of Indians in Oklahoma- as

classes, respectively; may be submitted to the Court of

Claims. and jurisdiction is hereby conferred upon the Court

of Claims, notwithstanring the lapse of time or statutes of

limitation, to hear? examine? adjudi.ate; ani render jacgnent

C in any and all legal and egnitahle claims arising or growing out

of any treaty or agreement between the United Eiates azd the

Cherokee Indians. or arising or growing out of any act of Conn

grass in relation to Indian affairs; which the said Eastern or

Emigrant and 3 stern or Old settler Cherokees may have against

the United Stateso * * *”
The claim there considered was a legal or equitable one arising or grow“
ing out of a treaty or agreement between the UBib€d States and the Cherokee
Indians; and in adjndging the case it was not necessary to changes revise
or reform any treaty or agreement in order to reach its determination.

0

Likewise: in the pending claim, the ultimate qnestion to be passed on is

119 L

the same as in the former case and 1; Uhe claim were now presented to Us

-0
J.

“.1.
‘Te

for the first time would, under the allegations o the amended petition.

have to be considered as ene coming under the provisions of clause (1) of

Section 2 of the act creating the Indian Claims Commission. which, in effect,

1

9.3.

gives the Commission the same jurisdiction t t the Court of Claims had

under the special jurisdictional act, so. it is apparent that the clauses

ection 2 of the Act, which plaintiffs would have us considers

(3) and (5) of

C‘:
Lt

-heir amended petiticno

J.
U

do not apply to the claim pleaded in The act assumes

J

U
"1

1
n " -ri._L

M-4' .q--..

aant may have which

9’8 the cases of action stated in

J- . therefore. of the op nio

‘:5

the amended petition is the same as that adjudicated by the Court of Claims

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 1 M 18 _

in Case No. @2080; that it was between the same parties and that therei
was an adjudication by that court on the merits of the claim set forth
in the amended petition herein and therefore not within the jurisdiction
of the Commission to entertain.

Since this case is disposed of upon a motion, findings of fact

and conclusions of law do not seem to be necessary. of. Lindsay V.

Leavy (C.C.A. Wash.) 1149 32’. 2:19 899-; 11.5. v. Fremont County. 53 F. supp.
395; Pen~Ken et al. v. Warfield, 2 F.R.D. 355.

From what has been said it follows that the motion for summary
judgment must be sustained and the amended petition dismissed: It is

so orderedo

Dated this 15th day of Xovemberg 1948.

/2; J LOUIS J. o'1»:4_s.n
Associate Commissioner

1. the undersigned. concur in the foregoing opinion:/3 / swim at. How:
Associate Commissioner

19

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 1 Chief Commissioner Witt: concurring: 10
I agree with the decision of the majority of the Commissioners
that the notion of the defendant for summary judgment should be granted,
but I do not agree with all the reasons given or statements made in their
opinion.

My principal disagreement is with the statement that "if the
claim were now presented to us for the first time it would, under the
allegations of the amended petitions have to be considered as-one coming
under the provisions of clause {1} of Section 2 of the not creating the
Indian Claims Commission. so it is apparent that the clauses (3) $35 (5)
of Section 2 of the Act. which plaintiffs would have us consider9.do not
apply to the claim pleaded in their amended petition“.

I think that the pleadings by the plaintiffs in the case at bar
invoke and require the application of clauses (3) and (5) of Section 2
of the Act, and I think the Act certainly authorizes the finding of
liability by the Commission when by the application of clauses (3) and/or
(5) to the facts of any case? the Commission should find that a plaintiff
has been wronged by the Government; and has not had redress or a previous
day in court upon the merits of the claim. However, I think that the
pleadings. the findings of fact and decision of the Court of Claims in
case No. H2080 show that that court gave consideration to every contention
and fact urged in the case at bar. and did not decline the consideration
of any fact or contention for want of jurisdiction or the absence of
legal liability therefor on the part of the Government, and that there»
fore the decision in that case is res judicata of the instant case.

I concur in a decision granting a summary judgment to the
defendant and dismissing plaintiffs‘ petition.

/s/ _ EDGAR E. wxrr.
Chief Commissioner

