A THE UNITED sums 0F‘AMERICA,

2 219

BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE POTIZAWATOMIE TRIBE or
INDIANS AND Tm PRAIRIE
BAND 015' THE POTJZAWATOMIE
TRIBE or INDIANS ,

Plaintiffs,

v. Docket No. l5eA

M./\.u/‘\-./\—/\../\-/‘u./\./\-/\-./‘~../\uu’

Defendant.

Decided: June 5, 1952
Appearances:

0. R. McGuire, with whom was
Robert Stone,

Attorneys for the Plaintiffs.
Sim T. Carman and Leon J. Moran,
with ..whom was Mr. Assistant

Attorney General Wm. Amory Underhill,
Attorneys for the Defendant.

OPINION OF THE COMMISSION

’Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

The plaintiffs, the Pottawatomie Tribe of Indians and the Prairie Band
of that tribe, present a claim.against the Government for perpetual annuities, aggregating $9037.90 a year, that were payable to the tribe under
various treaties, alleged to haye been unlawfully commuted by the defendant
under an agreement concluded March 16, 1909 with a claimed majority of the
individual adult members of the tribe pursuamxto the Act of Congress of

April 30, 1908 (35 Stat. 70) authorizing the making of commutation agree__——_........ . .. -....._..--.._. .. . _ ...........-q.-..,.... -.-p.....—,.—.--.... _..-.. -.....-.. ._._

—---u--A'-I—'-;-4-- -"--4--I-I-‘anon.--.—. —.o----..-u ..._-..-_...—---1. -. gm. --. 4.-.4 - --o 4---I-H

4.._..—— ..-._-._..».-o... .u_.. .

2 220

ments with tribes. The plaintiffs contend the agreement is void and
not binding on.them because it was not made with the tribal authority
of the Pottawatomie Tribe; and because through fraud and misrepresentation
it was made with individual members of the tribe who lacked the legal authority to agree to a disposition of tribal funds; also, that the United
States as guardian of the Indians had no legal right to obtain such an
agreement from living members of a tribe for the commutation of tribal
annuities and pay them.the capitalized amount, thereby depriving future
generations of their right to perpetual tribal benefits provided in treaties.
The defendant contends Congress acted within the scope of its plenary authority over Indian tribal affairs, property and funds, in capitalizing the
annuities and paying in lieu thereof their full value at the time they were
commuted; that the plaintiffs consented to the agreement by a majority of
its members signing it under the procedure prescribed or approved by the
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and by the acceptance by all members of
the tribe of the beneficial consideration provided thereby. The plaintiffs
ask that the annuities be reinstated and seek to recover a judgment for the
amount of their annuities of $9037.90 a year for the period from 1908 down
to the last anniversary payment date just prior to judgment, together with
interest from date each annual payment became due. They appear willing to
concede that the sum of $180,758.00 paid by the Government as a capitalization
of said annuities and later disbursed in per capita payments to the members
of the Tribe may be deducted from the amount they now claim.

The facts described briefly show that the annuities involved represent
the balance of the annuities payable to the Pottawatomie Tribe that remained

after approximately two-thirds of its members were permitted under the

2 221

provisions of the treaty of November l5, 1861 (12 Stat. 1291) to become
citizens of the United States and have their respective pro rata shares

of the Tribe‘s annuities commuted and paid to them, whereupon they ceased
to be members of the tribe. The remaining members of the tribe, whoi
became known as the Prairie Band of the Pottawatomie Tribe, continued to
receive the reduced annuities of $9037.90 until March, 1909.

The Act of Congress approved April 30, I908 (35 Stat. 70, 73) authorizing the making of agreements with Indian tribes for commutation

of annuities provides as follows:

"that the Commissioner of Indian Affairs is hereby authorized

to send a special Indian Agent, or other representative of his
office, to visit any Indian tribe for the purpose of negotiating

and entering into a written agreement with such tribe for a commutation of the perpetual annuities due under treaty stipulations,

to be subject to the approval of Congress; and the Commissioner

of Indian Affairs shall transmit to Congress said agreements with
such recommendations as he may deem proper."

As the Act did not contain any provision or requirement relative to the
manner in which the formal consent of a tribe was to be obtained, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs obviously considered the procedure in this
regard was left to his determination, for he appointed one F. C. Campbell
as a Special Agent and directed him to negotiate such an agreement with
the Pottawatomie Tribe of Kansas and Wisconsin, instructing him.he was to
obtain the approval and signatures to the agreement of a majority of the
adult members of the tribe, without regard to sex, with the minimum age of
members entitled to sign being fixed at 18 years, and if married, they
could sign regardless of age. The number of such members is shown to have

been fixed by the Superintendent of the Kansas Pottawatomie Agency at 362,

most of whom.lived in Kansas and some 98 in Wisconsin.

2 222

Agent Campbell first presented the proposed commutation agreement to
the Pottawatomie Indians in Kansas for approval, and later to those
members residing in Wisconsin. The agreement was concluded by Campbell
on March l6, 1909, and it had affixed thereto the names of 216 of the 362
Pottawatomie Indians constituting the voting population of the Tribe at
that time, each of whom has either signed, or in separate signed statements
had agreed thereto and authorized the attaching of their respective names
to the agreement, wherein they agreed to accept the sum of $180,758.00 in
commutation of the permanent annuities payable to the Pottawatomie Tribe
of $9037.90 a year, said sum.to be in lieu of the annuities and to be
deposited in the Treasury of the United States there to draw interest at

five per cent per annum; and to be withdrawn by the Secretary of the In‘terior for the use of the Indians or paid direct to them in his descretion.

A copy of the agreement, except for the signatures and certificates, appears
in Finding No. 7.

The completed agreement was transmitted by Campbell to the Commissioner
of Indian Affairs in a letter on March 17, 1909, with the explanation that
in securing some of the signatures thereto, Campbell had found the Indians
much scattered and written authority to attach such members names to the

agreement had been secured from them and their names attached, with the

agreement having been presented to them in person where it had been

possible to do so. The Commissioner of Indian Affairs accepted and
approved the agreement as made, transmitting it to the Secretary of the
Interior who also approved it and forwarded it to the President, who, in

turn, on February 10, 1910 submitted the agreement to Congress for action.

Congress ratified and confirmed the agreement as a part of the Act of
April 4, l9l0 (36 Stat. 269, 289). A copy of the Act, insofar as it
applies to this agreement is set forth in Finding No. 8; by the Act,
Congress directed the $180,758.00 paid in lieu of the annuities be
placed in the Treasury to the credit of the Pottawatomie Tribe of Kansas
and Wisconsin, and to draw five per cent interest per annum; authorizing
the Secretary of the Interior to withdraw the funds for payment to the
Indians or expenditures for their benefit at such times and in such
manner as he deemed proper.

As required by the Act of l9l0, two funds were set up on the books
of the Treasury on July 1, 1910. One fund of $180,758.00 was designated
the "Pottawatomie of Kansas and Wisconsin Fund, Act of April 4, 1910."
The other as the "Interest on Pottawatomie of Kansas and Wisconsin Eund,
(act of April 4, 1910)" in which fund interest on the principal fund as
it accrued was deposited, totaling $35,304.18, and in the years l9l2
through 1915 was disbursed by the defendant to the Pottawatomie Indians
in per capita shares. In March of 1914 the Secretary of the Interior
determined, as authorized by the Act of l9l0, that it was essential for
the edonomic welfare of the Indians to withdraw the $180,758.00 for their
use, with the result in May and June of 1914 the fund was disbursed to all
of the 764 enrolled members of the Prairie Band of Pottawatomie Indians in
per capita shares of $236.60.

The plaintiffs challenge the right of Congress to commute perpetual
annuities thereby depriving succeeding generations of such annuities.

We believe that Congress does have that right, for it is a well established legal principle that Congress possesses the exclusive and

2 223

-o....-..u.....-u......a- - -. ..-5... .Ao -'-u. s---.\-.-In - .—. q.-- -u--- ‘-2 224

plenary authority to deal with tribal Indians, lands and funds in
whatever way it deems to be for the best interests and welfare of the
Indians, and even in conflict with some provision or stipulation contained
in a prior treaty. Lone Wolf v. Hitchcock, l87 U. S. 553. .As the plaintiff
Indians in this action were tribal Indians, both before and after the commutation agreement of 1909, and the annuities were tribal funds, we believe
they and their annuities were subject to the control of Congress, and such
funds in the discretion of Congress could be commuted and used for the
benefit of the Indians.

In the case of Chippewa Indians of Minnesota v. United States, 88 C.
Cls. l, a similar issue to the one in this case was raised. In that case

the present members of the Chippewa Indians sought to recover as ‘remaindermen for interest on a trust fund, which fund and interest was provided for

under an agreement between the Indians and the Government, but which fund
was, before the expiration of the period stipulated in the agreement, expended and disbursed by an Act of Congress contrary to the provisions of
the agreement that such fund would be held in trust at interest for fifty
years. The Court dismissed the claim on the ground that Congress possessed
the authority to do what it had done without rendering the Government liable
for continued payments under the prior agreement. In denying relief the
court said in the opinion (p. 41);
"Per capita distributions were made to the Indians from

the funds in accord with the following acts of Congress:* * *.

Manifestly it was essential to make them. Changing economic

and social conditions obviously inspired the legislation which

altered the provisions of the Act of 1889. The present generation of Indians, as well as many who have passed on, accepted

these benefits and they were beneficial, and they did not then
object that the so called trust fund was being unlawfully de: depleted. It was not until after all these benefits had been

2 225

fully realized by the tribe that solicitude was manifested
for the designated remaindermen."

It is also true that annuities are usually created as payment for tribal
lands formerly ceded to the Government. And we do not believe it can be
disputed that Congress has legal authority to dispose of tribal lands for
the benefit of a generation of Indians who need the proceeds, so we see
no difference in the right of Congress to commute and use tribal annuities
created from sale of such lands when needed by the Indians. In fact it

is not unusual for Congress to capitalize annuities and pay the sum.in

per capita payments to individual members -- as was done with the Citizens
Band of Pottawatomies.

The plaintiffs contend that the agreement is invalid because it was
made with individual members of the Pottawatomie Tribe and was not the
action of the tribe assembled in general council. ‘We do not think the
evidence actually bears out this contention. In the first place it is
to be noted that, aside from providing that a written agreement be entered
into with the tribe concerned, the Act of 1908 did not specify the method
to be employed by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in accomplishing this
end. :So it is entirely reasonable to assume that Congress left it to the
Commissioner to determine how the consent of the Pottawatomie tribe was
to be obtained, and to prescribe the rules and regulations needed to
obtain such consent. This the Commissioner did by prescribing that the
agreement should be signed by a majority of the adult Indians of the tribe,
and no objection was thereafter made by Congress to this procedure. See
Chippewa Indians of Minnesota v. United States, 90 C. Cls. 140.

While it is true that such agreements affecting tribal property have

usually been made in a general council with the chiefs and headmen, or

" -- ----'°-I-9' ' -— «j. on-.._ _...- a . _. 4'-—.

elected representatives acting as representatives of the tribe, this
method is not exclusive, for the consent of a tribe has been obtained,
as in this case, by securing the approval and signatures of a majority
of is voting members. See Klamath and Moadoc Tribe v. United States,
81 C. Cls. 79, affirmed 296 ULS. 244. The reason, as we view it, is
that while the title to tribal property or funds is in the tribe, they
are held for the common use and benefit of all its members; in fact, the
members are usually treated by the Government as communal owners.
Cherokee Nation v. United States, 40 C. Cls. 252, 325; affirmed 202 U.S.
101. Therefore, when the individual members of a tribe are given an opportunity to consider a proposal and express their approval by a majority of
them signing such an agreement affecting tribal property, we believe this
majority should be considered, in effect, as acting on behalf of and representative of the tribe just as effectively as chiefs or an elected council
who would but represent the will of the majority of the membership of the
tribe in their approving and consenting to such agreement on its behalf.
While the record in this case discloses that the commtation agreement
was not executed by the members of the Pottawatomie Tribe at one council
meeting, but at several different meetings in Kansas and Wisconsin, with
some members separately consenting in writing that their respective signatures be attached, nevertheless, we think the evidence is sufficiently
convincing that this procedure was necessary under the circumstances in
order to afford the scattered members of the tribe an opportunity to
express approval or disapproval of the agreement, and when the majority

of the tribe did approve the agreement they were in effect acting on

behalf of the tribe in consenting to a commutation of its annuities.

. _ -.— ‘_"-n..-u..---§,2 226

Surely the officials of the government and Congress must have so

construed their action when the agreement was approved and ratified

as made.

But the plaintiffs charge that the signatures to the agreement
were obtained by fraud and misrepresentation and have placed in evidence
numerous affidavits made in l936 and 1937 by Pottawatomie Indians and

filed with a Senate Committee Report in 1939 on a proposed jurisdictional

bill then pending in Congress. A number of aged Indians have also testified and some of these affiants and witnesses repudiated their signatures
to the agreement while others-say they signed but misunderstood what it

was about, and a few thought it was to receive payment for a pledge to
quit drinking liquor. We do not believe, however, that this evidence
can be considered as sufficient to overcome what the contemporary documentary evidence discloses as to the explanation of the agreement to
the Indians and the obtaining of their approval and signatures thereto.
In the case of Klamath and Moadoc Tribes v. United States, supra, the
validity of a release by the Tribe signed by a majority of its members

was under consideration and the plaintiff indians had made charges and

submitted proof similar to that in the present case. The Court of Claims

in evaluating such evidence and sistaining the release said in the
opinion (p. 99):

"The burden of proof with respect to duress and misrepresentations proffered to invalidate an instrument under
seal is upon the plaintiffs, and when signatures to such
a document some nineteen or twenty years later testify
with unanimity, and at a time when the prospects of a
large judgment appear, that coercion and misrepresentationYobtained;to procure theirasignatures,°therrecord
thus loses much if not all of its probative force and

falls far short of reaching that degree of proof essential to establish the charges made."

2 227

..u.. q... 5.... -5-.-. .-.--.‘-you .

There is nothing in the record reflecting on the honesty or integrity of the representatives of the Government who conducted the
negotiation of the agreement, nor that the disinterested witnesses or
the interpreter who certified that the agreement was fully explained
to the Indians, had any personal interest in the matter that would
cause them to make false certificates to that effect. The agreement
was under consideration by the Indians for at least two months before
it was completed and it is in evidence that in 1906 fifty percent of
the Pottawatomie Tribe spoke and understood English sufficiently well
to conduct their own business affairs. _So, while we recognize the fact
that it is quite impossible to say that every member signing the
agreement understood fully and completely the import of the agreement,‘
it is quite evident that many of them did. This, we think, is shown
by the*activity of many of the members to have the sum.representing
.the capitalized annuities of the tribe paid to the members in pro rata
shares after it had been placed in the Treasury of the United States to
the credit of the Tribe.

Furthermore, the entire $l80,758.00 representing the value of
the tribe's permanent annuities in l909, which sum Congress appropriated
and deposited in the Treasury to the credit of the Tribe, was paid to
and accepted by all enrolled members of the Tribe in per capita shares
in l9l4, and there does not appear to have been any protest made by the
Indians respecting the commutation of the annuities until 1936. Such
action, we think, shows an approval and acquiescence on the part of the

Indians to the commutation and distribution of the annuities in question.

As the Court of Claims said in the case of Chippewa Indians of Minnesota

2 228

-I _.4_-._r-.,_-_.__.—.._-. -._.u-....4-—-....p-—-_._.___ . __ __

v. United States, supra, in considering what amounts to consent by an

Indian tribezi
"Moreover, the Chippewa Indians of Minnesota accepted
the additional allotments made and no protest was made
at the time. Every act with reference to the making of

the allotments was under the direction of the Secretary
of the Interior, and while the records of that Department

do not disclose any vote or agreement prior to actual

allotment, we think a complete consent to the amendatory

act of l89l was nevertheless given by the Chippewa Indians

of Minnesota when they, without exception, accepted their

allotments thereunder. The manner of giving consent is

unimportant when the consent itself is shown to be actual.”

It is argued that the agreement was submitted to Congress as having
been made with the Pottawatomie Tribe when in fact it was with an alleged
majority of the members of the Tribe. We do not see how Congress could

have been misled and not be aware of the manner in which the consent of

the Pottawatomie Tribe was obtained. The agreement with the attached

certificates and signature authorizations were all before Congress and
they plainly revealed that the agreement was made with "a majority of the
adult members of the Pottawatomie Tribe," and that it had been signed

by individual members at different council meetings in both Kansas and
Wisconsin, as well as the fact that signatures of some members had been
affixed to the agreement by the Superintendent upon the members‘ signed

authorizations. Certainly if the agreement as made had been considered

objectionable, Congress would have questioned it before ratification.
This it did not do.
We are of the opinion from a study of the facts and circumstances

of this case in the light of the established principles governing the
power and authority of Congress in its dealings with tribal Indians and

the management and control of their properties and affairs that, re2 22

.;_

2 Ind. C1. Comm. 219 230

gardless of the validity of the commutation agreement, Congress did
not deal unjustly with the Pottawatomie Tribe of Indians in capitalizing and commuting their permanent annuities and substituting a sum
equal to their value to the credit of the tribe, The action taken was
done pursuant to a policy adopted by Congress, as is shown by the Act
of 1908 authorizing commutation agreements with any tribe. Unquestionably
Congress acted in good faith in the matter and intended to and did pay an
adequate consideration for the discharge of the Government‘s obligation
to the Tribeew In effect, it was but a change in the form of investment
of tribal funds, and the capitalization of the $9037.90 annuities upon a
basis of five per cent, uhich is the rate of interest paid by the Government on tribal funds at that time (Alcea Band of Tillamooks Q. U. 8.,
115 C. C13. 463, 517), produced the principal sum of $180,758.00. The
plaintiffs suffered no loss by the capitalization, for this sum was placed
in the Treasury of the United States to the credit of the Tribe where it
continued to bear interest at five per cent per annum, as provided in the
commutation agreement, and produced annually for plaintiffs a sum equal
to their annuities before capitalization. This interest was paid to the
plaintiff Indians until it was determined by the Government that the
capital sum be disbursed for the economic welfare of all the members of
the Tribe.

It is the conclusion of the Commission that the plaintiffs are not

entitled to recover and the petition should be dismissed.

WM. M. HOET
Associate Commissioner

 

We concur:

EDGAR E. WIT!
Chief Commissioner

 

LOUIS J. O'MARR
.Associate Commissioner

 

