1 Ind. C1. Comm. 575 -  '-.584
IBEFOE TE IISFDIAH CLAIMS COMMISSION

em LAKE, snmxm mm wsxne nines
mamas, em mnmssom osxspsn nszss,
perm GRAVES, Josms omwsss mouse —
mm, mmsmnwn cam. sisnnrm, nossnu
VII.LmmJ'E, moms snmoxs, mm sanomz
nmson,

Plaintiffs,
7. Docket No. 18--A

UNITED swans on AMERICA,

Defendant.

Appearances:

Mr. Jay E. Hoag, with whom
were Messrs; .A.n.stin I.-e.thers3
Clarence G. Linciquist, and
Ho Jo G'I'3oIJ.IliS,

Attorneys for Plaintiffs.

Messrs. Sim L‘. Carman and.
Ralph A. Barney, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General A. Devitt Vanech,
Attorneys for Defendant.

SE? 1 '2' 3351

osmzos 9;: g_Ig_:«:_ COMMISSION 

Eolt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission:

This claim is presented to the Commission by and. on behalf of ‘the
Red lake Band and the Pembina Band of Chippewa Indians. The claim is

for the value of approximately 8,,63+1+,llO acres of land. located. on ‘both

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575   L ~. ’ _585

6-.2-.

sides of the Red River from the Canadian border south, in the present

States of North Dakota. and Minnesota. These lands were included within the cession made by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands of ‘Chippewa Indians to the United States in the treaty of October 2, 1863 (13 Stat. 667).
This treaty of l863 was subsequently modified by the treatyof April 12,

18634 (13 Stat. 689) between the‘ same parties which somewhat changed the

consideration to be given the Red Lake and Pembina Bands, and made some

other minor changes, but contained no additional cession of lands to the

_ United States’. The boundaries of the area ceded are fixed by the l863

treaty as follows:

Beginning at the point where the international boundary
between the Ijnitcd States  the 31“:'i.tish possessions intersects the shore of the lake of the Woods; thence in a direct
line southwesterly to the head of Thief River; thence down
the main channel of said Thief River to its mouth on the Red
Lake River; thence in a southeasterly direction, in a direct
line toward the head of Wild Rice River, to the point where
such line would intersect the northwestern boundary of a tract
ceded to the United States by a treaty concluded at Washington
on the 22d day of February, in the year eighteen hundred and
fifty-five, with the Mississippi, Pillager, and Lake Winne-bigoshish bands of Chippewa Indians; thence along the said
boundary-line of the said cession to the mouth of Wild Rice
River; thence up the main channel of the Red River to the
mouth of the Shayenne; thence up the main channel of the
Shayenne River to Poplar Grove; thence in a direct line to
the Place of Stumps, otherwise called lake Chicot; thence in
a direct line to the head of the main branch of Salt River;
thence in a direct line due north to the point where such line
would intersect the international boundary aforesaid; thence
eastwardly along said boundary to the place of beginning.

The parties are in agreement that the above described ceded area

contained approximately 9,799,91t0 acres of land.

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 575   535,
.. 3 ..

The plaintiffs allege in.their petition that the Red lake and
Pembina Bands held this entire 9,T99,9M0 acres of land ceded by them
under the treaty of 1863 by original Indian title. However, during
the trial of this case and in their proposed findings of fact, the
plaintiffs have modified their claim and now concede that approximately 2,311,660 acres of this ceded.area lying between the Goose and
Cheyenne Rivers on the Dakota side of the Red.River were jointly used
and occupied.by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands and certain bands of
the Sioux Tribe of Indians, of which the plaintiffs now claim.onehalf, or 1,155,830 acres. With this change, the plaintiffs now claim
ownership of 8,6MM,ll0 acres of the ceded area.

The plaintiffs assert in their petition that the execution of the
1863 treaty and the supplemental treaty of 186% were both.procured by
the defendant through misrepresentation, fraud and duress, and that
the consideration.paid to the Red Lake and Pembina Bands for the
cession of their lands constituted an unconscionable consideration.

The anount of $68H,OhM.5M was paid to the two bands by the United States
in fulfilling its obligations under the treaty of October 2, 1863, as
modified by the supplemental treaty of April 12, leélt. The plaintiffs
ash "that each of the foregoing treaties (1863 and 186%) be revised to
grant to plaintiffs the reasonable and fair value of the lands so ceded
and to determine the amount justly due from the United States to plaintiffs,

with credit for the amounts already paid."

1 Ind. c1. Comm._575 537

_ h.On the part of the defendant it is admitted that Red Lake and
Pembina Bands ceded to the United States whatever interests they had
in the lands described in the 1863 treaty, but it is contended the said
bands did not have such exclusive possession or ownership of the area
coded as to constitute a compensable interest therein. Defendant also
denies that the execution of the 1863 and 186M treaties was procured
through misrepresentation, fraud or duress on the part of defendant‘s
agents, and contends that adequate and just compensation was paid the
Indians for their interest in the lands ceded by them.

The first important question to be determined is whether the
plaintiffs hare proven that the Red Lake and Pembina Bands had the
exclusive use and occupancy right or title to the area ceded by the
1863 treaty.

_ Before considering the proof submitted on plaintiffs’ claim of
original Indian title to the lands in question we have for determination.one other question raised by the defendant, and that is the
right of one of the plaintiffs, the Pembina Band of Chippewa-Indians,
tq either maintain this action or have it maintained by individuals on
its behalf, on the ground the Pembina Band is not a "tribe, band, or
other identifiable group of American Indians" within the meaning of
Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission.Act (25'U.S.C, 70a).

The defendant takes the position that a tribe, band or other group I

must be an.existing political entity in order to have its claim determined

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 588
X 5 #9

by this Commission. Counsel for defendant does not deny the existence.
of the Pembina Indians as an organized band and its recognition as such
by the United States at the time the treaty of October 2, l863'was concluded with said band.and the lands involved in this claim were ceded by
it to the Government, but counsel contends that such a band of Indians
as the Pembina.Band no longer exists and has not existed since 1891, at
which time its members were merged with either the.Red Lake or White
Earth Bands of Chippewa Indians, and are enrolled as members of those
bands.

A.similar contention.was made by the defendant in the case of The
Loyal Creek.Band or Group of Greek Indians v. The United States, Docket
No. 1, decided may 6, 1919. In that case this Commission decided that
the three classes of claimants who are permitted to assert claims under
the Indian Claims Commission.Act, namely, a “tribe, band, or other identifiable group" do not have to be existing political groups in order
to be heard by the Commission. The controlling question is whether the
claimant group can'be identified and hays a common claim. We believe
that the decision in that case applies to the contention made by the
defendant in the present suit,

As the plaintiffs concede that the Pembina Indians are.no longer
organized as a band, the question then is whether members, or de- I
scendants of members of the Pembina Band as it existed and was recognized at the time of the 1863 treaty, can be identified. If they can

1 Ind. C1, Comm. 575 « 589
-6...

be so identified, then any one of their group is authorized by express‘
statute to present this claim as a representative of all the members,

as provided by Section 10 of the Indian Claims Commission Act (25 11.5.0;
708.), which provides that: "any claim within the provisions of this Act
may be presented to the Commission by any member of an Indian tribe,
band, or other identifiable group of Indians as the representative of
all its members. 1

We believe that it is such a representative action that is presented
here. It is true that in the caption or the petition the Pembina Band
is named as one of the plaintiff bands, which would indicate that the
claim was presented by an existing organized band; however, the allegations of the petition clearly show that this claim is presented by
individual members, or descendants of members, of the Pembina Band or
Group of Chippewa Indians which was a party to the 1863 treaty cession
of lands, out of whichuthis claim arises, and that they are acting as
the representatives of all the members or descendants of members of
said band.

As heretofore stated,” the Pembina Band of Indians was recognized
as a separate and distinct band of Chippewa Indians and was dealt with
as such by the Government at the time the 1863 treaty was negotiatedoi
The record shows that some years thereafter the United States officials
moved the members of the band and settled them on apportion of the White

Earth Reservation. They were listed separately on the census rolls at

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 59°
...7...

that reservation as Pembina Indians until 1923-theyl922 roll showing
519 of them.. hut apparently due to a change in the method of making

the census rolls, no separate roll appears to have been maintained of
these Indians as Pembina Indians after 1922. However, regardless of
how these Pembina Indians were listed on the census rolls after 1922,

we believe the evidence shows quite conclusively there is a group of
Pembina Indians now living who are descendants of members of the Pembina
Band that was a party to the October 2, 1363 treaty out of which the
present claim.arose, and they can be identified and have a group claim
which they are entitled to have determined by this Commission. The
‘existence of such.a group having been established, and our conclusion

is that it has been, we do not consider it necessary for jurisdictional
purposes to determine who are all the individual members of said group.
r(Indians of California.v; United States, Docket No. 31.) The plaintiffs
have alleged in the petition and satisfactorily established by the evidence that the named individual plaintiffs, Bosetti Villebrun.and
Katherine Carl Barrett, are members of this group of Pembina Indians
who are descendants of the original members of the Pembina Band and

they are therefore entitled, under Section 10 of the.Act, to maintain
this action.in a representative capacity on behalf of themselves and
all other members of the claimant group.

We now turn to a consideration of the question of whether plaintiffs

have proven by satisfactory evidence that the Red Lake and Pembina Bands

1 Ind. (11. Comm. 575 ‘ L I .1 591-D 8 -no

of Indians held and owned original Indian occupancy title to the exclusion of other Indian tribes to the lands ceded by them by the treaty

of 1863.

This question of what proof is necessary to establish aboriginal
possessorytitle to lands claimed by.  Indian tribe was before this
Commission in the case of the Pawnee Indian Tribe 17. United States,
Docket no. 10, decided. by this commission on July 11». 1950. In that
case a review was made of the authorities governing aboriginal rights,
and based on those authorities, we concluded that it is a question of
fact to be determined as any other question of fact whether an Indian  
tribe or_ band occupied the land claimed by then, under aboriginal
possession, and we also decided in the Pawnee case that in order to
prove an aboriginal use and occupancy title it must be established as

a fact that there was actual exclusite use and occupancy of definable .

. territory by the tribe or band asserting the title. See United States

1:. Santa Fe Railroad co.,- 311: ms. 339, 86 1.. ed. 260; Gramer v. United
states, 261 ms. 219, 67 L. ed. 622; Choctaw Nation, et al. v. United
States, 311- G. Cls. 171; Assiniboine Indian Tribe '9'. United States, 77
0. 01s. 31:7; Wichita Indians, et a1. v. United states, 89 c.‘ cls. 378;
and Alcea Band of Tillamook Indians V. United States, 103 C. Cls. H9’-l,
affirmed by the Supreme Court, 329 ms. 1+0, 91 1.. ed, 29. V
The evidence in the instant case shows that the Chippewa Tribe or

Ration of Indians was one of the larger Indian tribes in the northern

3”‘ __~,‘,...,- 1...... 3-4241 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 9 592

section of the United States. It was formerly located along the shores
of Lake Huron and Lake Superior, andeduring the:'l8th century.  extend-5

ed its range on westward across Minnesota to the eastern part of North

7 Dakota, by the process of pushing other Indian tribes out of the area.

The Chippewa Tribe consisted of a large number of bands and groups
scattered over this large area, and many of said ‘bands or groups came to
be known by the name of the particular village, lake or river near which
they resided. Among these bands were the Pembina Band. on the Pembina
River in the extreme northeastern corner of North Dakota and the Red
Lake Band around Red Lake in northern Minnesota. One of the early reports on the Red Lake and Pembina Bands as separate Chippewa bands was
made by the Lewis and Clark Expedition when they reached what is new
North Dakota in November, l801L. In a report on their expedition of
April 7, 1805 to the President they reported  the Red Lake Chippewas
"claimed the country around Red Lake, and Bed Iakehiver, as far as the
Red River of Lake ‘vfinnipie, beyond which last river they contend with
the Sioux for territory.“ As for the Pembina Band, they reported that
.”the River Peznbina Chippewa formerly resided on the East side of the
Mississippi, at Sand Lake, but were induced by the N.H. Company to remove about two years since, to the River Pembina. They do not claim
the land. on which they hunt.“ (Ptffs. Doc. 62.2..) While it is not ~
clear whether Lewis and Clark actually visited the two bands in 1805

or made their report from information gathered by them from other sources,

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 c _ 593- 1o _

their report on the location of the two bands is about the same as that
given by Henry 3. Schoolcraft in 1851 in his official report on Indian
tribes in the United States, wherein he lists the names of Indian bands
end their geographical positions. Schoolcrait locates the Red Lake Band

es cw. of Height of land," which counsel roe plaintiffs erpieih.in their

"brief as being in the vicinity of Red Lake, and the “Pembina of Red River

on Red River, North."
While the foregoing reports tend to fix the general locations of

the two bands, they do not Supply a great deal of information as to the
extent to which they occupied this area ceded by them in 1863. However,
from an examination of the evidence. it appears that at the time of making
the 2.863 treaty and for many years prior thereto the Red Lake Band lived

and had their permanent camps in the area around Bed Iake in northern

Minnesota--which is located to the east and outside of the ceded area.- '

The Pembina iBand lived in the village oftPembina and its vicinity on the
Pembina River, in the extreme northeastern corner of what is new North
Dakota, and within the ceded area, Tlie proof shows that each of these
bands had hunted in various parts of the ceded area and together they
claimed Indian occupancy title to all of it, although there were other
bands of Chippewa Indians who appear to have also hunted on parts of the
area and claimed to have the same occupancy rights therein as the plaintiff
bands of Chippewas. The main contenders with the plaintiff bands for the

use and occupancy of this land were bands of the Sioux Tribe who hunted

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 ' 594

- 11 _

and roamed over a large part of it, and.appear to have continuously disputed its use with the Chippewas.

The number of had Lake and Pembina Chippewas does not appear to have
been large. In the 1851 report of Schoolcraft referred to above, he lists
the number of the Red Lake Band of “all ages and sexes" at H00, and the
Pembinas at 660. Governor Ramsey, who negotiated the 1851 unratified
treaty, refers to them at that time as follows: "and finding that the
whole number of Indians at Pembina and Red Lake did not exceed 800 souls"
(Ptffs. Doc. 159.1). At the council meeting when the 1863 treaty was
negotiated the number present was given as about 1600, but a large number
of these were half-breeds from Pembina. So when the area of some 3,000,000
acres where the Red Lake Chippewas lived and retained for their permanent
‘use and occupancyt lying immediately to the east of the ceded area, is
added to the approximately 10,000,000 acres included in the 1863 treaty
cession, it may be readily understood why bands of the size of the Red
Lake and Pembina, located as they were on the east and in the extreme
north of the ceded area, found it difficult to control such a large
territory-Qparticularly as against the hostile bands of Sioux Indians
who were so close on the south and west. The plaintiffs now concede
that these Sioux Indians also used that portion of the ceded area lying
between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers on the Dakota side of the Red
River as a hunting ground, and we believe the Sioux are shown by the

evidence to have held as good or even a better claim of use and occupancy

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 575 1 - 12 - 595

to this particular area than did the plaintiff bands of Chippewas. For .

when the Sioux Tribe of Indians and the Chippewa Tribe concluded the
treaty of Angnst 19, 1825 (7 Stat. 272), they agreed on a ditiding line
betweenbtheir claimed territories, and this line extended to the north
along the Red River from the mouth of the Buffalo River to the mouth
of the Goose River, where it ended. This placed the area lying west
of the Red. River in Dakota, between the Goose and Cheyenne Rivers, in
recognized Sioux territory. Again, when the United States and the Sioux
bands entered into the treaty ‘of February 19, 1867 (15 Stat. 505), the
‘United States recognized that the Sioux had a claim to this area by
including it within the boundaries of the lands in which the Sioux
ceded to the United States certain rights to construct roads, railroads,
and utilities. 1
with reference to the plaintiffs‘ claim of exclusive useand occupancy of the remainder of the ceded area on the Dakota side of the Red '
River, extending from the Goose River north to the Canadian border,
it is important to note that this area was also included within the
territory claimed by the Turtle Mountain Band of Chippewa Indians and
ceded by them to the United States under the agreement of October 22,
1892, as amended by act of Congress April 21, 1901; (33.Stat. 191+),
and said band. now has a case (Docket No. 113) pending before this Commission in which it presents a claim to this same area on the basis of

their alleged “inme:norial“ use and occupancy of it and other lands.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 T ' . - 596

n_l3_

It is true that while this does not settle the question of what band
or group of Indians, if any, had original Indian title to this area,
it does show that bands of Indians other than the Red lake and Pembina
Bands also claim it by right of original Indian title.

The plaintiffs refer us to the provision_of the Horthwest Ordiinance of 1787 (act of July 13, 1787), which.was made applicable to
the Territory of Minnesota, as proof that the United States recognized
the rights of the plaintiffs in their land and guaranteed them.peace—
able possession.and occupancy of the same. This provision states

that ”the'utmost good faith.shall always be observed towards.the Indians. Their lands and property shall never be taken from them without

‘Y their consent and in their_property rights and liberty they never shall

be invaded or disturbed unless in just and lawful wards authorized by

Congress." While this provision accorded protection to whatever
beneficial ownership in lands the Indians possessed, based on original
Indian title, until extinguished by the Government with the consent
of the.Indians; it does not eliminate the necessity of proving that
they had such original Indian title through exclusive possession.and
occupancy to the lands so claimed by them.

we believe the proof submitted fails to show with any degree of
certainty that either the Red Lake or Pembina Bands had held original
exclusive use and occupancy title of any very great portion of the

lands included in the 1863 treaty cession, with the exception of that

l Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 L _ , ' 597' - lh —

undefined area. occupied by the Pembina Band along the Pemhina River
in the extreme northern part of North Dakota. How far this area extended to the west along that river is not shown. As stated before,

the Red lake Band is shown to have been occupying the area to the east

and outside the ceded area at the time of the 1863 treaty, although

b they also roamed and hunted within the coded area. The ceded area

lying east of the Red River appears to have been hunted over ‘by the
Sioux as well as other bands of Chippewa Indians. It is therefore
our conclusion, from a study of all the evidence submitted, that the
plaintiffs have not established that at the time of the 1863 treaty
that either the Red Lake or Pemhina Bands had original Indian title
to any portion of the area of land claimed by them _in this action,
except the undefined and indefinite  along the Pembina River in
the extreme northern portion of the 1863 cession occupied by the
Pembina Band.

But the plaintiffs do not rely entirely on their proof of exclusive use and occupancy by the Red lake and Pemhina Bands in order
to establish Indian title to the lands ceded by the 1863 treaty, so
irrespective of proof submitted of that title, we have the related
question of whether the Government has recogized or acknowledged
their title to the lands ceded. The plaintiffs contend the Government has recognized title to these lands in several different ways-—

'by the boundary line treaty of Augist 19, 1825 as setting this land

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 ' . 593

_ 15 _

aside for the Chippewa Tribe; by the treaty of cession of October 3,
1863; and, by the language of the 1863 treaty itselfo If there has
been such.recognition, then proof of aboriginal use and occupancy to
establish title should not be necessary. .Alcea Band of Tillamooks V.
United States, 103 c. Cls. net, 329 U.s. no.

The boundary treaty of 1825, upon which plaintiffs rely in.part
as placing the ceded lands within recognized Chippewa territory, was
made by the United States with the Chippewa, Siouz.and other Indian
tribes for the stated purpose of promoting_peace among these tribes
by establishing boundaries "dividing their respective countries."

The Chippewa and Sioux Tribes agreed upon such a dividing line which
extended across southern Minnesota in a northresterly direction, reachw
ing the Red River at a point where the Buffalo River enters the Reds
and then continued north down the Red River to the mouth of the Goose
River, which enters from the west. This constituted the northern point
of the line separating the respective territories of the two tribes.
While this line a pears to place an.area in Minnesota on the east

side of the Red River lying between the Buffalo River and north as

r far as a point opposite the mouth of the Goose River within territory designated as Chippewa, it also places the area in Dakota west '
of the Red River from the Goose River south within designated Sioux
territory. Thus, we believe it is quite apparent that the only portion

of the 1863 cession that could possibly be considered as lying within

J. Ind. (21. Comm. 575 ~ 599

-15..

territory assiged to the entire Chippewa Tribe by the 1825 treaty
would be the area on the east of the Red River lying between the point
opposite the mouth of the Goose River and south to the Wild Rice River

in Minnesota. As this tract constitutes but a small portion of the

cession it hardly bears out plaintiffs‘ contention that the lands _

coded in 1863 were within territory set aside by the 1825 treaty for
the Chippewa Tribe.

The treaty of cession oi‘ October 2, 1863 provides that “The Red
Lake and Pembina Bands of Chippewa Indians do hereby cede, sell and
convey to the United States all their right, title and interest in and
to all the lands now owned and claimed by them in the State of Minnesota and in the territory of Dakota within the following described
boundaries. "--then follows a description of the boundaries of the area
of land. which is the basis of plaintiff s‘ claim. Although the treaty
does not contain any express stipulation of recognition of the one
clusive use and occupancy right or title of ‘either the Red Lake or
Pembina Bands to any portion of the area ‘ceded. counsel for plaintiffs
insist that without proof of a superior title the original Indian title
of said bands should be considered as having been recognized by the
Government, for they believe that by its having negotiated and accepted the treaty cession in the language employed in the treaty, the

Government conceded that the Red Lake and Peznbina Bands owned the land

described in the treaty.

l Ind. C1. Comm. 575 600

- 17*In support of their contention that after negotiation and acceptance of the treaty cession the Government should not be permitted
to question ownership, counsel for plaintiffs quote from two Indian
cases the following language:

Where the treaty makers on behalf of the government

were well acqiainted with the claim of the Indians, the

nature of their possessions, their right to exclusive en-_

joyment, they cannot, subsequent to the making of the

treaty, be heard to say that the Indians did not own the
landand had no right to make a cession of it. Omaha Tribe

.v. U. S... 253pU.S. 275.
_ The acceptance of these cessions is an acknowledgment

of the right of the Cherokees to make or withhold them.

Horcester v. Georgia, 6 Pet. 515.
Ar. emmination of these two cases from which the foregoing quotations
are taken shows that in the Omaha case the court had under consideration
lands that had been definitely reserved for the Indians in a treaty, and,
in Worcester v. Georgia the lands had been specifically set apart and
guaranteed by the Government to the Cherokees, while the present case
involves extinguishment of title to la.nd‘claimed but not previously
recognizedlor confirmed. So it is quite apparent that both of the
foregoing statements were written in explanation of an entirely different
situation than is presented here. See Northwestern Shoshone Indians '9'.
U. s., 321; 11.5. 335. 89 L. ed. 985. V

We are not convinced that the effect of this treaty was the recognition by the Government of originallndian title in the ceded area as

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 ’ 501

counsel for plaintiffs contend, for it is quite clear from the words
of grant contained in the treaty that what the Red Lakeiand Penbin
Bands purported to do was to Surrender and quitclaim to the United
States whatever rights they had or claimed to have in the area described. But the fact that the treaty was made for the purpose of
extinguishingywhatever those claimed rights were in the land, and that
a cession was made and accepted under the treaty of those rights, does
not in our opinion amount to a recognition of original Indian title to
the lands described in the treaty. Nor have we found any cases in
which the courts have construed such.a treaty cession made for the
purpose of extinguishing claimed Indian title as a recognition by the
Government of the Indian title in ceded lands described in a treaty.
The same question here presented as to governmental recognition
of Indian title by treaty was presented and fully considered by this
Comnission.in.its opinion in the case of The Qwapaw Tribe v.‘United
States, Docket No. lh, decided by this Commission on March lh, 1951.
In the Quapaw case, the treaty under consideration provided that the
Quapaw “tribe or nation, do hereby ¢ 3 * cede and relinquish to the
‘United States forever, all the lands within the following boundaries
* ° “.” Counsel for the Indians contended (as they do in the instant

case) the above language indicated a purpose on the part of the Governa

ment to recognize the Indian title to the described area by the Quapaw, '

for they believed.that the Indians by ceding and relinquishing the

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 s j 602
.. 19 ..

lands and the Government accepting the conveyance in the words of grant

used conceded that the Quapaws owned all the territory described. In

considering this argument this Commission said:

We are not impressed by the argument, for manifestly
the Indians by the words ‘cede and relinquish‘ intended to
convey all their rights, both actual and asserted, to the
territory described in the treaty. Such words of grant were
commonly used in treaties of cession and we have found no
cases in which the courts have construed them as a recognition by the Government of the Indian title to the lands
ceded, nor have the plaintiffs cited any cases so construing treaties containing such a grant. It is quite
plain that in negotiating with Indians for land cessions
it was impossible in cases involving vast areas to determine the territory actually held and exclusively occupied
by a tribe, so the treaty commissioners were required to
accept the claims of territory made by the particular tribe
or band with whom they were negotiating as to boundaries in
order that there would be a complete eztinguishment of Indian title, actual or claimed, but that does not mean that the
Government recognized original Indian title to all lands
that may be described in a treaty.

We see no material difference as to the effect of the words of
grant in the 1853 Chippewa treaty and those contained in the Quapaw.
The terms used in the 1863 treaty, "cede, sell and convey * '9' 5 all
their right, title and interest in and to all lands now owned and

claimed * * * (underscoring supplied) within the following boundaries, 3

 

indicate more distinctly an assertion of ownership than actual ownership of the area described. And while the Red Lake and Pembina Bands
may have claimed exclusive ownership of all the lands described, the
proof of its use by other Indian tribes and bands at the same time and

in the same manner as the two plaintiff bands does not substantiate

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 575 ' 503

their claim.iNor do we'be1ieve that it was the intention of the Government to
recognize the exclusive use and occupancy title of the Bed lake and
Pembina Bands to any definite part of the area described in the 1863

treaty; we think this is shown by the action taken by the Government

6 in negotiating and concluding the 1863 treaty and the supplemental

treaty of April 12, 1861!».

The only directions concerning the acquisition of the land ceded
were those contained in the act of Congress of July 5, 1862 (12 Stat.
512, 529), and the instructions of William Dole, Commissioner of Indié
an Affairs, to Alexander Ramsey as treaty commissionero These directions were simply to extinguish.the Indian title to the lands of
the Chippewas of northern Minnesota.

On September 23, 1863, Ramsey met in council with the Chiefs and.
headmen of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands at Old Grossin of Red Lake
River in northern Minnesota for the treaty negotiations. The journal
of the proceedings reveals that Ramsey first offered to buy a right of
way along the Red River, but this was‘unsatisfactory to the Indians.
.However, they offered to make a cession of the area, and the boundaries
of the territory claimed by each band were described by the Chiefs.
While Ramsey appears to have questioned their rights in at least a
part of the area described, with the exception of the western portion

of the area claimed by the Pembinas, the boundaries as they were fired

1 Ind. c1. Comm. 575 6 . , g D 604

in the treaty followed generally those claimed by the two bands. After
ten days of negotiations, the treaty was finally agreed on and was exe- i
cuted on October 2, 1863 with the two bands ceding to the United States
all the right, title and interest they owned and claimed in the land
within the boundaries fixed in the treaty. This amounted to some

9 ,800 ,000 acres located on both sides of the Red River in Minnesota and
Dakota Territory. The 1863 treaty was ratified by the Senate on March 1,
1861;, with but two minor amendments.

On April 12, 18611 a supplemental treaty was made and concluded in
Washington, D. C. with the Chiefs of the Red Lake and Pembina Bands,
in which they reaffirxned the 1863 treaty, as amended by the Senate, and
with certain other modifications as to the consideration to be paid
under the 1863 treaty, but with no additional cession of land. ".t'£his
supplemental treaty was -ratified on April 21, 1861+ and proclaimed by
the President.

We are unable to find anything that was done by the Government in
connection with the above described transactions which discloses a
purpose on the part of the Governznent to do more than extinguish Indian title, whatever it may. be, whether actual or asserted. Such directions to "extinguish" have never been considered as a recogition
of aboriginal rights to the land ceded.

The plaintiffs point out in their brief certain words contained

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 . — 505

- 23 in oral expressions used by both the Indian Chiefs and treaty Commissioner Ramsey during the 1863 treaty negotiations which plaintiffs
believe show that Ramsey did not question but considered the area

ceded was occupied by the Red Lake and Pembina Bands. Those used by

rthe Indians were such expressions as “my home," “our land,“ and others

of a similar nature. Those used by Ramsey were “In agreeing to sell
their land," "In buying their land," "Desire a description of their
boundaries,” and others also having a similar meaning. It is submitted
that these words or partial expressions are such as would be expected
when the parties were negotiating for a treaty which had as its purposec
the eztinguishment of title to lands claimed. Some of the expressions
were made before the Indians had even stated what area of land they
claimed and with the same record of the meeting showing that Commissioner
Ramsey did question their ownership of the land described. we do not
think:such general expressions in treaty negotiations, used as they
were, would be sufficient to support a finding of recognition or acknowledgment of an exclusive occupancy title to the land ceded by the
treaty, because we do not believe that the parties using the lenguage
relied upon had in mind the question of recognition or achnowledgment
of Indian title. This is true, for at that time the negotiators were
not concerned with the character of title they were extinguishing; it
made no difference to the Government whether the Indians had title by

‘virtue of immemorial possession or whether their title to the ceded

l Ind. C1. Comm. 575 ' _ 606_

_ 23 lands had been.previously recognized by the defendant.
It is also contended by counsel for plaintiffs that in the absence

of proof of ownership of the area described in the 1863 treaty by other

Zr

Indians, then.the original Indian title of the Red Lake and Pembina

Bands to the area was fixed.and determined by that treaty. There is,
however, proof of other tribes and bands also using and occupying the

ceded area at and prior to the time of the 1863 treaty, but even if

there were no other Indians claiming the area it would still be necessary that the actual occupancy of the plaintiff bands be shown as any
other fact, and.the lack of other claimants does not relieve the plaintiffs
of proving exclusive use and occupancy to establish a claim of original
Indian title to the land. qaapaa Tribe v. ‘United States, supra. As

this Commission.points out in the Quapaw opinion, "It has a1ways'beenr

held that the fee title to lands occupied by Indian tribes vested in , the United States by virtue of discovery (Johnson v. McIntosh, 5 L. ed.
681), and.that the Indian tribes only had the right of occupancy because
of their previous possession. United States v..Alcea, 329 U.S. MO.
.And * * * that such occupancy must be actual and not merely constructive
or merely asserted.’

It is the conclusion of this Commission that the plaintiffs have
not proven that either the Red Lake Band or Pembina Band of Chippewas
Indians had original Indian title to any definite and defined part of

the area of land described in the treaty of October 2, 1863, and they

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 575 r 7 507- an are therefore not entitled to recover on their claims.

Chief Commissioner Witt and Commissioner 0‘Marr concur in the

above opinion.

September 17, 1951

