7 Ln. Cl. Conan. 619   I 619

BEFORE THE 1'I~?13'I.5.N CL.«‘a.E~iS CCMMISS ION

PUEBLO de LSLETA,
Petitioner,
vs. Docket No. 211

THE UNITED STATES OF AM1lBICP.,

~../s.../-../x...-~../H»./\_.#\..a'\._..I

Defendant.
gDecided';': June 5, 1959
FINDINGS OF 

The Commission makes the following Findings of Fact:
Fmding 3..

The Pueblo de Isleta, petitioner herein, is a tribe of Pueblo Indians
recognized by the Secretary of Interior, havingta reguiarly elected Governor
and council to represent it and authorized under the 'I.L.aws of New Mexico to
sue and be sued as a corporation. Petitioner now is ar-_.'1~ for centuries has
been an autonomous Indian community_, and is an identiiiahle “group of American Indians entitled  sue under the Indian  (immission Act of

August 13, 1916. P

irg 2.
The land involved in petitioner’s first cause »::_3:f._’: action is Erncwnlas the
Peralta tract and contains 'lh,73.0.BS.acres, more_or.."iess (Pet. EC. _C}._._ 
tract‘ is a part of a Spanish land grant ‘mam as the Lo de Padilla Grant containing S1,_9hO.82 acres, more or less, made on 1_-iay 11;, 1'E’l8 (Pet. Ex. 5).

Finding 3.

The land insvolved in petitioner‘s second cause of action is Bzn "rm as
the Bosque de los Pines and containsl2,5'82.78 acres, more or less. This
tract is a part of the origiral Spanish land grants known as ‘the Antonio
Gutierrez and J oaquin Sedillo Grants aggregating 22,636.92 acres, more or
less (Pet. Ex. 6), made on November 5'; 'l7l6, and some time prior to 1731i,
respectively. 2

Finding 1;.

For almost 300 years prior to 1821, Spain exercised sovereignty over

Mexico, one of its colonies in the 1~'.’e~.-I World. Near Mexico was then one of

the internal provinces of Mexico, often referred to as New Spain. Mexico

revolted against Spainand became independent in 1821.

 

Finding 5.2
The Spanish Goverrnnent allowed the Indians of New Spain to occupy and
' use so much of the Crown lands as they could use and protected the occupants
against trespasses until the Crown might desire‘ to terminate the same. This.
policy of the Spanich Government was shown by the Recopilac ion de las Indias.
The possession and use of the Crown lands by the Indians xéias at the will of
that government. Spain apparently made gents’ of Crownlands to Indians and
non-Indians without regard to the rights of Indians occupying the same;
Finding 6.

Land grants were made by Spanish authorities in the New World to India’;
pueblos as well as to non-Indians. As early as May 28, 1567, an ordinange
by t11€_=:.p__§'_iceroy of the Province of New Spain ordered that each of.‘ the Indian

 _pueblos as might need land upon which to live and sow," should have given to

7 1__'_nc1, Cl. Comm. 619 H 621

then 500 varas, and more should it be necessary, and that from that time forward there Shmlld 110"!» be granted to any one lands or grounds unless they should
be located 1,000 varas away from the pueblos and houses of the Indians. A
rare was equivalent to about 33 inches. Numerous ‘revisions were thereafter
made in provisions for the extent of pueblos, sometimes measuring from the
church in four directions and sometimes from the farthest house of the place,
 the accepted size of the Endian pueblos of New Mexico became four square
leagues, or approximately 17,000 acres. A 1921.; House of Representatives
Cqzzmittee on Indian Affairs Report states that there were 20 Indian pueblos
of New Mexico with a total population of between 6,500 and 8 _.,000, each pueblo
consisting of about 17,000 acres of land or a total of 31403000 acres in all.
Finding 7.

The period of Mexican control over New Hexico was comparatively short

when compared with the era of Spanish rule over this territory. The;1_?l.a»ni

of Igualag adopted by the revolutionary government of Mexico February 21;,

1821, while New Spain was theoretically a part of Spain, declared that “all

{'»h8_ 0  of New Spain withop.t"'distinctiopn, whether Europeans, {ifricra ns , i

or Indjansippare citizens of this monarchy, with the right tobe employed 

3-T1? I-'>OS“G according to their merit and vhtues and that the person and proiP81‘{7.f of every citizen will be respected by the government.“ These pri.nciples were recognized in the Treaty of Cordova between Spain and Mexico
3‘1€uS’0p 214, 1821, and in the Mexican declarationof Independencechseptemberp
28, 1821. i V

The Government of Mexico assumed ownership of all lands formerly held

by the Spanish Crown. Grants of land made by Spain were recognized by Mexico.

N

t 7 Ind. Clo Comm. 63.9 62

No change in private property rights occurred as a "result of the change :1_n

sovereignty frozn Spain to Eiexico, Laws and decrees pmmulgated by the 8- anish

‘U

Government were regarded ‘by Mexico as continuing in force, except where specifically changedf by the new goverrment.
Fi.-. ding 8.

E311 May 13 , 181:6 war was declared between the United States and Mexico.
On August 18, 18146 General Stephen W. Kearny entered Santa Fe and took possession of all of Raw Mexico in the name of the United States. On February
2, 1811.8 the Treaty of Guadalupe I-Iidalgo was signed, ratifications exchanged
May 30', l8}_L8, and the treaty proclaimed July h, 18348.

The United States acquired sovereignty over New Mexico by virtue of

 the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 183.18. Under the provisions of Articles

 

VIII and IX of that treaty the United States agreed to respect and protect
all propertyirights within the ceded area (9 Stat. 925%?-U-930). Thus, it became the ldutyozf.‘ Congress to recognize and estahlish every title and right
to property nhich before the cession Mexico recognized as’ good and valid.
In other words,  harmony with the rules of international law; as well as
with the terms of the treaty of cession, the change of sovereignty should
work. no change  mspect to rights and title; t whichi-zas good before
should be good after the cession; and that which the law would enforce before should be enforcible after the cession.
Findmg 9.
“ln order to" carry out its obligations under the provisions of Articles

7111 and IX of the Treabr of Guadalupe Hidalgo, and to ascertain what lands

in Iiewliexico were private property, the title to which should be respected

7 Inde Clo C Au;--O 619 623

and protected, the Congress of the United States passed the Act of July 22,
185i; (10 Stat, 308), entitled, “An Act to Establish the Office of Surveyor
”General of New Mexico,  -13-  and for other purposesdl By the act, Congress
provided for the appointment oi‘ a Surveyor General for New Mexico Territory,
who should ascertain the origin, nature, character, and extent of all claims

to lands within such Territory which might have existed under the laws,
usages and customs of Spain and Mexico. A  report of his findings was
"to be submitted to the Congress on all such claims as originated before
the cession of the Territory to the United States with his decision as to
the validity or invalidity of the sane under the laws,, usages and customs
of the country before such cession; and also a report in regard to all existing pueblos in the Territory, showing the extent and locality of each,
the number of inhabitants in each pueblo, and the nature of their titles to
the  Under the provisions of Section 8 of the Act‘, this report was
to be submittedto Congress for such action as might be deemed just and pro?
Per with a view to confirm allbona fide grants and thus give full effect to
the Treaty, of Guadalupe Hidalgo. pp 3 i
         Finding 10. 7       
‘In accordance with the “provisions ofiithepact oi‘ July,22, 3.851;, this
petitioner presented its claim to lard to the Surveyor General. The claim
presented, however, was not for the two tracts of land here in issue but
rather for the tract lcnotxn as the Islet-a Pueblo Grant. Petitioner’-‘s claim
was investigated by the Surveyor General and approved by Congress by the

Act of Deceznber 22, 1858 (11 Stat. 371;). On November l, 186).; aipatent was

issued to petitioner for the Isleta Pueblo Grant containing 110,080.31 acres,

7 Ind. 01., c  619 ’ 621;.

more or less”(Dei‘. &. 10). This tract lies immediately north of the Bosque
de los ?inos and the Lo de Padilla Grant.
Finding 11.
It was not until the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 851;) establishing
the Court of" Private Land Claims, that Congress provided a judicial tribunal

for the adjustment and confirmation of claims under grants from the governa

ments of Spain and Mexico of land in New Mexico ani certain other territories

 

included within the Mexican cessions of l8h8 and 1853. Prior to that Act,
Congress reserved to itself the demrrdination of such claims.

The Court of Private Land Claims began work in Denver, Colorado, July
l, l89l,_ but soon transferred its seat of operations to Santa Fe, New Mexico.
It was not until June 30, 1901;, that all the cases brought before the Court
were completed;

FIRST CAUSE or ACTION

 

Finding 12.

The 1;\’eralta'"Tract is in the southwestern part of the L0 de Padilla
Grant and lies entirely within’ said grant. This grant was made to Diego de
‘Padilla May ILL, 1718 by the Spanish Governor and Captain General of the Providence of New Mexico, which was then under sotrereignty of Spain, and the
grantee ixnmediately placed in possession a of said lands. On February 1:,
1750, the legal heirs of Diego de Padilla deeded and conveyed to the Pueblo
u, title and interest in said lands.

Fh1ding 13.

On or about January 27, 1896, a petition was filed in the United States

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 61.? 625

in

Court of Private Land Claims, entitled the Pueblo of Isleta vs. "he United

 

tates of America. et al., No, 273, seeking confirmation of the Lo de Padilla

 

Grant. On November 28, l896, a Decree (Def.  2) was entered, finding that
the petitioners had sufficiently connected themselves with the grantee Diego
de Padilla and his lawful heirs to entitle them to have the Court approve

the validity of said grant, and that said grant was a perfect grant. The
Court thus decreed:

It is therefore on this the 28th day of November, A.D. 1896,
hereby ordered, adjudged and decreed by this Court, that the title
and claim in and to said lands and real estate within the boundaries herein set forth is a good, legal and valid title, and claim
to said land under the Treaty between the United States and the
Republic of Mexico, known as the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, and
under the laws ordinances usages and customs of Spain and of its
successor in sovereignty, the Republic of Mexico; and that the

_title to the said tract of land as described in the Grant and
juridical possession, with the boundaries aforesaid, be, and the
same is hereby established and confirmed forever to the heirs
assigns and legal representatives of Diego de Padilla, free and
discharged from any and all claims and demands for or against the
same on the part of the United States; and the confirmation or
allowance of said claim shall not confer any right or title to
any gold, silver, or quicku-sj'_'Lver mines, or minerals of the same;

but all such mines and minerals shall remain the property of the
United States.

 G  is declared by the Court that the‘ comfhmation in this decree contained is made under Title 311., of Book J.'\:’., of the “ P
Recopilacion de Leyes de Los Reynos de Las Indies, the Royal De- _
cree of the King. of Spain of October 15th, 1751.1, and the law of

nations. '
Finding 11.3..
Based upon this determination, a patent (Def. Ex. 1) was issued April. at
9, 1908, providing as follows:
NOW’ KNCW YE, That the UNITED STATES OF AMEICA, in consideration

of the prernises, FAVE GIT;i‘..?~I Aim GRANTED and by these presents DO

GIVE. AND G?~?.fL'i\‘T, unto the said HEIRS, .4‘-.SSIG1\B Ail) LEGAL PEPR‘:“SI-:.‘1\‘TATE of DIEGO de P.1LDl'.'!_-LA and to their heirs, the lands above described;

 

7 Ind. Clo Comm. 619 626

TO P.'.=5.V:‘3 AND TO HOLD the sane, together with all the rights,
privileges, rhnmunities, and appurtenances, of whatsoever
nature theremto belonging, unto the said Heirs, Assigns and
Legal Representatives of Diego de Padilla, and to their
heirs and assigns forever; Provided, Thatfthis grant shall
not confer any right or title to any gold, silver, or quicksilver mines or minerals of the same; but all such mines and
minerals shall ‘remain the property of the United States with
the right of working the same; and that the said grant is made
subject to all the limitations and terms of the said Act of
Congress of March 3, 1891.1

‘This patent to the L0 de Padilla Grant was, in effect, a quitclaim
deed fromgthle United States and did not af"ect any other private rights to
such land.

Cniiay 15, 179?, the I’ueblo of Isleta, sold and conveyed a portion of
the Lo de Padilla Grant to Hazmel Aragon and twelve other Spanish settlers.
Pecause of the uncertainty of the boundary locatiors, a continuous controversy ensued between the Indians and non-Indian settlers forggmany yearsShe non-Indians cla  under the 1797 conveyance brought an action
to quiet title, entitled Federico Sanchez, et al vs. Pueblo de Isleta, No.
2.715 in the Valencia County District Court.  or about February 3, 1915,
the Court entered the following decree (Def. Ex. 3),: S g

This Cause having been heretofore argued and submitted to

the court with leave to the respective parties to submit written

briefs, and counsel for plainti:-‘.’fs having long since submitted

such brief to the court’ while counsel for the defendant has '

failed and neglected to present any such brief on behalf of

defendant, the court being not: sufficiently advised in the pnaxises,
announces its decision in favor of the said plaintiffs and against
the said defendant and, as required by the statum in such case made

and provided, makes the following findings of fact:

1 1. That in the year 1718, Diego de Padilla petitioned the
Governor and Captain General of the Kingdom and province of New

7 Ind. Cl. Corzrao 619 627

I~ie:~:ico, for a grant of land described as bounded on the east by
the Sandie. Iriountains, on the north by the lands of Pueblo de
Isleta, on the west by the river bed of the Rio Del Norte, and on
the south by the lands of Valencia, which grant was made to the
said Diego de Padilla by the then Gomrnor and Captain Generaf.

of the Kingdom and province of New Mexico , and on the lhth day of
May," l7l8, the said Diego de Padilla was placed in possessionof
said tract by Captain Alonzo Garcia, Alcalde Mayor of the jurisdiction of Isleta.

2. That on the th day of February, 1750, the legd heirs
v of said Diego de Padilla, deeded and conveyed by lawful conveyance,
and for a valuable consideration to the Pueblo of. Isleta, all their
right, title and interest in and to said tracts

, 3. That on the 15th day of May, 1797, Manuel Aragon, Manuel
Antonio Aragon, Domingopchavez, Vincents Chavez, Juan Aragon, Francisco Javier Aragon, Jacinto Sanchez, Felipe Montoya, Simon Sedillo,

p Francisco Garcia, Jose Ignacio Molina, Lorenzo Romero and Francisco

‘* Aragon purchased from the said Pueblo of Isleta and the said Pueblo
of Isleta conveyed to the said persors, a portion of the said grant
madegas aforesaid to Diego de Padilla, and by his heirs conveyed to
said Pueblo of Isleta, which portion so purchased by said above
-snamedpersonsis bounded on-_the north by lands of the defendant, on
the south by lands of Los Lentes or Peraltas, on the east by the
mountain, and on the guest by _the_Rio G-rande del Norte, measuring from

south to north 2hi2S-é varas.

11. That the said purchasers of said portion of saidwgr-ant to
Diego de Padilla entered into possession of the same, and they and
their descendants and assigns have remained in continuous possession
t1'_1~3IT,8Of twithout any interference, from anyone until just before the
beginning; of this suit, and that the plaintiffs herein and those
whom they represent and forwhom they act, are descendants and asSigns Of Said original purchasers under the deed of May 15, 1797.

. 5., That on the 27th day of January, l896, the said defendant p
filed a petition in the court of private land claims praying for the
confirmation to it; and its successors forever of the said grant of
‘made to Diego de Padilla, as the legal representative of the said
°35'l€3-118.1 grantee, and on the 28th day of November, 1896, by a final
decree of said court of private land claims, the said grant of land
was established and confirmed forever to the heirs ,' assigns and legal
representatives of said Diego de Padilla, free and discharged from
any and all things and demands for or against the same on the part
of the United States.

6. 'i"na_t shortly before the beginning of this suit, the defendant,

? Ind. Cl. Comm. 619 t 628

A

to interfere with the possession by plaintiffs and those whom they

represent, of a portion of the land purchased by their predecessors

in title from the defendant on May 15, 1797 , and that prior to that

time no such attempt had ever been made or any claim of title to said
land ever set up by or for said defendant.

or some of its members, ‘orewnding to represent it, made some attempts

Based upon the foregoing findings of fact, the court makes the
following conclusions of law.

That the confirmation by decree of the court of private land
claims inured to the benefit of the said plaintiffs and those whom
they represent quite as fully as to the benefit of the defendant as
they were as hereinbefore found, as matter of fact descendants or assigns of the persons who purchased the lands in question in this
case from the defendant on Hay 15, 1797.

That the title to the land described in the complaint herein is
fully and completely vested in the said plaintiffs and those whom

they represent and they are entitled to the relief prayed in said
complaint.

t is, therefore, ordered, adjudged and decreed by the court that
the estate of the said plaintiffs and of those whom they represent,
the descendants or successors in title and interest of the said

Manuel Aragon, Manuel Antonio A-ragon, Domingo Chavez, Vmcente Chavez‘,
Juan Aragon, Francisco Javier Aragon, Jacinto Sanchez, Felipe Kontoya,

, . Simon Sedillo, Erancisco Garcia, Jose Ignacio Molina, Lorenzo nonzero

and Francisco Aragon, who made the purchase hereinbefore mentioned

from‘ the defendant on May 15, l797,"in the said tract of land so,purchased by said persons at that time,_which is bounded on the. north by =
lands. of the defendant, on the south by lands of Loss Lentes or Peraltas,
on the east by the mountain and on the west by the Rio Grande del Norte,
tfnich measures from south to north 21425-3 varas, be and the sane hereby
is established against any and all adverse clams of defendant or of
any person or persons clai.m_'1ng under, by or ‘through defendant and that
defendant be and it hereby is barred and forever estopped from having
or claiming any right or title to said premises adverse to the plaintiffs and those whom they represent, am that the title of plaintiffs
and‘ those whom they represent thereto be and the same hereby is forever quieted and set at rest.

__ t is further ordered that the plaintiffs do have arn recover from
the defendant their costs in this behalf expended, and that they have
execution therefor. i ‘

The Pueblo was not represented in this action by the United States or

2

an attorney employed by the United States.

Ola--hq

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 619 629

Finding 16.

The controversy involvirg the Peralta lands was f inally submitted to
the Pueblo Lands Board. By Act of June 7, l92h (h3 Stat. 636) Congress
provided for the creation of the Board in an effort to provide for the final
adjudication and settlement of a very complicated and difficult series of
conflictingtitles affecting lands claimed by the Pueblo Indians of New
Mexico. It consisted of three members 5 one representing the Secretary of
Interior, another the ttorney General of the United States, and a third
appointed by the President of the United States.

. Under the provisions of the Act, the Yueblo Lands Board was directed
to imrestigate, determine and report upon all lands within thepexterior
boundaries of any land granted or con_€‘ir.z1ed to the Pueblo Indians of New

Mexico under authority of the United States or of any prior sovereignty, or

. acquiredby said Indians as a cczmmunity by purchase, or otherwise, title

to whichihthei "board shall find not to have been extinguished in accordance

with 1... provisions   of this Act.”

 ;;;::i Un’dqer. the provisions of Section 6 , the Board was also required to in-  Vestiéteand determine what lands or water rights ofthe Pueblo had been

I_l0st._If  loss occurred as a result of the ‘failure of the United States
3333093517 900 prosecute the rights of the Pueblo, the United States was to I
be held liable therefor and an award made to the Pueblo to compensate it
for such loss. Any award of compensation was subject to judicial review by
the U1'1i“5ed States District Court and the Circuit Court of Appeals.

Section 2 provided that one cow of the reports of the Pueblo Lands

I Board had to be filed with the United States District Court for the District

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 619 I 530
of New Mexico. Section 3 required the United States Attorney General, upon
the filing of each report to forthwith cause to be filed in the District
Court a suit to quiet title to the lands described in said report as Indian
lands the Indian title to which had been determined by said report not to
have been extinguished.

Section LL protected the right oi‘ Pueblo Indians of New Mexico to as==

.sert their title to any land in any court’ 03'.‘ competent jurisdiction at any

 

time prior to the filing of field notes and plats by the Secretary of the

Interior as provided in Section 13.
  ’ Finding 17.
Ch August'l?, 1928 the Pueblo Board issued two reports on the Isleta
Pueblo: Report #1 on title to lands granted or confirmed to the Pueblo Indians not extinguished (Def. Ex. 7) , and Report #2 concerning Indian titles

extinguished‘ (Def. Ex. 8). In Report #2 (pp. 5-7) the Board deals with the

Peralta Tract as follows :

The L0 de Padilla Grant, originally made to Diego Padilla

011 May 11:, 171.8, was purchased by the Pueblo of Isleta on Februar:,7 I4,’ 1750, from the heirs of'said Padilla and patented to

the said‘Pueblo on April 9 , 1908. Said grant so patented contains 51,9ho.82 acres. 12.11 of the land includedin this grant

was conveyed to the Pueblo of Isleta in 1750 by the heirs of

Diego Padilla. The grant appears to have been confirmed by the
Court of Private Land Claims on November 2, 1896. However, on
February 3, 1915, there was handed down a decision by the Judge of the
District Court for the County of Valencia in a case known as Federico
Sanchez, et al. vs. the Pueblo of Isleta. t appears that in

179'? ten natives, presemnably the descendants of the original grantees,
purchased back from the Pueblo Indians part of the grant. The decree
states that the descendants of these purchasers entered into possession and retained possession until just before the beginning of the
suit. The description of the area in the decree however, which it
was alleged was at that time so deeded to the Indians, is not such
as __to enable either the Indians or the non-Indians to definitely
identify the tract, ard this has resulted in continuous controversy
between the interested parties as to their respective rights in the
area referred to. At the town of Peralta a considerable settlement

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 619 631

is situated near the river, toward the eastern end of the tract
so deeded, and the Indians have never claimed , ossession of or
am title to the area within and surrounding this town.

The situation resulted in negotiations between the people

of Peralta and the heirs of the original Spanish grantee on the

one hand, and the Isleta Indians through their duly appointed representatives on the other, looking toward an agreement whereby a fair
division of the Lo de Padilla area could.be arrived at. .After a

good deal of negotiation, an understanding was reached whereby
1b,7l0.8S acres, comprising the Peralta settlement and adjacent lands
were segregated from the Lo de Padilla Grant, and to the satisfaction
of the Indians and nonelndians alike, set aside by the Board as the
area to which the Peralta people are entitled. The Board therefore
finds (see Report No. 1) that of the Sl,9h0.82 acres patented as the
Lo de Padilla Grant, the Indians are now entitled to 37,229.97 acres
and the nonylndians to lh,7lO.8S acres. D The Board finds .as to this llv,,7lO.85 acres known as the Peralta
3' tract, that it could not have been recovered by the United States by
seasonahle prosecution as defined in the Act, and that therefore the

Isleta Indians are entitled to no compensation for the loss thereof.

Another document ‘of the Lands Board appears in the record, a Memorandum dated, June 30, l93l (Def. Ex. l9). It covers the various areas found

.'to have been extinguished, upon which no award was recommended to the Indian5- The Board.said that obviously the Government could not have recovered
these lands by seasonable prosecution.because title had'become perfect and
complete in the nonslndianslpriorto the freaty of February2,ldh8, Such D
an area was at-Isleta. The Isleta case, however, is said to be different
from the rest. "Here a voluntary agreement was arrived at between the parties. Deeds covering the compromise were exchanaed‘with the approval of the
Secretary of the Interior". Details are given.similar to the findings in
R9P0?ti¥2,‘with the addition.of certain.testimony showing that the Isleta
approved the settlement. Joe Padilla, governor of'the pueblo, is quoted

a3,t05Pi§Yina ‘that it was a fair deal and was agreed.to by the council.

7 Ind. 01.  51.9 V 632

Pablo Eoeita, Antonio Afoeyta, a member of the council, and Jose Carpio, also
a menfoer, agreed to Governor Hager:nan‘s statement as to the exact area to foe
:'Lnclude-:1 in the transaction. Hagerman was a member oi‘ the Board.

  o

 

The Ekchange Quitclaim deed dated the lst day of May, 1928 , is set out

in the Petition as Ebchibit G. The instrument expresses the desire of the

parties to anicably settle and dispose of for all time the controversies

between the parties as to where w‘thin the Lo de Padilla grant the 2h2S%varas oi‘ land claimed by the non-Indians under theAValencia County; District

Court decree lies. Therein the "Pueblo of Isleta quitclaimed to the nonIndians all their right, title and interest in and to lh, 710.85 acres as

I described by meets and bounds ther-;:-in, and the non-Indianstquitclaimed to

 

the Isleta all. their right, title and interest in and to the remainder of

the Lo de Padilla grant.
The signatures include that of Walter C. Cochrane as a witness. He was

the special Pueblo attorney employed and paid by the United States. He

1 represented the. Isleta before the Lands Board and‘ in the negotiation of the

settlement by Ebcchange Deed. %

While the deed states that the Pueblo of Isleta was "acting through its
governor and council by and with the consent of the Secretary of Interior of
the United States of America", it does not appear that the deed was fomally
submitte to the Secretary for approv 1. The original deed was lost. The
Secretary of Interior,‘ by letter of December lo, l93l to the Honorable Dennis
Chavez _(Appendi:r D, Def. Brief pp. 1.16-117)., adxdsed that an exanination of

the files disclosed no record of the receipt oi‘ the deed, and said iurthem

.
. _ _ . -.\..._

7 Ind. Cl. ache. 61.9 ' 633

From the context of the letter (from Mr. Chavez concerning
the mutual exchange deed), it appears that the deed was one
executed in the settlement of claims by the Pueblo Lands Board,
and does not require su nission to the Secretary of the Interior
for approval.

Finding 19.

The Pueblo Lands Board operated for about eight years from a date shortly
after the eraciment of the Act ih June 1921; to the beginning of the fiscal
year of l933 (Def. Ex. l5). . ‘

Beginning December 27, 1930, the Pueblos indicated some dissatisfaction with the findings of the Board and issued challenges directed against
the actions of the Board. These challenges took the form of independent‘
suits in ej student against the white claimants of Pueblo lands and were
brou@t under authority of Sec. 14 of the Pueblo I-ands Act. The effect of
these suits, or at least their prosecution to final judgment, was tantamount to rejection by the Pueblos oi‘ the settlenent conteznplatedl by the 1921:,
Act.” Congress and the Secretary of the Interior became concerned by the
threat of this litigationphtrhich promised to bring about a situation identical with that which had existed prior to the enactment of the 1921; Act.

it this stage of the controversy investigations were: by the
Subcorrmittee on Indian Investigation of the Serate Indian Affairs Committee.
These 3hW95’°i3ations were carried on in I-Iashington and New Mexico and culminated in a report filed by the Committee Januazgr 6, 1932 (Def. Ex. 13)
39003539351? Sllpplemental legislation to compensate the Indians and effectuate the purposes of.‘ the l92h Act. Thus Sec. 2 of the proposed bill au-B»
thorized that there be appropriated to the several Pueblos therein named

an increase in compensation over and above that awarded by the Pueblo Lands

7 1nd. Cl. Cosme 619 1 63].;

Board. This, it was hoped, woxid brim to an end the most ‘troublesome and
ancient of.‘ land controversies affecting Indian lands under the jurisdiction
of the United States. It would conserve the effect of the work done from
1925 to 1932 at a cost of severd hundred thousand dollars by the Pueblo

Lands Board, the Department of the Interior, and the Department of Justice.

, Prompt and favorable cons ideration of the bill was recommended by the Secre,1:.ary of the Interior (Def. Ex. 15, o. 18). t was enacted into law May 31,

Q

 (1.18 Stat. 108), and provided for an appropriation to the Pueblo de

lsleta of 5h7,?S1.31 as compensation over and above that originally awarded

by the Pueblo Lands Board.

 

Finding 20.

Before the Senate Subcomzriittee, the Pueblo of Isleta was represented
by private counsel Judge Richard H. Hanna. The Subcommittee investigated and"
held hearings onthe Pueblo Lands Boards proceedings as to the Is1eta,ivin-1
cluding the Perelta settlement.

The record of the hearings indicates that Pablo Abeita, Secretary of
Islet-a Counciliiin 1931, had no comP‘laint1 to make about the fairnessoi‘
 Peralta settlement negotiated between the Indians and settlers in 1928
(Def. Etc. 12, p. 10071;); that Charles H. Jennings, a member of the Pueblo
I-ands Board, felt that the settlement was satisfactory to the Indians (p. .10098) and that the%Board considered  fair, too (13. 10096); that Lbuis Ho
Warner, Chairman of the Board, testified that the officers of the Pueblo came_
before the Board and expressed satisfaction with the settlement (p. 10096),
and that he, too, as well as the other Board members, thought that the Indians

"305 a Very good trade" (13. 10-398); that Walter C. Cochrane: Bhe 5980-“S13

7 Ind. Cl. (Corn. 619 635

Attorney employed by the Goverrment to protect the interests oi‘ the Indians,
was of the opinic-n that the settlement was "qu;3.te fair" (Pa. l0096)3 and in
the testimony of Judge Richard H. Hanna, he would not say that the settleInent was unfair, but did believe that the Indians should have been awarded
some compensation in the matter (13. 10097).»

Further evidence submitted to the Investigating Committee at the
hearing in Washington included (1) a certified copy oi’ the exchange quitclaim deed dated May l, 1928 (Def. Ex. l2a, pp. ILll§S and 13.168 «- 11170),
which is the same deed now before this Commission; (2) a statement of the
Pueblo interpreter and the Governor of the Pueblo and two rr_1embers of the
Pueblo Council at the time the deed was executed, indicating that it was
executed uponthe advice of H. J . Hagermang the member of the Pueblo Lands
Board representing the Secretary of the Interior, and other Indian'Bureau
officials Vtogeliininate a. lot of litigation" (pp. 3.1.155 and 11163-113451;);
(3) an affidavit of Diego Abeita intended to show a value of at least $10.00
P91‘ acre forlandgv inithe "Isleta tract" (pp.  and “pp. 11.159--l3l<%5l)3 (14)
a "e='i.1engthv.statementbvJudseiama specifically roasting that petitionerigbe awarded,compensation at the rate of ‘$2.00 per acrepfor loss of
the Peralta tract (pp. 1Ll_‘LS5'-lIgl_'LS8); (S) and finallyga written statement by
Ho 5- H?-geman regarding the L0 de Padilla Grant and Peralta settl-anent (pp.

11161;-3.157).
Finding 21.
In reports of March 16, 1932 (Def. EX. 11;, p. S)  of May 10,

1933 (Def. Ex. 15, p.14), the House of Representatives Committee on Indian

Affairs sta ted:

7 Inda Clo C~..z;1J.;:c»  I 

with respect to the i'igure included in section 2 of the proposed
bill (H. R. 13011;) for the pueblo of Isleta, in addition to the amount
which constitutes the difference between the amount of the award and
the appmised value of the tracts of land involved, which is the sum
of $2,hhh.?l, there is hcluded further compensation in the amount of
$29,191.70 for 134,710.85 acres on the basis of $2 per acre. The Board
made no award for this tract, apparently holding in error that it could
not have been recovered for the Indians. The Board held, however, as
to two small tracts in the same area that recovery could have been
made by the Government, and at-7a.rded 32 ‘an acre for these tracts. The
necessity for compensation to justify the divesting -of title requires
the extending of the compensation at $2 per acre to include all of the
acreage within this area, for which reason the ccmmittee approves to

the increase of award for this pueblo for this particular tract of
land. L

Thereafter, the amount of $29,h2l. 70 was included in the appropriation made
by Congress as set out in Finding 19 and was received by the Pueblo of Isleta,
as aclqiowledged by the petitioner herein. a

Finding 22 o

 

Some of the evidence introduced by the petitioner in this docket is the

sane as that before the Cong-essional Committees. In addition, Antonio Abeita, '

Secretary and interpreter for the Pueblo de Isletadin l928 when the Peralta

dispute was settled, testified before this Commission in Albuquerque, September lO, l95'h and in Santa Fe, Decenber 11,, 1956, regarding the execution of
the exchange quitclaim deed involving thePer-alta tract. his testimony indicates that the deed in question was signed willingly by the Indians, and
that he interpreted for them the meaning of such document to the best of his i
ability. He further testified that nothing nas said about compensating the
Indians but that the Indians expected compensation for the "lands they were
quitclaitlinga Diego Abeyta testified in both proéeedtings.

Finding 23.

2 In_l9h9 the defendant transferred title to three tracts or land to the

7 '_r_1-151, (31, Conan. 619 g 637

United States in trust for the iPueblo oi‘ Isleta, said lands aggregating 17 ,LL92.7l
acres, one of which tracts included most of t .e Peralta tract in the arrzount of
jL1,l.Lr,2.39 acres (Def. Ex. 16, DD. 9-103 63 Stat. 601;). Thisland had been acquired by the United States by purchase in the l930’s as a part of a submarginal land acquisition project.
Finding 214..

The Commission finds that the defendant‘s actions regarding the Peralta
tract and the ‘Pueblo of Isleta were not less than fair and honorable; that
the Peralta settlement was fairly negotiated before the Pueblo Lands Board
and was of benefit to all parties; and that the Exchange Quitclaim Deed was
sufficient in form "and execution to accomplish the%set‘ole1nent, was made for

a mutual consideration, and did not require the subsequent formal approval

of the Secretary of the Interior.

HSECIOND CAUSE OF ACTION
Finding 25.

West off the lo de Padilla Grant lie two contiguous tracts of land coaPrising, the. Antonio Gutierrez sea Joaquin Sedillo Grants. I-Iithinlthe escterior 
boundaries of‘ these grants lies the Bosque de los uPinos containiig 2,S8-2.78 '1
acres, more orrless (Pet. Ex. 6). The east boundary of the Bosque tract
is the old bed of the Rio Grande Riivergand the west boundary’ is the river
bed after the river changed its course. _

Finding 26.
0“ °r abmlt Septefnber 9, 1896 two petitions (Def. E. 18 ,pa 1) were filed

in the Court of.‘ Private Land Claims ‘oyi J .' Francisco Chavez against the United

,..-in.

 

7 Dad. 01. Conn. 619 638

States, seeking confirmation of the Antonio. Gutierrez and Joaquin Sed;_.....'1"o
Grants. On or about Tiovenfoer 13, l896 petitions (p. S) were filed in the

same dockets by the Pueblo de Isleta through their attorney G. L. Solignac

‘ praying that it be allowed to join in said causes as a co-petitioner with -. _v t

the said J. Francisco Chavez; that it adopted as its own, an of the allergatiors of the Chavez petition; and joined in the prayer for a con:E'i:r:ma_tion
oi‘ the Gutierrez-Sendillo Grant therein described.

In the proceedings before the Court of Private land Claims Chavez did
not claim title to the entire Gutierrez-Sedillo Grant but only to the Bosque
de los Pines; all of the evidence presented by him clearly showed that only
the Bosqute tract was claimed (pl 8).

Neither did the Pueblo de Isleta at that time make claim to the Bosque
de lospiphinos. pi Its claim was to all the lands within the Gutierrez-Sedillo
Grant nest oi‘ the Rio Grande as its channel then flowed. This excluded
‘the Bosqu.e"de“'los Pines which lay east of the river between the old_ and new

channels. There was no dispute about this claim by the Pueblo since all

t parties stipulated (p. 10) “that the Pueblo of Isleta has had ‘open and notorious possession and use of lands on the west side of the Rio Crrande -3- -3- -3-?as far back as the memory’ of the oldest man living within  pueblo can extend, and that such possession and use have been claimed to be under the

purchase from the heirs of Clmente Gutiemez, of.‘ which some documentary

' -evidence has been presented in the paper -3-? -~‘’- % dated May 3, 1808 ," - (p. 27)

and other papers (pp. 27-30) presented by the officers of the Pueblo.
0nJune 2, 189? the court entered a decree, after a formal hearing and

other p_roo.€‘s (pp. 6-35’) had been taken in open court on behalf oi‘ both

.__ ..-.._.._.___...:..--.,_.... - 7 Ind. Cl. CC.-7:1, 619 T 639

petitioners and after counsel had been heard on behalf of defendant and petitioners. The court found (pp. 35-37):

1.- That on November 5, 11716 the Spanish Governor of New
Mexico granted to Antonio Gutierrez a tract of land bounded on
the north by an arroyo with some cottonwood trees that comes
down from the hi_l_'Ls, on the south by the Pueblo of San Cl-emente,
on the east by the Rio del Norte, and on the west by the hills of

the Euerco River.

2. That some time prior to 1731; a grant was made to Joaquin
Sedillo, who had also acquired some additional land, the whole
tract being bounded on the north by the Pueblo de Isleta lands, on
the south by the northern boundary of the aforesaid Gutierrez Grant,
on the east by the Rio del Norte and on the west by the ceja of
the Rio Puerco.

""3. That in l78S Clemente Gutierrez died in possession and on ing both of the above tracts. i

' "11"." That some time prior to Eay 3, 1808 the. Pueblo de Isleta acquired the title of Clemente Gutierrez to all of the above lands
lying west of the present river bed of the Rio Grande del Norte, and
had entered into possession of the same and has held such possession
down to the present time. T 5., That by a number of deeds from the children and heirs of — I
r Clemente Gutierrez, beginning in 1819, Francisco Xavier Chavez acqhired all of the Gutierrez title to the above lands east of the

present river bed of the Rio Grande del Norte,-which tractis
 the Bosqueppdelos Pines. T r

p 6. That after the making of the original grants the Rio Grande
" formed a new channel (its present channel) west of its original channel and that the lands bet:-teen the old and new channels have since

become knot-an as the Bosque de los Pines, acquired by Francisco
XHVIBI‘ Chavezo '

The court, therefore, entered its decree in which it confirmed title
in the T Bosque de los Pinos tract to J . Francisco Chavez and title in
the remainder of the Gutierrez-Sedillo Grant, namely, for those lands west
05 the Bosque tract, in favor of the Pueblo de lsleta.
Finding 27.

Upon 3PDea1 by the United States, the determination by the Court of

7 End. 01. Comzn. 619 ‘etc

Private Land Claims respecting claims of.‘ J. Francisco Chavez and the Pueblo
de Isleta to lan‘ vrithin the ‘Gutierrez-Sedillo Grant was ai‘:=’;‘irned by the

United States Suprane Court (United States v. Chavez, 175, U. S. 509, 525’).

The appellees were represented by Fran}: VI. Clancy. This decree, however,did not ‘affect’ any private rights or conflicting claims of’, sach parties bet 

ween thenselves. The proceeding m the Court of Private Land Claims was not
litigation between conflicting private interests; it was an action "against
the United States, and determilative only of the'titl'e against the United
States.“ Any conflicting claims between Chavez and the Pueblo de Isleta had
to be so. .1 itted to the courts of general jurisdiction. The Court oi‘ Private
Land Claims had no authority to determire or adjudicate conilicting interests
in lands bettveen private parties.

The result of the proceedi'r.gs before the Court of Private Land Claims
and Supreme Court, ‘therefore, was that as against any claimuof the United
tates to the lands ‘within ‘the Gutierrez-Sedillo Grant, the claim of the

Pueblo de Isleta was confirmed to all lands except the Bosque de lcs Pines;

and the at title to the Bosque de los Pinos was confirmed in J. Francisco Chavez.
Such a detennimation, said the Supreme Court, was clearly 1-Iithin the juris-9
diction of the Court of Private Land Claims
On November 15, 1909 a joint patent (Def. ‘Ex’. 6) was issued to J. Fran.cisco Chavez and his heirs and to the Pueblo of Isleta for the separate
tracts _as found and described by the Court of Private Land Claims.
*;;.- Finding 28.
-The Pueblo Lands Board, in its Report #2 (Def. Ex. 8, p. 14%-5), foul‘-d

:£'ifteen_ tracts aggregating 59.8h8 acres to have been extinguished within the

7 Ind. 01. Comm. 619 . 6}_:_]_

area of the Gutierrez and Sediuo Grants and made an award therefor. The Board

I

:EI::r*ther-'i"oIn1a that "there does not seem to have been any serious controversies
“between the Indians and non-Indians in this section. “

At the l93l_hearings refemed to in Finding 20, Mr. Jenn3'_ngs, a member
of"‘ch'e"b'oard, considered the ccmfirmation of the Bosque tract to Chavez by

“the Court of Private Land Claims and the afi‘irmance by the Supreme Court to

"berres adjudicata and that the board had no authority to go into that matter.

Neither the Eouse (Def. Ex. 11:, 15) nor the Senate (Def. EC. 13) Reports

mention the Bosque tract, and Congress never made an award to the Isleta therefor.

Finding 29.

 

{L

The Comnission finds that the Pueblo of Isleta never purchased the Bosque
de los Pinos tract; that’ the area became private property by reason of the
1716 Gutierrez Grant and the SediLLo Grant scmetime prior to 17314; and that
‘thereafter, the use of the Bosque tract by the Isleta did not and could not

give the Isleta a ccmpensable interest in such land.

/s/ EDGAR s. E-EITT
it Chief Commis sioner

 

/s/ LOUIS J. on.‘-19.2212
Associate Commissioner

/s/ In‘. M. HOLT
Associate Commissioner

