BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMHISSION

Tm comm D‘A1E1‘TE TRIBE )
or‘ INDIANS, - ;
Petitioner, 3
V. 3 Docket No. 81
THE UNITED STATES OF ARERIGA, g
Defendant. 3
mciaed: August 26, 1955
Appearances:

Ralph G. Wiggenhorn, with whom
were Leonard S. Strahan and
Bruce L, Boatty,

Attorneys for Petitioner.

John D. Sullivan, with whom was
Mr. Assistant Attorney General

Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant.

0PINION‘g§_g§§rCOHHISSION
0'Marr, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

On motion of the defendant, the Commission limited the hearing in
this case to the question of petitioner's right to the land claimed to
have been used and occupied by the Coeur d‘Alene Enibe, and the area
thereof.

Petitioner contends that from time immemorial until relinquished

by cession in the Agreement of March 26, 1887, 26 Stat. 989, I Kapp. M19,

is 13

the Coeur dinlene Tribe has claimed, possessed, used and occupied exclusively the territory as described in Finding 11. The area claimed
would amount to approximately four million acres less some 600,000
acres set aside as a reservation for the tribe by executive order in
1873. (Pet. Ex. 95).

Since the first white contact in 1806, when Lewis and Clark were
making their western exploration, the Goeur d’Alene have always been
located by fur traders, explorers, missionaries and government agents
in the vicinity of Coeur dinlene Lake and its tributaries. In l8h2,
Father de Smet ordered a mission established among the Coeur d’Alene
and Father Point, the first missionary to reside with them, found them
occupying twenty-seven different localities within the area of the lands
now claimed by the tribe. Father de Smct in 1858 described the territory of the tribe from north to south and east to west as embracing
100 miles in each direction. In 1859, the same missionary said that
taking Coeur d'Alene Lake as a central point their country extended fifty
miles to every point on the compass. (Finding H).

iGovernor Isaac Stevens, in 185M, while on his expedition to locate

a railroad from the Mississippi to the west coast, reported the tribe as

,living "on the upper part of the Coeur d’Alene River, above the Spokanes,

and around the lake of the same name," Governor Stevens on this journey
made many treaties with the neighboring tribes but due to an Indian outbreak failed to negotiate a contemplated treaty with the Coeur d'Alene.
As the years passed, whites began to settle in Coeur d'Alene country.

In 1867, an executive order reservation was set side for the Coeur dialene

413+

--Int-him!-In-..—... - .-.

including Coeur d’Alene Lake and all its tributaries.

but the Indians did not learn about this for several'years. In 1873,

an agreement was entered into with the tribe (Finding 6) under which
the tribe agreed to relinquish all right and title to the lands claimed

by the tribe outside of the reservation agreed to be established by said

agreement. This agreement was never ratified but the reservation was

set aside by executive order of November 8, 1873 (Def. Ex. No. 3). Nothing

further was done to secure a cession of the lands claimed by this tribe,
which in 1885 petitioned the Government to send a commission to treat with
them for their lands outside the 1873 executive order reservation (Finding

7),_until an agreement was concluded with the tribe by the Northwest

Indian Commission on March 26, 1887, (Finding 8). By this agreement, the
tribe,iunder Article 2, ceded, granted, relinquished and quitclaimed all

right,_title and claim to all lands outside the reservation. Unlike the

unratified agreement of 1873, the 1887 agreement did not describe the

lands ceded but the Commission referred to the 1873 agreement and the

tribe's petition of 1885 for the description of the lands in reporting

the 1887 agreement. (Finding 8).

In the early part of the twentieth century, James.A. Teit made a

study of the Coeur dfeleno. Although Teit was not an ethnologist by

education, his work was edited by Franz Boas who became known as "the

father of.American.Anthology." Teit wrote that the country occupied by

the tribe was almost entirely in what is now the State of Idaho, with a

small part extending into Washington. He said “they held all the waters

of Spokane River from a little above Spokane Falls to the sources,

To the southeast

H15

their territory extended across the head of the Clearwater, a tributary
of the Snake River. Their eastern boundaries were the Coeur d‘Alene and
Bitter Root Mountains.“ (Finding 5).

Petitioner contends it has proven Indian title in two ways to_the.
lands claimed by the tribe and described in the tribe's petition of 1885
(Finding 7). First, petitioner urges that it has shown that it has
proven title by a factual showing that the tribe used or occupied a definable area, and secondly, by showing a recognition or acknowledgment
of aboriginal title by the United States that the tribe had such title.
Defendant, on the other hand, urges that the proof does not sustain
Indian title to all the lands claimed by the tribe and that there was no
recognition of Indian title in the tribe by the United States to the

area claimed.

Use and Occupanci
In support of the claim that the Coeur dJA1ene Tribe had exclusively

used and occupied the area described in Finding 7, petitioner introduced
into evidence historical documents, such as the writings of the missionr

aries, fur traders, explorers and government agents. Many of these docur

ments and maps are cited in the findings. All of these prove beyond doubt
that the Coeur dFAlene were a semi-sedentary people with a tribal organization and that the tribe from time immemorial held, used and occupied a
given area of land within what are now the States of Idaho and Washington.
Nor does the defendant deny that the Coeur d‘Alene were using and coCuPying lands in the vicinity of Coeur dinleno Lake at the first white

Contact and ever since ~- but would limit the tribe to the area within the

1873 reservation.

1:16

In addition to historical documents and maps which were introduced
through the testimony of Father William N. Bischoff (Tr. 12—1u9, 292-392),
historian, the petitioner called upon.Ir. Verne F. Bay, a recognized
authority on the plateau tribes, and Dr. Alfred William Bowers, anthro—
pologist.

Dr._Ray, an authority on the tribes in the plateau area, has had
published several ethnological works on the area including "Tribal Distribution in Eastern Oregon and Adjacent Regions," (1938), (Pet. Ex. 120extracts): “Cultural Relations in the Plateau of Northwestern America?
(1939), (Pet. Ex. 121 - extracts). In Petitioner's Exhibit 119, at page
103, Dr. Bay has a map showing the native territorial distribution in the

northern plateau about l850. On this map the Coeur d'Alene territorial

boundaries are shown and they appear to conform generally with the_
boundaries on.petitioner's Exhibit 122, a map showing Ray's boundaries in

red and Bowers’ boundaries in green. Dr. Ray testified that the only

change he made on petitioner's Exhibit 122 as compared to his early map
appearing in petitioner‘s Exhibit 119, was with respect to the south»
western boundary. Dr. Ray testified that the area enclosed on petitioner's
Exhibit 122 has a natural boundary only on the eastern side where the

Bitterroot Mountains are found. The witness stated his conclusions were

based primarily on ethnological research conducted among informants of the
Coeur d‘Alene and neighboring tribes. (Tr. 52H-525).

Dr. Bowers, an anthropologist, also testified for the petitioner.
On petitioner‘s map, Exhibit 122, Bowers’ boundary lines appear in green

and conform to Ray's line, generally, with one major exception —- the

H 17

southern boundary line. In response to a question by petitioner's counsel

regarding this difference, (Eowers' line is considerably north of Ray's
line) Dr. Bowers testified (Tr. 560-561) that in studying the Nez Perce
Tribe he found that those Indians recognized the difference between the
drainages from the St. Joe River and the drainages to the Clearwater.

With respect to this southern boundary line, Spinder (Def. Ex. 13,
P. 33) in.his writing ”The_Nez Perce Indians“ gave the northern boundary
of the Nez Perce as following "the divide at the heads of the short
streams flowing into Snake and Clearwater rivers till it reached the
Bitterroot hountains." Although Ray's map in petitioner's Exhibit 119
at page 103 shows the southern boundary to cut across far_down the North
Fork of the Clearwater River, his maps in his later publications, petitioner's Exhibits 120 and 121, appear to show the Coeurididlene southern
boundary north of the Clearwater watershed. The Commission has before
it a claim of the Nez Perce Tribe for its aboriginal lands, Dockets Nos.
175 and 180, and a claim by the Kalispel, Docket No. 9M, which include
areas conflicting with those of the Coeur d'Alene, however, as stated in
Finding 9, the Coeur dfalene have removed the conflicts by correcting the
boundaries of the area claimed by them.

.Although the Indians in the unratified areement of 1873 indicated
Steptoe Butte as the landmark for their southwestern boundary. Dr. Bay,
on his map, (Pet. Ex, 122) bonds the line further to the west to Colfax,
Washington. The tribe in its petition in 1885 (Finding 7) claimed west
of Steptoe Butte. There is evidence, however, to indicate that the area

around Colfax was not exclusively used and occupied by the Coeur dFAlene.

his

5Pier, in his "Tribal Distribution in Washington" (1936), quoted Teit:
"Colfax was considered to be in Palous country, at least, in later days,

but was to some extent within both Coeur dlalene and Nez Perce spheres

of influence." (Def. Ex. 13, p. 39).

Petitioner's witness, Dr. Bowers,
also placed the southwestern boundary to the east of Colfax. (Pet. BX.

122 - green line).

Dr. Ray and Dr. Bowers in drawing the northern boundary line on the

map, (Pet. Ex. 122) includes a portion of the lower tip of the foot of

Pend Oreille Lake. Petitioner's witness Ray (Tr. hso) testified that it
would be ridiculous to say that the Coeur d'Alene came to the tip of the
lake and made no use of it and that the Kalispel Indians recognized the
utilization of the loser tip of the lake by the Coeur d'A1ene. In Docket
9h before this Commission, however, the Kalispel Tribe has presented
evidence in support of their claim of aboriginal possession which includes
to the foot of Pend Oreille Lake, (see Pet. Ex. 63 in that case —- a map
outlining the alleged boundaries of the Kalispel). In the Kalispel hearing, IE. Allan H. Smith, ethnologist, testified (Tr. ll} of that case) that
the Kalispel's had an important winter village at the southern tip of the

lake and that the Coeur d'Alene "used to hunt up to the lake but they

never wintered there and had moved southward back into their own territory,

more deeply into their own territory. The overlap map indicates that the

Kalispel claimed territory to the south of the southern tip of the lake.

The Coeur d‘A1ene hunted up to that point in the winter and turned and

went back. However, the Upper Kalispel did have a winter village at that

point as indicated on the overlap map, Exhibit 6h." Dr. Ray also

testified in the Kalispel case that "the degree to nhich that exhibit
lghowing the boundaries of the Kalispe§7 differs from my earlier mapping,
I would accept, and it is my opinion that this is accurate, the more
accurate of the two." Mooney’s map (Inf. Ex; 13, following p. M1), would
indicate that the Kalispel territory extended south of the foot of Pend
Oreille Lake. As stated above, these conflicts have been removed by the
Coeur dPAlene.

In the northwestern corner of the Goeur d'Alene territory the limit
of the tribe's use and occupation may be set with reasonable accuracy.
The petitioner claims westward to the point on the north bank of the
Spokane River where Antoine Plant formerly resided and operated a ferry.
The most westerly permanent camp of the tribe on the river was near
Spokane bridge about twenty miles from Spokane City, and Teit placed the
boundary between the Spokane and Coeur didlene a few miles below the
most western camp which would be in the vicinity of Plant's ferry.

(Def. Ex. 13, p. 126). Defendant's ethnologist, Chalfant, locates Plant's
place as being five miles east of the town line of the city of Spokane
near Millwood, Washington. (Def. Ex; 13, p. 108).

The eastern boundary, according to Ray, is the only natural boundary
involved in this case. Teit (Finding 5) said "their [§heur dFAlen§7
eastern boundaries were the doeur dlnlene and Bitter Root Mountains.”

Defendant would limit the concept of “use and occupancy” to “the
area to which they went consistently and which they exploited nearest
to their permanent villages." (Def. Br., p. U3). In support of its

Position defendant introduced the written report of Stuart A, Chalfant,

; ethnologist, (Def. Ex. 13) and Mr. Chalfant testified as an expert in

support of his conclusions. Briefly, Mr. Chalfant prepared a map, Def.
Ex. 13-A, on which he located the villages of the Coeur d'Alene tribe.
On this map he designated with red cross~hatching what he called
"nuclear areas" which were the more accessible areas adjacent to the
permanent villages. There are three such "nuclear areas," so-called,
shown on Chalfant's map. Counsel for defendant states (Def. Br., pp. uh,
H5) that these areas contain ”238,000 acres or about 500 acres to each
Indian, even women and children." Defendant‘s counsel urges: "Most of
their food, the fish and the small game were found near the villages, in
the lakes, rivers and valleys. Under these circumstances, it would seem
preposterous that this small group of people could use and occupy (using
any reasonable interpretation of those terms) any greater area than that
outlined by the solid red lines on defendant's Exhibit 13—i, Since this
area is much less extensive than the area which was assigned to them as
a reservation by the March 26, 1887 agreement there is no basis for the
claim asserted herein."

Defendant's ethnologist, however, testified (Tr. 65h) that the villages
within the nuclear areas were not the only villages of the tribe. Chalfant
said they did have summer camps such as at Desmet and Tekoa, Washington,
outside the nuclear areas. Chalfant also indicates in his map (Def. Ex.
l3wA) by a broken red line the subsistence area of the Coeur d'Alene which
encompasses much more territory than the nuclear area. It is these
"Primary subsistence areas,” according to the witness, "which determine

the lands held in common-by all the Coeur d'Alene and define the extent

# 21

of their aboriginal territory. By that I mean it defines the extent of
the territory they used in their yearly rounds, and it is the same
territory lying not only within their nuclear areas of habitation, but

the areas lying between these areas of habitation that were used in common
by the bands of all these various groups." Chalfant further testified
"this is not to be construed as implying that they never ranged beyond
these basic subsistence areas, but it is ethnologically sound to limit
their territory to those regions which have been, in the course of their
known history, essential to their existence as a unified ethnic groups"

So. we see that witness Chalfant recognised that the Coeur d'Alene's

aboriginal territory included more than just the nuclear areas and on

cross-examination (Tr. 786) he testified: "I am not stating that the

dotted red line that I made is indicative of the extreme range of the

Coeur dialene. I an pointing out that it was the interrelation of many

factors and since they trapped and fished up to head navigation and around
the rapids 1;? St. Joe Rive:7, that that is a very feasible point we could
see in relation to the terrain and topography of the mountains surrounding
the St. Joe River, from there, or to assume that is about the extent of
their continual use and occupation. ‘This does not mean they never used
areas bezpnd that.“ (Underscoring supplied).
To limit the Coeur d’Alene Indian title to the so-called nuclear
areas, as contended for by defendant, based upon the testimony of defendant's witness, would, without even considering petitioner's experts

and documentary material, result in adopting a theory of use and occur

Pancy which is unrealistic and contrary to the weight of the evidence.

M22

H 23

Based upon the documentary material, the writings of the ethnologists
and others of record, and the testimony of the witnesses, it is reasonable
to say that the Coeur d'Alene Tribe has proven that it has from time immemorial exclusively used and occupied the area of land set forth within
the boundaries fixed in Finding ll.

Defendant further contends that the petitioner does not constitute
an aboriginal entity insofar as the use and occupation of land is concerned.
Defendant‘s position is that the Coeur d'A1ene Indians as an ethnic group
was made up of separate autonomous villages or bands which in themselves
held tenure, if it existed, and that the present Coeur d'Alene Tribe was
not a legal or political entity and therefore it was incapable of holding
an interest in property.

This theory is based upon the testimony of witness Chalfant (Tr. 661672), wherein he interprets the works of Teit and Bay to conclude that
the villages were politically autonomous except in times of crisis when
they would band together to form a larger division. Cohesion, he felt,
among the Coeur d'Alene was more social or ethnic than political.

There is no merit to this theory advanced by the defendant and its
witness. Teit, with when Chalfant disagrees, found a tribal organization
existed (Tr. 669) and Dr. Bay in his "Cultural Relations in the Plateau
of Narthnestern America" (1939), (Pet..Ex. 121, p. 11) ascribed to the
Coeur d'Alene a tribal organization. It is noted also that all the
documentary evidence of the record bearing upon the subject indicates
that the Coeur d'Alene was a tribal entity capable of holding Indian title
by use and occupancy and that it was such entity that the agents and commissioners of the United States dealt with over a long period of time.

Recognition or Acknowledgment of Aboriginal Title

Petitioner further urges that it has proven Indian title to the lands
contended for by showing a recognition or acknowledgment of such title
by the United States in the tribes. Counsel for petitioner states that
governmental "recognition" of Indian title may be established by'a
common~sense consideration of all transactions between the parties and
that it is not necessary "that the government wave a formalized sovereign
wand as a basis for recognition," citing Grow Indians v. United States,

3 Ind. Cls. Comm. 1&7, and Miami Tribe v. United States, 2 Ind. Cls. Comm.
517 » ._ 5 .

Defendant in its brief objects to the petitioner’s requested finding
that there was a recognition of aboriginal title in the tribe. Defendant
points out that the agreement of March 26, 1887, upon.nhich.the claim
is based, contains no description ofwa ceded area. Article 2 of said
agreement provided that the tribe "hereby cede, grant, relinquish, and
quitclaim to the United States all right, title, and claim which they
now have, or ever had, to all lands in said territories and elsewhere,
except * ¢ * their present reservation ¢ * 5." (Finding 8). This article,
defendant urges, indicates a quitclaim and is in no way a recognition or
acknowledgment of interest in any specific area of land. Defendant's
counsel seeks to distinguish the Crow case, supra, since in that treaty
the territory involved had been described in the Fort Laramie Treaty and
therein designated as the land of the Cross. .As to the Miami case, supra.
defendant points out that the treaty contained a provision whereby the

United States engaged to consider the Indians as joint owners of all the

country on the Uabash and its waters.

1:2

\

4

As previously noted, no effective agreement was made with the Coeur
d'Alene Tribe until the Agreement of March 26, 1887 (26 Stat. 989).
Earlier, an agreement had been made, but never ratified, with the Indians
on July 28, 1873, whereby the tribe therein agreed to relinquish all their
right and title to all lands claimed by the tribe outside the reservation
within boundaries described therein. (Finding 6). In 1885, the tribe
petitioned the Government to send a commission to treat with them for their
lands outside of the 1873 reservation established by executive order and
in the petition set forth the boundaries of the lands they claimed to own.
(Finding 7),

In.March 1886, the United States Senate passed a resolution (Pet.

Ex. 101, p. 2) directing the Secretary of the Interior to furnish the
Senate with all correspondence dealing with the Coeur d'Alene, and other
Indians, in regard to the cession or quitclaim by any of said Indians to
the United States of any lands "alleged to be heretofore owned or claimed
or occupied by then * * *.“ The Commissioner of Indian Affairs inferred
that only recent correspondence bearing upon the Indians’ claim for inw
demnification for lands formerly held and occupied by them which the
Indians claimed they had never relinquished, was desired by the Senate.
The Secretary of the Interior forwarded papers dating from 1883 in nhich
Various persons urged a.settlement of the land claims of the Indians, including the petition of the Coeur d‘Alene of 1885. (Pet. Ex. 101).

The result of the action of the Senate was the inclusion of an item

in the Act of June 30, 1887, (2U Stat. MM) authorizing a treaty to be

made with the Coeur d‘Alene Indians and others as cited in the act.

Under the provisions of this act, commissioners were appointed who negotiated the Agreement of 1887 with the Coeur dlalene. The commission

- was known as the Northwest Indian Commission.

On March 23, l887 (Pet. Ex. 106, p. 60), the council with the

Coeur d’Alene opened. In addressing the tribe, Judge Wright, one of

the commissioners, said: "It is also known that you claim to have

possessed a large body of land, that much of it has been settled by
white people, that you.had never ceded it away, and that you.have received nothing for it." A little later, Judge Wright had this to say:

The paper which I hold in my hand_L§enate Docunen£7 sets
out fully your claim; in that petition you say your boundary
was as follows: Commencing at Steptoe Butte, runs northwest
to Antoine Plants on the Spokane River, thence to the Pend
d'Oreille Lake, thence to the summit of the Coeur d‘Alene
Mountain, thence south to the most southern thereof whence
flows the waters of the Palouse River, thence west along the
southern rim of the waterushed of the Palouse River to the
beginning.

We wish to do right about the claim; that was one purpose
for which_we were sent to you. * * * (Pet. Ex. 106, p. 62).

In reporting the agreement, the Commission, however, said that “the
lands which they'[Ehe Coeur d‘Alene7 claimed, and held by occupancy,
contained about h,OO0,000 acres. They had the same title to it which
other Indians had, that is, the fee in the United States. and the
Occupancy, with all its incidental rights, in the Indians. The right

of the Indians to their occupancy is as sacred as that of the United

States to the fee." (Finding 8), The Commission also reported that
it had before it during the negotiations the 1885 petition and the unr
ratified agreement of 1873, in diich the description of the boundaries

substantially agreed.

M26

In transmitting this report to the President, the Secretary of the

Interior said: “The Coeur d‘Alene Indians, in the agreement made with

them, relinqnish to the United States, for the consideration of $150,000,

to be expended for their benefit, etc., all right, title, and interest
they now have or ever possessed to and in any lands outside the limits

of their present reservation in the Territory of Idaho; * * *." The
Commissioner of Indian Affairs report on the agreements made by the

Northwest Indian Commission accompanied the letter of the Secretary, and

said in part:

These Indians [Coeur dinleney also lay claim to a large
tract of country in washington, Idaho, and Hontana Territories,
by right of original occupancy, and, as we have seen, the act
authorised negotiations with them "for the cession of their

lands outside the limits of the present Coeur d'Alene Reservation to the United States."

By the terms of the agreement made with them, the Indians
cede and relinquish to the United States all right, title, and
interest they now have or ever possessed in any lands outside
the limits of their present reservation,

Prior to ratification of the 1887 agreement, Congress authorized

(25 Stat. 1002) another negotiation to be made with the tribe for the
Purpose of purchasing some l8M,960 acres on the northern part of the reservation.
to ascertain the feasibility of throwing open any portion of the reserve
to occupation and settlement under the mineral laws of the United States.
The Secretary referred the matter to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs
who advised that the reservation might be materially diminished but only
with the full and free consent of the Indians and the payment of proper

compensation to them. In so advising the Secretary, the Commissioner

The Senate had previously directed the Secretary of the Interior

M 27

said: (Pet. BX. 109, p. 2h),

In conclusion I will state that in my opinion these Indians
have all the original Indian rights in the soil they occupy.
They claimed the country long before the lines of the reservation were defined by the executive order of 1873, and the
present reservation embraces only a portion of the lands to
which they laid claim. This claim has been recognized in
various ways and at sundry times, and the last Congress authorized the Secretary of the Interior to negotiate with them
‘for the cession of their lands outside the limits of the present
Coeur dlnlene Reservation to the United States.‘ Pursuant to
that authority negotiations were conducted with them in march
last and an agreement concluded, which is now before Congress
for ratification. The agreement is published in House Ex. Doc.
No. 63, Fiftieth Congress, first session, pp. 53w56.

Defendant contends that the above-quoted remark refers only to the
land they occupied -- that is, the reservation as established by executive
order in 1873. It refers also to the entire area claimd by these Indians
outside the 1873 reserve.

A.Conmission appointed to secure the cession of the northern part of
the reservation concluded an agreement with the tribe on September 9,
1889. In reporting this cession to the Secretary, the Commissioner of
Indian Affairs said, with respect to the 1887 agreement: "The Coeur
d’Alene Indians laid claim to a vast area'outside of their present reservation, including the site of the present flourishing city of Spokane Falls
and other populous communities. Their claim was based upon original
Possession and occupancy,"

In 1890, the House Committee on Indian Affairs, in reporting favorably on a bill to ratify and confirm the 1887 and 1889 agreements with
the Coeur d‘Alene Tribe, stated in the report:

On August ls, 1838, and for generations long prior thereto.
the tribe of Coeur d'A1ene Indians were in possession of and

claimed to own the lands described in this bill and in said
two treaties. * * * (Def. Ex. 7, p. 1)

M 23

The.Agreement of Harch 26, 1887, as ratified by the Act of March 3,
1891, 26 Stat. 989, Section 19, itself recognizes the Indian title to a
large area of land, that is, the land ceded by that agreement outside
the Coeur dialene reservation, for in the preamble of that agreement
it is recited:

Article 1. Whereas said Coeur d'Alene Indians were

formerly possessed of a large and valuable tract of land

lying in the Territories of Washington, Idaho, and Montana,

and whereas said Indians have never ceded the same to the

United States, but the same, with the exception of the

present Coeur d'A1ene Reservation, is held by the United

States and settlers and owners deriving title from the

United States, and whereas said Indians have received no

compensation for said land from the United States: Therefore,

True, the specific boundaries of the area so acknowledged to have been
possessed are not stated in that agreement, yet it cannot be denied that
all persons, officials of the Government and civilians alike, were agreed
that the Coeur d‘Alene occupied a large territory outside their reservation, an area specifically described by boundary lines in the documents
hereafter referred to.

Prior to the 1887 agreement, a commission was directed by the Interior
Department to obtain the extinguishment of the tribe's title to all lands
claimed by them and for the purpose of establishing a reservation for them.
«An agreement was concluded on July 28, 1873, (Pet. Ex. 9M).
although submitted, was not ratified but it contained a description of the
boundaries of the lands claimed by the Indians. Again, and in 1885, (Pet.
Ex- 109. p. 30), these Indians petitioned the President to have a Commission to treat with them for their lands outside their reservation and

in the petition described the lands they claimed to “own.” This and

This agreement,

....._4.._.-.4-_.._u._..__.-_._4_._..__._ .. -...- -.. —- -—-—-- -— —-—----- -v-- the 1873 agreement were before Congress as the exhibits show. In fact,

these, with a mass of other documents, were submitted to the Congress
Pursuant to an act of Congress (May 15, 1886, 2h Stat. MM) and were
before that body at the time of-the ratification of the Agreement of
March, 23, 1887, by the Act of March 3, 1891. (Pet. Ex. 106, pp. 36-37
and.Pet. BX. 109, pp. MO-U1). It is reasonable, therefore, to presume
that the “large and valuable tract of land” possessed by the Coeur d'Alene
Indians referred to in the preamble of the 1887 agreement, were the lands
within the boundaries described in the unratified agreement of 1873 and
the petition of 1885. In truth, the only evidence of the boundaries
claimed by these Indians was that supplied by Government agents who were
familiar with the area claimed, and were apparently agreed as to the
boundaries thereof.

We consider the fact that specific boundaries were not set forth
in the treaty, of no importance here, because such a description was une
necessary to convey title.

He, accordingly, conclude that the Coeur dinlene hare proved
aboriginal Indian title to the lands described in Finding ll, and also,
that defendant had by the Agreement of March 26, 1887, recognized such

title in said Indians.

Louis J. O'Marr
Associate Commissioner

We concur:

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

 Wm. M. Holt

 

Associate Commissioner

