8 Ind. Cl. Com. h7S h7S

BEFCPE res mm CI.-€=.'mS C01-II-EESSION

THE UPPER SKAGIT TRIBE OF INDIANS,
Petitioner,
Docket No. 92

Vnn: UNITED STATES or AMERICA,

k.../~..../V~....u'\~.../*o../*~.....d\-..../\_./\..._.r

Defendant.
Decided: March 25, 1960

FINDINGS _g13 FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. The Upper Skagit Tribe of Indians, petitioner herein, is an
identifiable group of American Indians within the meaning of the Indian
Claims Commission Act of August 13, l9h6 (60 Stat. l0h93 25 U.S.C. Sec.
70(a)). Presently constituted as a tribe since about l9lS,.petitioner's
ancestry and predecessors in interest were a number of separate, independent villages situated along the upper reaches of the Skagit River
above the present site of Mount Vernon,‘Washington, as hereinafter more
particularly described (Findings 3-5: l0-l3, l6-19, inclusive).

.2. The name "Skagit" in Indian parlance is somewhat ambiguous; it
may mean (1) Skagit Tribe proper, also called Lower Skagits or Whidbey
Island Skagits, or (2) Upper Skagits, a modern term.referring to aboriginal
villages on the Upper Skagit River, or (3) Upper and Lower Skagits, or (h)
Lower Skagits and a few of the Upper Skagit villages, or (S) as a linguistic
classification of the Salishan language, the Skagit dialect, or (6) as a
geographical classification in reference to Puget Sound land areas'where
"Skagit speakers" resided in aboriginal times (R. 93, 117, lb? and 206;

Pete Ex! 53 pi  Ro]36)o

8 Ind. c1. Corn. £375 l 1.76

3. The Upper Skagits, in aboriginal. times, consis’:.od of ten
autonomous "extended villages" each pol:E-tical_'L;sr separate and distinct
from the other and from the Skagit Tribe proper (Pet. Ex. IR). The
Skagit Tribe proper resided in aboriginal -times at the mouth of the
Skagit River and on Whidbey Island (Hodge, Handbook of American Indians,
1910).

The names and locations of said ten extended aboriginal villages
are listed by petitioner‘s expert, Dr. June I-Eccormick Collins, as
follows: '“"'

I. Nook-*.~:-'a-cha-mish (Nookachamps or Doc}:-3-:a-shabs). Nine Trtinter
houses between Clear Lake, Mount Vernon, and Sedro-‘.'Ioolley,
Washington.

II. See}:-weeg—gweelts (I-iee-see—qua-quilch). Seven winter
houses between Lyman and Burlington, -fashington. _

III. Cho-bah--ah--bish. Two winter houses situated in the vicinity

 

of Lyman, Washington.

IV. Baosloh-a-—loh. One winter house west of Hamilton, Washington.

 

V. Sabaliuhk. About two dozen winter houses variously situated

 

near Birdsview, and the mouths of Pressentin and Finney Cracks,
and. extending to a point,east_of,17an Horn, Washington, known as
Faber’s Ferry on the Skagit River.

VI. Say-lay-ot-sid. A small winter ‘house at Old Sauk east of

 

present tounsite of Roc ort Eiashincrtcn. and two houses
3 C.) I

situated upon what is now said to:-rnsi-E:-o.

P1.

VII. Shay-ay-ot-sid. Three winter houses on th-:=.. ,;L-agit River between

   

Rockport and the mouth of Rocky Crock no-a:.:"= ';L=r::.‘ole;no11.nt, IrIa::h3‘-ngton.

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h7S

VIII. Shayawih. Six winter houses extending from near Marblamount
to the mouth of Bacon Creek, along the Skagit River.
IX. Kwa—bats-absh. Three winter houses extending from west to
Damnation Creek to the present site of Newhalem, Washington.
I. Sah-ku-mehu. Described in Finding 5 below.

b7?

Only the first three of the above named village bands are specifically‘

. mentioned by name in the preamble to the treaty of Point Elliott and also

village X, together with "other allied and subordinate tribes and bands"

I

which are not further identified by name in said treaty (Pet. Ex. 1, a

map with villages and house sites marked by'numbers 1 through bl; Pet. Ex.

IR., Dr. Collins’ village list).
h. Petitioner's antecedents, comprised of the above listed ten extended villages along the Upper Skagit River, were signatory parties to

the Treaty of Point Elliott er January 22, 1855, 12 Stat. 927, II Kappler

669; (Duwamish, et al v. U. 5., 79 c. Cls. 530, Fdg. Iv at p. 533).

5. The Suittle~Sauks were in aboriginal times constituted of one
extended village, according to Dr. Collins, and also mentioned'by her in
the cited exhibits in above Finding 3. ‘This extended village is named in
the Treaty of Point Elliott preamble as “Sah-ku-mehn" and was constituted
of some five winter houses extending from the mouth of the Sauk River to
Sauk Prairie with a sumer house upstream.near Bedal,'Washington (Pet.
Exs. I, IR., pp. 5-6; also see Finding 12 below).

6. The petitioner, in January l9Sl, filed its petition herein under
provisions of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, alleging

that it was an aboriginal tribe of "Skagit Indians" and that by virtue of

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h75 I 578

the Point Elliott Treaty defendant, the United States of America, acquired
certain land belonging to petitioner, paying therefor an inadequate and
unconscionable consideration. Said lands so claimed conflicted with claims
of the Skagit Tribe, also known as the LOTJEI‘ Skagit Tribe or Skagit Tribe
of Whidbey Island in.Docket 2914 filed with the Commission. I Thereafter, on
October l7, l9S8, petitioner herein filed its amended petition describing
itself as the "Upper Skagit Tribe of Indians" and modifying the boundaries
of its claim, all with leave of this Commission. The respective amendments
in the two claims (Docket 92 and Docket 2911) thus removed the conflict of
tribal name and of the lands respectively claimed by each of them. The
land for which fair compensation‘ is now alleged or claimed extends along
the drainage system of the Skagit River from near Mount Vernon, Washington,

to the Canadian border. This claim is estimated to aggregate a total of

Ni§1,769,8Oh acres of land (Pet. Ex. 19, Planimeter Report;.Amended Petition,

.___J 2 Oct. l9S8; Lower Skagit Tribe v. §_.___§., 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 292 (1959); Map,
Pet. Ex. I). M

7. In the amended ‘petition, filed herein on October 17, 1958, petitionerreduced its claim of Indian title from an original claim describing all of the lands ceded by all Indian parties to the Point Elliott Treaty
0f Jam-181'? 22,-. 1355, to claim Indian title to only a portion of same described
as follows (Amended Petition, par. )4, p. 3):

Commencing at a point on the Skagit River approximately one mile south oi‘ the present site of Mount Vernon,
Washington; thence westward to the divide separating the
waters of the Skagit River from the ‘waters of‘ Padilla Bay;
thence northward along said divide separating the waters
of Skagit River from the waters oi‘ the south fox-1:, middle
fork and north fork of the Nooksack Fiver, through the
crest of Mount Baker and along the divide sopara in; the
waters of Chillir-Ia ck River and Skagit River, to the In.":.er—
national Boundary Line between the United States and Canada;

8 Ind. 01. Com. 1:75 1179

thence east”.-rard on said International Bounday Line to the
crest of the Cascade Mountains; thence south:-rard along the
crest of said mountains to the most eastern point of the
divide separating the waters of San}: River from the headwaters
of Sk-ykomish River; thence westward, northward, and again, westward, along said divide, said area including the watershed of
the Sauk River and the Skagit River, to a point on said divide
approzaimately due south of the present town of Ehrlich, Washington; thence north‘:-rard and westward along the divide west of
Big Lake to the point on the Skagit River at the place of beginning. v

8. It was orally agreed and stipulated between the respective
parties on September 10, l9S8, at the commencement of the hearings of
this case, that only those issues related to title. would be tried at
this stage of subject litigation and that all evidence, testimony of
experts, documentary and ethnographic exhibits are introduced and are
interchangeably applicable in both this claim and in the Snoqualmie claim,
Docket 93 (R. 2, 3, 1.).

9. We find and conclude from the copy of Attorney's Contract No.
S8-A, as filed with this Commission, that same is a valid and ‘sufficient
contract executed with the necessary formalities and approval of the
Secretary of Interior.

The meremfact“ that petitioner has amended  name to read "Upper
iskagit Tribe of Indians" (see Finding 6 above) does not invalidate same
nor the authority of petitioner's counsel of record to prosecute this
claim on behalf of claimant Indians . - I

10. References to Upp_e_:r_'_Skagit by Dr. George Gibbs.

The report of George Gibbs to Captain George B. McClellan, dated
March 1:, 1851:, on the subj (act of the Indian Inhabitants of Washington
Territory contains the following comment upon the identity, population,

and location of petitioner's antecedents (originall ' ma:r'ked Petitioner's

.8 Ind. C1.  L75

}*_bdn‘.bf..t Ne. 16, in Doe‘;-:e<'= Ens. 1;-TF1 and 212, Quileute and Quinault cases,

O 2

and included herein by re:E‘eren:-:e as Defendant's Ediibit No. 3):

It req1.1irr:s  in this place, that besides the
tribes, or bands, inhabi..ting the shores and lower part
of the rivers,, there are on the headwaters of the latter,
along the whole course of the Cascade Mountains, another

_ range of tribes, generally independent of the former, who
rarely descend from their recesses, but are intermediate
in their habits between the coast and mountain tribes;
except the’ Taitinapam, however, they all belong to the
general family upon whose borders they live. Those in
the neighborhood of the passes own a few horses, which
subsist in the small. prairies skirting the base of the
mountains.

The tribes living upon the eastern shore possess also
territory upon the islands, and their usual custom is to
resort to them at the end of the salmon season--that is,
about the middle of November. It is there that they find
the greatest supply of shell-fish, which form a large part
of their winter stock, and which they dry both for their
own use and for sale to those of the interior. The summer

a and fall they spend on the main , where they get fish and
put in their potatoes (p. 1:32).

-.‘-’~%-3-‘r The Skagits are about three hundred all told; and
there are other bands upon the headwaters of their river,
amounting probably to as many more (p. 1133) .

-K%'£- Captain ‘£~Iilkes' Estimate, 18141 - (p. 2435):

   

Tribes and Localities Pop lat-ic_>_n_

-z<—-::---:~;- 
Penn's Cove, 1.wIhidby's Island (Scatchae Tribe) 650

-::-::-a:- -s:-:*.~.~:Estimate of Indian Tribes in the western District of‘
Hashington Territory -- January, 1851; (pp. 2;-35--Lf,_36)3

Names of Tribes

 

and Bands T Where located Total

Skagit Skagit river and Penn's Cove 300

N ' qua-cha—-mish )

Sma-lih-hu )

His-kai-whu Branches oi‘ Skagit river 333
Sa-Ifu-me-hu 3 (Rema:r'-1=:s: Es him:-xte)

' V...“ v v v

nso

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:73

Contributions to North American Ethnology, Volume I, Government
Printing Office, l877, contains in Part II under a sub-title "Tribes of
E-Iestern Washington and Northwestern Oregon“ by George Gibbs, M. D., the
followmg comment (Def. Ex. h):

In former times, before the diminution of the tribes

and the diversion of trade to the posts, there were numerous
trails across the Cascades by which the Indians of the interior obtained access to the western district. 01‘ late, many

of these have fallen into disuse, becoming obstructed with
timber and underbrush which they have not industry enough to
clear out. In fact all their trails through the forest, though
originally well selected, have become excessively tortuous, an
Indian riding around the fallen trunks of tree after tree sooner
than clear out a road which he seldom uses. The old Klikatat
trail across the mountains to Vancouver had become impassable
and was cut out by Captain McClellan in l8S3. Another led from
one of the branches of the Yalcama, south of Mt. Rainier, to the
Kowlitz River, which in like manner has been almost abandoned,
and the northern trails from the ‘Jinatshapam and Tselann Lake
to the Sto-luch-wha-mish and Skagit seem to be altogether so.
The two most used at present are those by the Nahchess and the
main Yakama or Snokwalmi passes, the former of which is the
route of the United States military road from Steilacoom to
‘wa11a'wa11a (pp. l69-170)-that

There remains on these waters what may be termed the
NiskwaJ_'Li Nation, which is thus divided, pursuing the geographical order: a

1st. The Skokomish, 9:-a:-as

‘Znd. The bands occupying Puget Sound and the inlets
opening into it as far down as Point Pully -3’<-K-‘:i- (p. 178).

3d. The Snohomish, with whom are included the Snokwalnni,
Skiwhamish, Sk‘tah-le-jum, Kwehtl-ma-mish, and Stolutswhamish,
living on the Snohomish and Stolutswhamish Rivers -.‘£-H- (p. 179) .

11th. The Skagits, including the Kikiallu, Nikwatsamish,
Tow-ah-ha , Smali-hu, Sakumehu, I-Ii skaiwhn, Miseekwigweelis ,
Swinamish, and Skwonamish, occupying the remaining country
between the Snohomish and Bellingham Bay, with the northern
part oi‘ ‘zfhidbey Island'and Perry Island. I-fith them a different
dialect prevails, though not so distinct but what they can be
understood by those already mentioned. They altogether amount
to lh75,,and have been assigned Goliah as head Chief. This division have no horses but are altogether canoe Indians. with the

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 1-,"{5'

exception of the Islands and the imrrzediate shore of the

main, their country is altogether 1'.=_=‘.1r.:>:_plored. They

formerly had some communication with the Indians beyond

the mountains; but it is supposed to have been discontinued

in consequence of obstructions to their trails. The Skagit
reservation, as agreed upon in the treaty, was the peninsula
forming the southeastern extremity of Perry Island (p. 180).-1',-it-a

POFULQ TICK

In my report to Captain I-'1cClellan, I made an attempt to
compare all of the estimates of the Indian population of the
Territory which was within my reach. Since then, an actual
count or census of most of the tribes in this part of the
Territory has been twice attempted, once by myself and once
by Colonel Simmons. In considering the different statements

_ which have been made from time to time, I am well satisfied
that none of them can be taken as the basis of any accurate
calculations respecting the ratio’ of increase or dimunition,
and I am further inclined to the opinion that the aggregate
former population, taking one period with another, has never
been very much greater than within our knowledge of it (p. 181).
In arriving at any conclusion, it is necessary to regard not
merely the actual facts of increase or mortality known to us,
but the capacity of the country to furnish subsistence, the
modes of obtaining it followed by the Indians, their general
character and habits, their fecundity, their wars, and various
circumstances directly or indirectly bearing upon life. That
the estimates, even of residents, cannot be relied upon with
confidence, has been made sufficiently evident by the discrepancies in our different attempts at an actual enumeration, and
those of travelers, like Lewis and Clarke, are likely to have
been still wider from the fact. StiZL‘L, as no other data exist
upon which to found any opinion, we are driven to assume these

for the purpose of discussion (PP- 181-182).-:14.-3':
FOOD

The principal food of the Indians on the west side of the
Cascades may be briefly set down as fish, roots, and berries.
Game furnishes to but few of them any considerable item. There
are mountain-sheep or, more properly goats, in the higher parts

 of the range; but they probably never constituted an important
' article of food, their wool being the principal object of their
capture. Elk and deer are hunted to a certain extent, chiefly
by the bands nearest the mountains; -32-:2-rc (p. 1593).

Governor Stevens reported to the Congress on .5.pril 30, 185?, a
tabular statement of Indians west of the Cascades, including a map of

the Point Elliott Treaty cession of January 22, 1855. The positions of

L82

,8 Ind. Cl. Com; 3:75 1183

the Upper Skagit villages are_ shown by name on said map (Pet. EC. 11,
map; see an enlargement copy of this exhibit, Def. Ehc. l6, Dkt. 116).

ll. language. all of the villages situated on the Skagit River

 

-r .

 

and its tributaries spoke the same Salish language called the "Skagit

dialect." However, there were some slight dialectical differences

between some of the villages (R. lS0—l5l).

Time adjacent villages who spoke a mutually intelligible language
to the Upper Skagits were Lower Skagits, Nut-:aha,_ Swinomish, -Kikiallus,
Stillagnamish and Skykomish (R. 36-140; Pet. Ex. 28, Collins‘ language
map). Slqrkomish tongues were not intelligible to the others above named.
language differences presented no difficulty to Indians of western ‘dashington according to reports of Dr. Verne F. Ray (Quinaielt, Dkt. 2142, R. J43;
Def. Req. Fdg. 11, p. 134).

Speaking of the general bilingual character of Indians of this region,
the celebrated work oif James G. S}-Ian. "Three Years at Shoalwater Bay" quotes —
Dr. (General) George Gibbs that Upper Bands of Snoqualmie, Cedar River,

Green River, ‘iihite River, the Puyallup, Nisqually, and Cowlitz speak two
languages (Def. Ex. 86, p. h26). lIt is interesting to note how the zimminentt
pioneer ethnologist, George Gibbs, notes this characteristic of "Upper Bands ,"
viz., those Indians living within the interior. Although this is a specific

reference as to Indians "living south of the Snoqualmie River and west of

' the mountains (Cascades) to the Columbia River, it lends credence to Dr.

Collins’ statement as to the bilingual character of‘. petition er villages,

north of the Snoqualmie River.

.-4"

12. Culture. The Upper Skagit area was in aboriginal "times, and is

today, a relatively isolated area (B. 113-llh; Pet. Ex. 2, p. 69). Travel,

p-a-V

5 Ind. Cl. Con. bib

except on the waterways and a few back trails, was most difficult
because of the dense forests and sharp undulations of the terrain.
The Upper Skagics had a difficult time in those seasons when the
winters were long and the spring season late in finding sufficient
food (Pet. Ex. 5, pp. 31-35; Pet. Ex. h, p- 337; R. 265; Pet- EX- 2:
p. 8). .

the Sound by canoe (Pet. Ex. Ii, Collins‘ map). Upper Skagits were

The log jam at Mt. Vernon offered some impediment to reiC?333

dependent upon the river primarily for fish, and secondarily upon the
adjacent salt water areas for shell fish as distinguished from the
Lower Skagit Indians.

Although petitioner's expert, Dr. June M; Collins, described the
culture of the'Upper Skagit and the Lower Skagit as "both sharing in the
same'broad culture base, they differed considerably from one another.”
(Pet. Ex. 5, p. 31).

The distinctions between the saltawater (Lower) Skagits and the
"upériver" Skagits are discussed at length by Dr. June hccormick Collins
in her thesis "Influence 0f'white Contact On Class Distinction and
Political Authority'Among The Indians Of The Northern Puget Sound“ (Pet.

.}"‘.x. 3, pp. 8-76). .

13. Dr. Collins classified the Suiattle-Sank as a subgroup of the
Upper Skagit group (R. 129, ht, 55, 56, 130).

The Suiattle-Sank has prosecuted an alleged tribal olaim.in its
“‘“ ri2ht on two occasions. The first was dismissed by the Court of

Ji‘§m3 f0? lick of prosecution (82 C. Cls. 697, 1936) and the second

"'“ *3“ ”‘3mI3bCd by this Commission for failure of the proof (2 Ind.

'27‘:
, I

as l9i9)» This Commission in dismissing said suit noted

' o‘ -\.
. ' 0 5.

her

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h7S _ % h85

“Claimant Indians will be beneficiaries of any at-yard made in said
Docket 92 ‘if they are descendants oi‘ members of said tribe” (Cit. Id).

The principal locations, if not the only winter locations of the
Suiattle-Sank, was near the mouth of the Sauk River near Rockport. The
Sank is a tributary of the Skagit River and said winter village was in
very close proximity to a cluster of Upper Skagit winter villages (see
map, Pet. Ex. I).

Supervisor 0. C. Upchurch reported on April I, 19311, the census of
"Skagit-Suiattle" as 20Stpersons (House Report No. 2680, in re Housed Res.
No. 89£%B3d. Cong.).

I ldletter from the Bureau ‘of Indian Affairswstates the Skagit Tribe ‘
and Sauk-Suiattle Tribe dissolved their association by at resolution which
implies a merger of the two groups existed prior to 191:6 (Def. Ex. 1:5).

The Suiattle-Sauks lived in an extended village called "Sah-ku-mehu"
(Sak--bay-ook), (Village No. 143 on map, Pet._ Ex. I; Pet. Ex. IR, p. 1;),
and is listed as a party to the Treaty of Point Elliott in the preamble
with the signature "Dahtl-de-min, Sub-chief of Sah-lzu-meh-hu, his X_ marlc"
about midway of the left column of signatures to said treaty (II Kappler”
669, 673). '

Based upon the above recited _facts and authorities cited , we conclude

that the group of Indians known as the "Sah-ICU-m.eh~hu" as identified in - I

' the Treaty of Point Elliott, and not; known as "Suiattle--Saulc, " lived on

the Skagit River at the mouth of its tributary, the Saul: River, and were

in such close physical, c:ultu.ral, and economic relation with the other

Skag§.t-speaking villages on the upper reaches of the Skagit River as to

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 5?; 586

he properlfr classified as Upper Skagit Indians". and the gover .ment has
since treaty times reported them as one entity, and it follows that such
entity is the successor to the aboriginal S iattle Sauks and were subsequently merged into the Upper Skagit group.

lh. Ixiutnraha. ‘The Nuwaha lived, aboriginally, west of the Upper Skagit.
Petitioner does not contend that the Ruwaha are a subgroup of the Upper
Skagit Tribe although some experts have so classified them (Pet. Br., Reg.
Fdg. ll, 10- 9). A principal village of the Fsmraha has been reported as
theprescnt site of Bayview on Padillo Bay. we do not find substantial
evidence in the record to support the ixifereneo that Hui.-rahas were part of
the Upper Skagits, an "up-river“ people.

15. _1=_’_opulati_<3_r_1_. There does not appear any direct evidence in the

record of a documentary nature as to the exact population of the Upper

 Skagit villages (R. 362, Dr. Carroll Riley). Petitioner's expert, Dr.

..,_.

 June Mccor-mick Collins, estimated the Upper Skagit population as 880

(R. 118), including the Sauks. Dr. Collins‘ es'!.;in:a_t-e is based upon the
total number of families, the average size of .i‘am:'Llies, ' size of village:s,
etc. (R. 89-°O).

_Dr. Carroll Riley eitpressed the opinion that the population in this
claimed area was severely decimated in about 1925 (R. 362). Dr. Riley's
estimate of this decixvaticn by disease was between 70 and 90 percent based
1113011 the record.ed . facts of neighboring tr-ihes, especially the Hoc-}:sa ck.
Smallpox was called "Nooksack sic1n1eos" (Def. Ex. 3?, pp. 332-333).. The
depopulation oi‘ the tribes in this area in pre-tr'z=:+.<E—;,r times ‘by’ reason of

O
epidemics of smallpox and respiratory c':’..-.seases is *.-:c'.'-°..'E_ doom:-.:r;t-ed in a

°°37iI33-1atio:.'; of reports oi‘ such decimation of populati<~n in ’»‘;”::e Puget Sound

8 Ind. Cl. Com. 75 b8?

and is summarized in Defendant's Requested Finding 18 (Def. Brf., Vol. I,

pp. l5?-173).

In the absence of any actual census count of petitioner Indians at
or before treaty times, save estimate of 300 by Gibbs, and in reconciliation of the probable fact of a great decimation by disease expressed in
the opinion of Dr. Riley, considered with the population estimate of Dr.
Collins, both competent students of petitioner, we must conclude (in accord
with Gibbs‘ estimate) that although.Upper Skagits may have numbered 880
members at the beginning of the nineteenth century, it was very probably‘
reduced to 300 by treaty times (Fdg. No. l0, Gibbs).

16. Use Areas. The life of the Upper Skagit people was oriented about
the Skagit River. It furnished the mainstay of food supply, the salmon.
East and west, the direction of the river flow, are the important compass
points, while north and south.were relatively insignificant to the Upper
Skagits.

The cedar tree was important to their existence ~ for houses (lodge
type multiple family units), canoes, boxes, baskets, dishes, clothing,
ceremonial poles and rattles.

In addition to fish, foods were'berries, roots and game. 'With.the
introduction of the potato each village maintained a small plot and the
product was an important food source by treaty times (Pet. Ex. 5, pp. S~6).

Patterns of subsistence varied somewhat in the degree of emphasis
between Upper and Lower Skagits as to fishing, hunting and gathering of
roots and berries. The mountain goat and grizsly'besr'were found in upriver mountain areas while shellfish, including clams, oysters, crabs,

.River valley and its tributaries .

8 Ind. Cl. Com.

.._‘!

edible musselrs one cooklcs r.-:s~re plentiful on c-ertain salt z~:a'ter be=::r:.hes,
and although more commonly gathered in E?‘.,1I:im£3I", were avail able in winter‘
seasons also. The salt water people used seal oQ while up-river people
obtained grease from deer and elk fat (Pet. Ex. 5, pp. l8-l9)- The
maximum number of wives were three among up-river people while salt
water'Indians sometimes had as many as ten Wives (Pet. Ex. 5', p. '31}.
Dr. Leslie Spier reported that “it is probable that all of the high

ground eastward of Mount Baker was common hunting territory oi‘ Isioolcsack,

- interior Skagit, Northern Okanagon, Hethoz-I and Chelan (Def. Ex. 23, p‘. 39)

This Commission found in the Kikiallus case that the Mcléurray Lake

area was roamed over freely by Kikiallus and Upper Skagit villagers. (

pKiI':ia11us Tribe v. U. 8., 7 Ind. Cl. Com. 1:56, 3471;).

Dr. Carroll Riley, in testifying upon hzmting grounds, stated. there
was a movement across the passes east of the mountains (plateau people)

°to‘the west of the Cascades for economic reasons (R. 361;). Dr. Collins

robserved that there were cultural changes  the Upper Ska gits up river

byreason of contact with plateau peoples (Pet. Ex. 5).
We conclude that the mountain areas were free-'=':.se areas and the Upper
Skagit exclusive use-areas were confinedtwithin the limits of the Skagit

While in pre-treaty times it is the

concensus of opinion among the writers that the up-—riveI' people relied

more upon hiunting in the great ezmanse of land nest of the crest of the

Cascades, considered with the fact of depopulation of the tribes oi‘ this

region prior to treaty times by disease, negates the claim of 1:-0":-i"c.ioner

to exclusive use of same. Moreover, the evidence of such e_*'olusive use

8 Ind. Cl. Com. h7S h89

by petitioner is insufficient is establish their claim of Indian title
to same.

17. Boundaries. The Commission, based on the findings of fact herein

-:-nu:---—.-._o

 

made and all of the evidence oi record, finds that the ten extended villages
of up—river people, the descendants of when are herein called petitioner,
jointly used and occupied to the enelasion of all other tribes and bands,
except as permissire'users, the follewing described tract of land:

Commencing at a pai;t on the top of Little Mountain,
which point is the site of the Higheay Patrol Microwave

Station, about ‘% miles seatheast of Mount Vera3n,'Wash-.
ington; thence northnesteard, along a straight line, passing

along the south side vf Gleseland Setcol in Meant Vernon to
the point of its interseetian with Dunbar Road, a distance

of approximately 3-5/l0 miles; th nee ‘ne north, along a
straight line about four miles long, to the point of its
intersecti:n'with Johnszn Read, which paint is about 2 miles
west of Chuckanut Junction; thence in a northeasterly direction along a straight line, about ;%-miles long to the

top of Sterling Hill; thence nertheastward to the peak of

Goat Mountain, which point is about 5% miles east of the
center of Lake Shannon; thence northeastward, along a straight
line to the jnnotien of Swift and.M:rnritz Creeks, immediately
northeast of Baker Lake; thence in an easterly direction along
a straight line to the mseth of Shannen Creek on the Baker
River; thence in a seatheeeterly'direetion to Bacon Peak;
thence in a generally'easterly direetion ta the center of
Gorge Dam.abote Neuhalem,HHashington; thenc
a straight line to the south bank of the ::seade'Reeer3 thence

on the Sauk River, which.point is abouts} miles northeast of
Darrington,‘Washington; thence nsrthnestnard, along a straight
line to the crest of the divide separating the waters of the
Stillagnamish and the Sank Rirers,'nhioh paint is intersected
by the Skagit-Snohomish Coanzy Lina; thence generally northra
along said divide to Rinker Paint; thence nerthaestward, along
a straight line to first and grineipal tern, or bend, in Finney'
Creek, which point is about L miles west of the menth of the
Sauk River; thence westward aizng a straight line to the place
of beginning.

18. Snooession. The resgertire ex§ert'

C-1.-1.-X-4-—Iu...-.1---5 an...If!
53
:3
r4
I J

' l

CI‘
55
I“

I}:

Q
Ha
I3

53
P

U}

0

I1.‘

U}

{J

‘.0

Dr. June HcSormick Collins for petitioner, and Dr. Carr;§l.Eiley for

defendant, asreed that petitioner lndiens, or at least a considerable

number of then, are descendants of the villagers who lived on the Upper

U3

'Skagit River in 1 55 (R. llh, Collins; H. 301, 302, 333, 325, Riley}The "Key to Informant Identification," pages iii, iv, and v of Dr.
Collins' thesis for Histers Degree, University of Chicago, l9h6 (Pet.
Ex. 2) indicates that ten or twelve of her informants were sires; is»
scendants of villagers on the Skagit River and its tribntar"5 the Sauk
River. Dr. Collins affirmed her belief that petitioner is the same tribe
in terms of historical_succession as that at the time of the treaty;

.f_ '5
0

Although this Commission is unable to find bw3% petitioner was a
tribal entity'at and before treaty times, it is well establisned in this
Record that many of petitioner's predecessors were a closely related ab~

original group of Indians living in separate villages upon the banks of

-«§the Skagit River and its tributaries (Finding 3 above).

The record indicates that it was'not until about 1915 that petitioner
was formally organized as a formal political entity or tribe, nevertheless,
the United States has long recognized their identity as closely related
or "allied bands" since the treatyiof Point I£1lli_ott (preaz:;b1.e).

Government Indian Supervisor 0. C. Upehurch described the "Upper
Skagits" as a modern term used to include "such bands as the Ssh‘-kuwrehu,
Nookawahuchahumish, Spa—nee-hen and Me—see'~qua«guilch" and tnat Upper
Skagits were the bands who "occupied the valley of the Shagit River and

its tributaries from.the vicinit* of what is new Sedro ;'

L
(“'1
C.
1...:
_- 3
(1

1
(D
$0
0}
C’
C‘*‘
O

-.

the mountains.” Upshurch described the inter—tribel rele«isn of Water

Skaglt bonds as ”frienily, hunted and fished togeLh;; ofier internarrisi

8 Ind. Cl. cor» 1:73 LL91

maintained interchange of products and extended inter—tribal socia- and

ceremonial functions. %%% The pattern of political organization in these

L

(Upper Skagit) bands were very simple ear. One would expect people of
similar language, similar habits and occupations, and similar traditions,
confined to this comparatively small area, to maintain not more than one
political organization, yet as many as nine existed independently;“ (Upchurch,
Pacific NM. Qtrly., 1936, pp. 285, 289; Pet. Ex’. 21).

This Commission finds that petitioner is the successor in interest to
the rights of this identifiable group of American.lndians, identified herein
as ten separate villages on the'Upper Skagit and Sank Rivers in treaty'times
(Finding 3) and subsequently'known as "the Upper-Skagit Tribe."

19. The United States extinguished the Indian title to that tract of
land described in Finding 17 by virtue of the terms of the Treaty of Point
Elliott of January 22, 1855. The taking by this cession and extinguishment
of subject Indian title became effective upon the date of ratification of

said treaty, toawit, March 8, 1859.

Edgar E. Witt

. -H. ' 1-1.--unj--j

Chief Commissioner

1..«:m. M» I-Iolt
Associate Commissioner

 

