BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

THE coaoa D‘ALE1\EE TRIBE or INDIANS, )
Petitioner, 3

v. _; Docket No. 81
THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA,‘ §
Defendant. 3

Decided: December 3, l957

ADDITIONAL FIIEDINCJ-S or FACT

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

l2. By the Agreement of March 26, 1887, 26 Stat. 989, 1027,
petitioner agreed to "cede, gra. t, relinquish and quit claiza to the
United States" all its lands except the portion thereof I-zitmn the
boundaries of the reservation set apart as such by Executive Order of
November 8, 1873.,

13. The lands thus ceded, relinquished and quit claimed by petitioner comprise 2,389,92h acres in the present States of Idaho and
Washington, 2,055 ,596 acres of which are in the State of Idaho, and
3311,3253 acres in the State of Washington. The reservation referred to
in Finding ‘.1. contained 598,500 acres, all within the State of Idaho.

114. Description of the Coeur d‘-‘ilene Tract: the Coeur d’A'Lez:.e

Tract occupies the central portion of the Panhandle section of the
State of Idaho and extends westward into the State of Washington I’°rom~
ten to twelve miles. The northernmost ezctension of the north boundary

of the Tract meshes the southern tip of Lake Pend Oreille and extends

from that point due eastward to the Bitterroot Mountains. The eastern

boundary of the Tract is the summit of the Bitterroot Mountain range,

which also serves as the boundary line between the States of Idaho and

Montana. The Tract extends southward to the spur ranges and hills

dividing the drainage basin of Coeur d'3lene Lake from the drainage
basin of the Snake River.

The Goeur d‘Alene Indianfieservation containing 598,500 acres is
located in the west central portion of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract. In the

main the Tract maybe said to consist of the drainage basin of Coeur

d'Alene Lake less the Coeur d‘Alene Reservation. The area is drained by

the Coeur D'Alene River flowing from the summit of the Bitterroot

MOUT‘t'!"..-‘?.'5‘t'I ranan '5-T¢=>_'¢_2‘I'_':r_.7::1v~r_'3__ tr}  -371+-A +31:-.5 1v')}rr:c +1!-U!) Q<i- Tan

L ja-Q93‘ be-us’? jj:¢& ,

from the Bitterroot Mountains in a northwesterly direction and emptying
into the southern end of Coeur d'A.I.ene Lake; and the St. Maries River
heading in the spur ranges and hills dividing the Coeur d‘Alene and
Snake drainage systans and flowing northward to a junction with the St.

Joe River a few miles east of the lake. Lake Coeur dhfklene empties into

the Colur.-zbia through the Spokane River, which flows directly westward

from Lake Coeur d‘Alene. In the main the Coeur d’Alene Tract is a

mountainous and rugged area. All of the area from Lake Coeur d‘Alene

to its eastern border is occupied by the westerly slope of the Bitterroot Mountains and by various short spur ranges. In the northern portion

Of the Tract the mountain area extends to and beyond Pend Oreille Lake,

and in the southern portion of the tract the St. Joe Mountains extend ri-a;::

to the Idaho-Efashington border.

a-cw -.-co hr‘-r"uv -b..n.oq.p..|. ..h.u£-~.II'!.h.J£5 ‘

g.

.5 

‘P

R)

l5. While the country had been visited and traversed by white men
much earlier, the first permanent settlement among the Coeur d'Alene
was in l8h2, when the Jesuit priests established a mission there. During
the ensuing years, the members of the tribe became thoroughly Christian'I'he Jesuits taught them how to farm and cultivate the soil. Long

ized.
before 188'? they had many acres under cultivation. By l887, they were
generally recognized as one of the most advanced and civilized of
Indian tribes.

l6. The white man's interest in petitioner's territory may be said
to have commenced, in respects material to this case, with the surveying
and construction of the Mullan Road about 1855, a military road surveyed
and cut through the forests frdn the east by Captain Mullan under govern- I
ment authorization. The discovery of gold on Oro Fino Creek in Nez Perce
territory bordering on the south of the lands involved heightened the
interest of the white men in the Coeur d'Alene country. This was in the
early l860‘s. Idaho Territory was established in I863. Prospecting on
the north fork of the Coeur d‘Alene River commenced as early as_l86§,
when there was a stampede of 600 men into the territory. Three years
later 700 prospectors were reported in the Coeur d'A.lene country. In
1879 a fort was established at what is now the city of Coeur d‘Alene.
Small settlements grew up, a sawmill was opened, a post office established,
and by l88O Shoshone County had an officially credited white population
Of LL67 and Kootenai County S18. Thus early, and before the Coeur d‘Alenes
had ceded their territory, it was invaded by whites.

From thence forward,

the pressure of white settlement increased. Gold was discovered on the

north fork of the Coeur d?Alene River in 1883 and the following spring
ushered in a vast horde of gold seekers. In.the ensuing three years
the population increased by leaps and bounds. Towns mushroomed overnight.
As early as l88h, Eagle City was a town.of 2000. The fbllowing;year,
Murray had 1000 people, both towns being on.the north font of the Coeur
d}Alene River where placer gold was beingtmined. ‘The settlement of the
south fork of that river followed shortly; with the towns ofVMullan,
Burke, Gem, Mace, Wardner,'Milo, Wallace and Kellogg, all on the south
fork where the lode discoveries were being prospected and exploited.
Other towns sprang up in the territory outside of the mining district.
In 1887, the white population in the petitioner‘s territory was estimated to be about ll,000.

1?. .Along the narrow river valleys of the tract are found recent
alluvial deposits that on the lower reaches of the streams are subject
to seasonal flooding. Otherwise the soils of this area are of residual
formation, that is, they have developed in place from the underlying rock
formations. This mountainous area extends across the southerly part of

Benewah County and into Spokane County. These soils have developed under

lforest conditions and vary from.gravellyg stony loams over the higher and

steeper areas to silt loans on the lower elevations.
heavy forest cover these soils are deficient in organic matter, which is
reflected.in their light color. The lower lying silty soil types have a
rather shallow surface soil overlying a subsoil generally similar but

more«compact. The underlying bedrock is usually found at less than three

feet.

Due to the originali

Topography is generally fairly steep so that these soils are ouigz.

to erosion on being cleared of their forest cover.

Extending along the northerly side of the subject lands from near
the southend of Lake Pend Oreille to the vicmity of Spokane there is a
rather broad, flat area known as Rathdrum. Prairie. This consists of a
dark colored gravelly, sandy loam. It is relatively high in organic
content due to having been developed under prairie grass conditions.
This soil was developed from glacial outwash material and contains large
amounts of water-washed, rounded stones. The surface soils which are of
only moderate depth merge gradually into the underlying, subsoil of
similar, but less developed, coarser material. Because of the gravel
content of these soils their drainage is excessive.

The subject lands lying in the southeasterly part of Spokane County
and the northeasterly portion of lrlhitznan County consist substantially of
silt loam. This is an aeolian or wind-deposited soil of great depth,
in places known to be as much as 100' feet. It was developed under a
natural cover of bunch grasses and small brush, which has resulted in a
very high content of organic material in the soil, and which is responsible
for the characteristic dark brown to black color. These soils consist ofa deep, silty loam surface soil that overlies a subsoil of similar but

lighter color. The topography of this area is characterized by smooth,

low, rounded hills, Permeability is excellent and this land is not as
subject to erosion as some of the heavier residual types of soils found
in the more mountainous sections. The Palouse soils are among the most

productive found in the Northwest.

U1.

18. The interest of the whites in the Coeur -d*Alene country was

not confined to mining. By 1887 many settlers had commenced fanning,
and in the ensuing four years, increasing numbers of settlers came into
the Coeur d*Alene territory to follow agricultural pursuits.

19. In early years, the Coeur dullene lands were inlfashington
Territory, and in 1859, the Washington Territorial Legislature established Shoshone County, which included all of the northern half of
the present State of Idaho. In 1861, a county government was set up
for Shoshone County. In 1863, the Territory of Idaho was established
and thereby, also, the portion of Shoshone County which had been in the
present State of Washington was cut off and added to Idaho Territory.
In 18614, Kootenai County was carved out of the northern portion of
Shoshone County. It included the northeastern portion of the Coeur
d‘Alene lands in the State of Idaho.

20. In the period_ from l887 to 1891, inclusive, the Coeur d'Alene
Tract, including the 1873 reservation, comprised large portions of
Shoshone County and Kootenai County in Idaho (the northern portion of
Kootenai County, now making up the Idaho Counties_ of Bonner and Boundary,
and the southern portion of Kootenai County within the present  
of Latah and part of the present county of Benewah were outs:3.de the ‘;[‘:;'~a_c::'i.:%
and the southern portion of Shoshone County, now constituting the 3':;::2:_;j<i:.;:.s~
portion of the Idaho County of Clearwater, was also outside the 
of the Tract). A strip of land about 10 miles wide East and was-:t and

1:8 miles long North and South along the eastern boundary of the State m‘.‘

Washington is included in the Tract.

ZL. Until the early 1880's the Coeur d’Alene Tract, as well as the

whole of the interior northwest region, was without railroad transportation. The Coeur dialene Tract's only means of comznunication with the
rest of the Northwest and with the outside world, aside from Indian trails,
was the Mullen Road, constructed from Fort Benton, Montana to Fort walla
Walla in the Walla Walla Valley of the Territory of Washington. This road
was constructed between 1858 and 1861 and passed directly through the
Coeur d‘Alene Tract. Like most military roads of this period, the Mullen
Road was little more than a trail hacked through the timber and over

the mountains, over which vehicular traffic could be moved only during

the summer months. By l887, however, the transportation and communication
facilities available into and through the Coeur d'Alene Tract were sub. stantial.  transcontinental railway line, the Northern Pacific, was
completed and extended from St. Paul to the Pacific Coast. This line
passed through the extreme northwestern corner of the Coeur d'Alene Tract
and extended along its eastern border. A branch railroad line from Hauser
Junction on the Northern Pacific extended southward to the northern end

of Lake Coeur d'Alene. At least three steamers were operating on Lake
Coeur d‘Alene and on the Coeur d‘Alene, St. Joe and St. Haries Rivers.
Steamboats could and did navigate the Coeur d‘Alene River to the old Mission
(Cataldo), some 25 miles eastward and upstream from Lake Coeur d‘Alene.
From the mission a narrow gauge railroad was built up the Coeur d‘F‘~lene

River to the mining towns of Kingston, Wardner, Osborne, Wallace, I-‘Iullan

and Burke.

Between March 26, 1887 and March 3, l89l the transportation facilities .

of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract were very materially increased and bettered.

The Washington and Idaho Railway Cornpany‘s line, astandard gauge branch
line of the O.hT.R. & N. Company, built from Farmington, T.—-.’ashington

east through the Coeur d'Alene Indian Reservation and up the valley of
the South  of the Coeur d‘Alene River, reaching Wallace in the mining
region on December 9, 1889, and the Northern_Pacific Railway Company’
extended a standard gauge branch line from De&net, Montana westward
across the Bitterroot Mountains by the Mullen Pass, reaching Wallace,
Idaho in August of 1890. Thus by March 3 , 1891 the Coeur d'Alene Tract
was served by the transcontinental line of the Northern Pacific which
passed through the extreme northwestern corner of the Tract and con?
tinued southward just west of the western border of the Tract; by the
Corbin narrow gauge from Hauser Junction to Coeur d‘-Alene Landing; and by
the Corbin narrow gauge from Cataldon into the mining region, the two
stretches of narrow gauge tract being connected by steamboat service
from Coeur d‘Alene Landing to Cataldo; by the standard gauge branch line

of the O.W.R.&N. system from Farmington to Wallace; and by the standard

gauge branch line of the Northern Pacific from Desmet, Montana_to Wallace,
Idaho.

22. By 1886 there were telephone lines connecting the pI‘ina2.::_}1‘JE?.j..

towns in the territory with the outside world and affording  I

within the territory, and by l888 telegraph lines were in operation  .

ing the entire Coeur d'Alene area with the ‘-sfestern Union Telegraph Cox:1pai;.~;= 

lines.

23. By l887 there were flourishing towns in the territory’ :::e::~  

.1

them mining settlements but others in the farming districts and still on: ‘*

68

-..
\_v

.\___I
...\.J

necessitated by transportation, communication and trade. The rapid
growth of the city of Spokane in this period was due in large part

to the mining activity in the Coeur d'Alene area. By 188? there were

in the territory post offices, flour mills, hanks, sawmillsand numerous
schools. The assessed valuation of property in Kootenai and Shoshone
counties amounted to nearly $2,000,000.00.

211.. 0f the total lands ceded by petitioner llL8,080 acres thereof

should be classified as mineral lands, 393,238 acres as agricultural

lands, and the remainder, l, 8h8,606 acres, as timber lands.

Agricultural Lands

 

25. (a) The lands classified as agricultural lie in part in that
portion of the tract which is west of the Coeur d'Alene reservation in
the State of Washington and in part in the State of Idaho , generally
north of Hayden Lake and the Spokane River. Part-of the agricultural
lands are in the Palouse wheat belt and other of these lands are found
in the Rathdrum Prairie area. The Palouse area is considered one of the
select farming regions of the world. Some of the lands within the Tract
classified as agricultural for the purposes of evaluation were timbered
in the 1887-1891 period and would have required clearing.

(13) By 1891 a fairly active market existed for the agricultural
lands of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract. A number of sales of farm land within the area had been made by the lforthern Pacific Railway Company and by
the Oregon Improvement Company. To l887 the Northern Pacific Railway
Company sales of its agricultural lands within the area were all at
$2.60 per acre, the Oregon Improvement Compamr’s at a slightly higher

price. During this same period a few homesteads had also been patented

\O

in the agricultural portion oi'the Tract. That the demand for agricultural land was not confined to the Coeur dialene tract, but extended
east and south of the area, is demonstrated by the sales data appended
to his report by the petitioner's appraiser, Murray. .As shown.by this
report, between.l887 and l892,IMurray found 186 sales from the Northern
Pacific Railway Company in Spokane County, Washington, and during the
same period 25 sales by the Northern Pacific Railway Company in Whitman
County,'Washington, and 38 sales during the same period from individual
grantors and from the Northern.Pacific Railwar Company in Kootenai
County, Idaho.

(c) During the period l88? to 1891 the Northern Pacific Railroad
made at least 251 sales, according to county records, of its unimproved
lands in Whitman and Spokane Counties, Washington and Kootenai County,
Idaho, for stated considerations ranging from $2.50 an acre to $10.00
an.acre for sales usually consisting of 160 acres or less. The average
consideration shown by the record of these sales is $h.l2 per acre.

(d) Mr. Henry T. Murray, a qualified appraiser, of I-iissoula, Montana,
testified as an expert witness for petitioner. .After assembling the above
sales made by the Northern Pacific Railroad, Er.IMurray:made certain adw
justments to arrive at his conclusion.of'the value to be placed on the
agricultural lands. The witness assumed.that an average of'five years
would be required to put all the agricultural land on the market and to
recover the purchaser‘s investment. He stated taxes were found to average

.035 cents per acre and assumed an investor would be satisfied with a

Discounting the averag

return of six percent on his investment. selling

6 1?

price of $h.l2 to determine its worth five years hence Mr. Murray concluded the wholesale price of the 393,237.75 acres of agricultural land
to be $1,110,389 or $0.90 per acre. Mr. Murray" testified that his opinion
of value for the agricultural lands would be the same for either 188'? or
1891 (Tr. 1286).

(e) Mr. C. Marc Miller, a qualified appraiser, testified as an
expert witness for defendant. ‘This witness also used the comparable
sales or market data approach to arrive at his opinion as to the value
of the agricultural lands within the Tract. Mr. Miller stated (Def. Ex.
38, P. 1119) that a study of the sales in the area showed the Northern

Pacific Railroad between 1881 and 1887 was sellingits lands in small

' tracts for $2.60 per acre, and after 1887 at from $2.60 to $b.OO per acre.

The witness limited the agricultural lands of the tract to 260,000 acres
which were those agricultural lands that did not need to be cleared of
timber. It was Mr. Miller’ s opinion that a well informed hypothetical
purchaser of the Tract as of March 26, 1887, would have believed that he
would be able to dispose of approximately 260,000 acres as agricultural
lands at an average retail price of $3.00 per acre but that such a purchaser would have recognized that there would be considerable expense
involved in the resale of the lands (Def. Ex. 38, pp. 163-161;). Defendant's appraiser was of the opinion that as of March 3, 1891, a hypothetical purchaser would have considered that he could have paid for the
agricultural lands of the Tract the sum of $2.570 per acre..(Def. Ex. 38,

p. 168; Tr. 11:61;-11:65) and that as of 1887 they were worth $2.00 per acre

(Tr. 11:63 and 15114).

(1') Based upon the entire record, including comparable sales, the
demamd for land, and the presence of timber on some of the lands classified
as agricultural, the Commission finds that the agricultural lands of the
Tract as of 1891 had a value o.€'_$S89,8S7.00, or at the rate of $1.59 per

acre for 393, 238 acres.

Timber Lands

26.

 

(a) The Coeur d‘Alene Tract consisted of 2,389,921.; acres of

land. Of this acreage the Commission has found that l,8h8,606. acres

should be classified as timber lands. Part of the tract in the southern

portion is in what is now known as the best white pin area in the world
(Tr. 11151). With the exception of the jack pine area in the north of the
Tract and the alpine growth in the higher mountain regions, all of this

timber was of good commercial quality. Due to the topographyof the area,

however, a large part of this timberstand would not have been considered
accessible in the period l88'?-l89l, and for many years thereafter. During
the same period, l88?-1891, the timber resources of the area served to
supply the local markets, as fuel for developing steam power in the mining

operations and steamboats, for timbering in the mines, railroad ties and

for building mate rials.

(b) During the period 1887-1891 there were no sales of timber lands

within the Tract. Freight rates were still prohibitive for shipment to

eastern markets. The Middle West was the main source of timber at that

time and it was not until about 1900 that it was eliminated as a controling factor in natural lumber production. A well-informed purchaser, however, would have been aware of the potential value of the timber in the

61

I\‘.

Coeur d'Alene Tract and would have also been pa:-rare that in the distant
but reasonably’ foreseeable future the timber lands of the Tract would be
in demand.

(c) Any well informed hypothetical purchaser as of l887-1891 in considering the timber lands as previously found would consider a large
amount of the acreage not accessible for timber operations. The same
well Eonned person, however, would realize the importance of this
timbered area to the future logging and mining economy of the Coeur
d'Alene Tract. The movement of the logs down the rivers of the Tract
to the mill sites required a stable and dependable flow of water in
these streams. The operation of the mines in the mineral area of the
Tract also required a continuous, stable and dependable flow of water.
Under natural conditions--that is, with the drainage area_of the rivers
covered with a dense stand of timber, such a continuous and dependable

flowoi‘ water down the streams of the area was insured. The removal of

the timber fromkthis drainage basin, on the other hand, would have in;
sured a succession of freshets, floods and water depletion in the streams.
The protection of the watershed insured a slow and gradual run off of
summer rains, and a slow and_ gradual melting of winter snows, thus maintaining throughout the year the flow of the streams of the area. But
the rivers of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract are short mountain streams, descending rapidly from the Bitterroot Mountains to Coeur d‘Alene Lake,

and the removal of the timber from the steep mountain and hillsides, which

make up this area, would permit the rains to immediately run off and would

permit the melting of the winter snows to accelerate tremendously, thus

producing seasons of freshets and floods followed by periods when the

streams of the region would become dry water courses.

27. (a) There being no sales of timber lands on the Coeur d'Alene

Tract during the period 1887-1891, the appraisers for the parties ‘
attempted to establish the value of the timber lands through sales of

such lands elsewhere. Mr. Murray, petitioner‘S appraiser, located a

sale in 1888 made by the Horthem Pacific Railroad Company of s3,391.ho
acres lying north of the Nisqually River in the State of Washington

which took all odd numbered sections. in 15 townships. According to this

appraiser the terms of sale called for 50 cents per thousand board measure

and $1.25 per acre for the land, and that the $1.25 for the land and $1.75

an-an 0-no-nun;-.  ,... .. .. .-...--3.. --- - -..'.-- .. - -V‘-o--. -‘ -,-r ..
P...-. ........- ... '\‘I-V3030  be.-; }_Jca-.Li:l aucui £1.:..;1g, in.) 0:31 0:111} 5813:6Ihe remainder
would in effect revert to the buyer upon the fulfillment of certain performance such as the building of a railroad line, building and equipping
a samnill and producing a stated amount of lumber for shipment each year.

Mr. Murray testified that the timber on this land was generally better

than on the Tract. Petitioner‘s appraiser also took into consideration

2].; sales of timber lands in l88'? and 1888 covering 3,719.83 acres rd. 
in Montana on the eastern side of the Bitterroot range not far from. the

T rac t .  .;  e

The sales of these timber lands averaged i_’5L;.S8 per acre.
witness also noted 5 sales that were made on a stumpage basis in t.h;e:.':;.
region which showed a return of $1.00 per thousand board feet. These
sales, Hurray f ound,‘ were largely in the valley and somewhat easier to
log than many parts of the Coeur d':‘slene Tract. The witness "(.8-‘E’,-1’:-?.'1‘...."

that these sales were probably selective.

(b) In arriving at his conclusion as to the value of the timber
lands on the Tract, Mr. Murray considered that Congress by the Timber

and Stone Act acknowledged that timber lands were worth at least the sum
01532.50 per acre. It wasbhis considered opinion, however, that in view
of the higher prices received in the sale of timber lands that the minimum

price Of $2.50 per acre should be weighted somewhat to reflect a willingness of buyers to pay more than said minimum. Murray therefore was of
the opinion that a fair market price of that part of the Tract valuable‘
for timber was $3.00 per acre. Since thesales he found’;-Ipcrc of small

tracts on a retail basis the witness adjusted the market price of $3.00"

per acre based on certain assumptions. Petitioner's appraiser assumed

that a hypothetical purchaser investing in the Tract would not pay the$3.00 market price since he would require time to either exploit the area

or dispose of it. The witness assumed it would require five years as an

average time to dispose of the timber holdings. Because of this the

appraiser made certain adjustments for charges for taxes, fire protection
and administration during such a period and assumed that the purchaser

would want a 6% return on the investment for the same period to arrive at
the Present North (or discounted value) of the fair market value of $3.00
per acre.

Mr. Murray was of the opinion that the value of the timber

lands as of March 26, l887, was $21.28 per acre and that as of the date of
I-Earch 3, l8S>l, their value was at the rate of $2.21 per acre. (Tr. l23S1265; Pet. Ex. lhh, pp. 12-2h).

28. (a) Defendant's appraiser, Mr. C. Marc Miller, concluded in his

study of the timber lands of the Coeur d'Alene Tract, that during the

61

period l887-1891 the only demand for the lmnber of the area was a local
demand; that the needs of the Mississippi Valley region were then being
met by the lumbemen of the Great. Lakes region and the needs of the West
Coast by the lumbemen of the Pacific Coast region; that the lumbemen
were not interested in acquiring timber lands in the Coeur d‘f'tlene Tract
or in any other part of the "Inland Empire" until after the turn of the
20th century. This witness was of the opinion that any value placed

upon the timber lands of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract as of this period 18871891 was a speculative value. During the same period Mr. Miller concluded that only 500,000 acres of the Tract would be considered accessible
timber lands and that any price fixed on these timber lands would have
been entirely speculative. Mr. Miller concluded that no zeasonably
prudent and well informed purchaser would have considered paying more
than $1.00 per acre for the accessible lands of the Tract and would have
placed nothing more than a nominal value on the remaining timber lands .

on theTract in either 1887 or l89l (Def. Ex. 38, pp. 934-99 and 161;-168).

(b) Defendant‘s appraiser found that during the years 1887-1891

there were no buyers for timber within the Tract or within the eastern
part of the State of Washington, except for a few areas located .:13%~.:..2i;:s.:‘:.d
sites of population, principally along the Columbia River and.  
eastern buyers had mt moved into the area although there were people when
did PI'0Spect the region. Mr. Miller found that the buyers 
companies started buying in the area principally in 1902 althongh ‘;..-I.';i.=Z3‘.i:"‘:.‘-":
had been a few sales prior thereto and that when the timber w:?r*:‘l:l-r*

 1‘) £5. .! J ‘ .‘

area became marketable it did sell and there was quite an 

\ we . .I._r'__: '

616‘

The witness lists some 58 sales within or near the Tract mostly in 1902
and I903 at prices ranging from about $3.50 to $30.00 per acre and testified that the only sales oi?timber‘within the Tract were of the more
accessible timber lands. Mr. Miller testified that he searched the county
record to find the largest sale o£'timberlan close to the Tract which
would be comparable. The sale he reported was the first sale in or
around the area and.was:made by the Northern.Pacific Railroad Company

of S2,32l.S7”acres of timber lands located directly north of the Tract

in Kootenai County for the sum of $l8h,32h.S0, or about $3.50 per acre

in the year 1902. "Mr. Miller also reported the sale by the State of
Idaho in 1903 of 8,190 acres of'stumpage only in.Kootenai County for

the sum of $67,567.50. Mr. Miller testified he did not consider sales

of timber lands in western'Washington for the reason he did not believe
them comparable with the timber lands in the Inland Empire because of the
difference in transportation and the greater stand per acre in the lands
west of“the Cascades. Defendant's appraiser testified that the $1.00 per
acre value that he placed on the 500,000 acres of what he considered to
be accessible timber lands was based on many sales in eastern Washington
at about the valuation date of‘more accessible lands at a dollar an acre
to threedollars an acre. These sales are not otherwise referred to or
listed as comparable sales. Mr. Miller testified he used the sales of
timber lands in and nar the Tract in the years 1901, 1902 and 1903 only
as a check on the value of $1.00 an acre he placed on the timber lands.

29. In the periodIL887-1891 there had been no sales within the

Tract of'ttnber lands and only a local market; freight rates'were prohibitive during the period with only hope of relief; some of the timber

6 l7

lands would have been Tconsidered.-inaccessible:and a-‘prospective purchaser
would have been aware of the necessity of watershed protection both to the
needs of the lumbering industry and to the mining region. A Well-informed
hypothetical buyer would also have been aware that the timber lands were
of good commercial quality, that with the rivers and the lake on the

Tract there was accessible timber in large quantities, and that the

timber lands of the area would be in demand by the lumbering industry

in the foreseeable future. The hypothetical purchaser would also take
into consideration the size of the area of the Tract classified as timber
lands; the necessity of paying taxes and fire insurance on the timber
lands; the administrative costs in holding and disposing of the lands;
the necessity of probably a number of years to exploit or dispose of his I
holdings when the timber became marketable; and finally the need of proViding for risk and the return of his investment with profit. In considering all the facts of- record the Commission finds that the timber
lands within the Tract as of March 3, l89l, had a value in the sum of
$1,816,606.00, or at the rate of $1.00 per acre for l,8h8,606 acres.

Value of Water Rights

 

30. The streams and waters of the Coeur d‘Alene Tract are  

cannot_ be separately evaluated. The value placed upon the ,
and timber lands and upon the mineral lands of the area comprehend the
availability of water and the continuance of an adequate water   '
;l.i..,s

meet the needs of the farms, mines and forests of the area. Water"; and

use and need is necessarily included in the valuation of the    Tract.

515;

619

Mineral Lands
31. The discovery by Prichard of the placers of Prichard Creek

ushered in the mineral development of the Coeur d'Alene mining area.

The date of Prichard‘s discovery of placer gold in the creek bed of
Prichard Creek is somewhat uncertain, and has been variously fixed by
the historical writers at 1880, 1881 and 1882. In any event Prichard
kept the news of his discovery strictly to himself for a period, and

not until the spring of 18811 did the news of the strike reach the general
public. In the spring of thatyear thousands of miners were on Prichard
and Eagle Creekiin the Coeur d'Alene area. Petitioner‘s witness Jones
states that his investigation established that a total of 2156 placer
claims were filed in the area. In addition to the placer claims located
on the tributaries of the North Fork of the Coeur d’Alene River, some
gold-bearing lodes were discovered in the same area. Ten claims, later
consolidated as the Mother Lode group, six claims, later included in the
Daddy group, four claims, later included in the Gold Chest group, and
two claims méing up the Yosemite group, were staked and developed.

In 188).: and shortly after the placer region of the Coeur d'Alene

Tract was brought into production, the first of the lead silver mines

of the region were discovered. The Tiger, the Pooman, and several other

silver lead prospects were located and staked in this year. In the follow- ,

ing year the Bunker Hill and 5ullivan mines were located and staked. In
fact during this year of 1885 and the following years of l886 and 1887,
a vast number of lode claims in the silver lead district of the Tract

were located and staked. Petitioner's witness Jones testified that his

investigation disclosed that a total of S222 lode claims were eventually
located and staked in the silver lead area of the Coeur d'Alene mineral

district. That a vast number of claims, both in the placer region of the

Tract and in the lead silver region of the Tract, were located and staked

in this very short period of time, is not at all surprising. Such is the

history of every reported mineral discovery. Actually these locations

are extended over all ground which might conceivably at some future

time be found to contain mineral values. Much ground is staked which

is utterly worthless, and in enumerating the locations filed at a much
later date, it is certain that many of the filings are repeated filings

upon the same land, and that a number of claims are frequently filed, in

part or wholly, covering the same ground. The petitioner's witness Jones

stated that much of the placer ground that was staked was valueless for

mining purposes. Jones also states that of the lode claims staked, 1:262

never were patented, and of the 2156 placer claims staked, 2031; never
were patented.

32. The Coeur d‘Alene Mirring District is located on the western
slope of the Coeur d'Alene Mountains in Shoshone County, Idaho. The

mineralized zone is approximately 30 miles long by lS miles wide or

about 1150 square miles (Tr. lO29). Frederick L. Ransome and F. C.

Calkins, of the United States Geological Survey, in their "History of
Mining Development“ 1908) in writing of the Coeur d‘Alene mining area
wrote in part as follows (Pet. Ex. l39, pp. 115-51):

Although the chief excitement at this time Zl88Lz-857

centered in the rich gold placers near Murray, the leadsilver veins of the South Fork [Sr the Coeur d‘Alene Rive§7

620

were beginning to attact attention.  '3? '33 In l885 the
Tiger mine, in spite of its comparatively inaccessible
.p0.Si‘5i0n,has been opened by three tunnels and had about
3,000 tons of lead-silver ore on the dump. It was bought
in this year by S. S. Glidden for $35,000, Burke and Carton
retaining contingent interests. "3-‘  *

-sz?a'»;The discovery of the Bunker Hill mine by ‘Phil’ O'Rourke
and N. S. Kellogg in 1885, and of the Sullivan mine by
‘Con’ Sullivan and Jacob Goetz and the evident existence
of large bodies or rich ore in the Tiger, Poorman, Granite,
San Francisco, Morning and other mines removed all doubts
of the future importance of the South Fork mines. The
opening of the year 1886 saw a decided rush from the outside and from the waning placers of Murray into this new
field, 6+ 44- 4:-.

-?«'r-5’r41'

In 15.pril,l887, the Bunker Hill and Sullivan mines were
sold to S. G. Reed and in August the Bunker Hill and
S.'L':.lli'.':..n Iiining :..'~'.C. Con<;entratlz1g Company was organized
with a capital of $3,000,000. The Poonnan, Granite, and
Morning mines were also sold at about this time. The
completion of the narrow-gauge railway to Burke in this
year enabled the Canyon Creek mines to ship their ore,
Probably over 50,000 tons of lead-silver ore was mined in
l887, the principal producers being the Tiger, Bunker Hill
and Sullivan, Tyler and Stemwinder, Last Chance, Sierra
Nevada, Poorman and Granite. The Mammoth and Standard veins
were as yet merely good prospects. The ore of the Sierra
Nevada was chieflyicarbonate, carrying 1:7 per cent lead and
60 to 90 ounces of silver to the ton. Freight to Portland
W88 $16 a ton, and the cost of mining and treating ore of
an average value of $96 was $148.85 a ton.

In 1888 placer mining near Murray and Delta had greatly
declined. A pipe line was constructed in 1890 to hydraulic
the bench gravels of the so-called Old Wash near Murray, and

some hydraulic mining is still occasionally carried on in
Dream Gulch. *,z- 4- ¢:»

'5-i";1'$’r

In l89l the Morning mine was sold for $h00,000. About
$200,000 m gold was produced this year, chiefly from the
Golden Chest, Golden King, E-Zother Lode, Occident, Treasure
Box, and Bu c"-key8Bay quartz mines, near Murray.

33. The greater part of the ore mined  the district had to be

concentrated prior to shipment. The numb er of tons of ore reduced to

one ton of concentrate varied. when treated in the mills which were
required to be built at the mines the production of one ton of concentrates contained from 50 to 60 percent lead and varying ounces of silver.
Although in l887 there was much development and exploration work being
done at mines there _were only two or three concentrators and apparently
only a few oi‘ the mines were shipping their concentrates. According
to the United States Geological Survey Report for the calendar year
1887 (Pet. Ex. 139, p. 113) the chief producers in the Coeur d'Alene
region were the Bunker Hill and Sullivan, the Sierra Nevada and the
Stemwinder mines. This report states, “The Bunker Hill and Sullivan
shipped about 10,000 tons of argentiferous lead concentrates in l887,
the latter two mines about 500 tons each. These mines are all at
I-Iardner, Shoshone county. The total lead output probably amounted to

nearly 7,000 short tons from the Coeur d‘Alene region. No new district

in the United States promises to play so important a part in the lead

markets of the Country as the Coeur d'Alene." The reports of the

Director of the Mint show the region produced 5,980 tons of lead in
1887 (Pet. &. l39, p. 3.12). The Geological Survey report in speaking
of the aspects of better rail transportation in the mining region stated:
"These roads, besides aiding development by lowering freights, would come
through districts containing promising mines, like those at Mullen and
the Sunset group, which are now too far from the railroad to be worked

profitably. ” While practically all of the ore shipped from the region

in 188'? appears to have been the product of the Bunker Hill and
Sullivan “mine, development work was being carried on at other mines
within the area.
314. (a) Between March 26, 1887 and March 3, 1891, the lead silver

belt of the Ooeur d‘Alene mining region continued its steady development.
In 1889 there were seven concentrators in the region. Production figures

for lead and silver recovered from tons of concentrates shipped from the

area are as follows for the period 1887-1890, inclusive:

         

Lead Silver Gold
Tons of
2000 Fine

Year pounds Value Ounces Value Value
1886 1,500 138,300 116,286 115,668 182,371
1887 5,980 538,200 3h0,000 332,520 152,276
1888 8,000 705,600 558,000 520,760 211,867
1889 17,500 1,333,500 1,095,26 1,025,168 17h,310
1890 27,500 2,392,500 1,h99,663 1,578,686 165,360

\

(b) In the main the upswing in the shipment of concentrates from the
area during the latter part of this 1887-1891 period may be ascribed to

improved transportation facilities. The hfashington and Idaho Railway

Company‘s line, financed by the 0. W. R. & N. Company, built from Farmington, Washington, east through the Coeur d'A1ene Indian Reservation, up
the valley of the South Fork of the Coeur d‘Alene River, reaching ’.«Ea11ace
on December 9, 1889. The Northern Pacific branch line from De &net,
}Eontana.was constructed westward across the Bitterroot Mountains by the

Mullan Pass,,and reached lfallace in August of 1890. These two roads were

standard gauge and offered to the miners of the Coeur d‘.".1ene lea and

623

silver belt direct, standard railroad facilities to the smelters of
the northwest. It is probable that much of the concentrates shipped
in 1889 and 1890 was produced from ore which had already been mined
and piled on the dumps of ‘the various properties. The period from
Iviarch 26, 1887 to March 3, l89l, brought about an improvement and
enlargement of the transportation facilities of the area and a reduction
in shippingcosts. These factors in turn produced a material increase
in the shipment of concentrates from the region. It is probable that
during this period public knowledge of and interest in the district was
increased, and that the improvement of transportation facilities, the

increase in the production and shipping of concentratesg, and the wider

knowledge and increased interest of the public in the area, enhanced
the value of the mining district.

35. Mr. Frank Lilly, a research statistician, specializing in
mining, was one of the expert witnesses appearirg for petitioner, Mr.’
Lilly in his work since 1920 has visited and inspected many mines in
the United States and Canada in order to obtain statistics for his
service booklets pertaining to the ecomomic outlook of different ores
and the markets on metals and the leading stocks. In addition he made
analytical reports on mines on which he was consulted. This witness
for many years has been familiar with the Coeur dhtlene mining district
having a financial interest in mining property in the area and has
visited the region frequently. Mr. Lilly, based on his research into
the hi.-s'tom ofproduc tion. and‘ development of -thelpmining districthanr-.,.

\

‘the amount of ore which he said was then ‘.-CIIOT.-.'1'1 to es:-ist, stated that

621;

in his opinion the value of the mining district in 18814-1885 would have
been a minimum of ten million dollars and that after the discovery of
the Bunker Hill and Sullivan the district in l887 would have had a
minimum value of fifteen million dollars (Tr. 227-228). Mr. Lilly
testified that placer mining  never been an important thing in the
district and that he would not include it in considering the value of
the district (Tr. 199-200, 233).

 (a) Mr. Fred 0. Jones, a consulting geologist, testified as
an emert witness for petitioner as to the value of the Coeur d‘Alene
mining district. Mr. Jones is a- gaduate of Colorado College where he
obtained an A. B. degree in geology. His experience includes a year

in minesin the Leadville district of Colorado where he worked in concentratina Dlants and in general mine mapping; a nwmba-r of‘ year: in +1-m
oil fields of Wyoming as an engineer and later was a project geologist
for the United States Bureau of Reclamation at Grand Coulee Dam for a
term of years analyzing the foundation conditions for engineering
structures such as power houses, pumping plants and dams. This witness
testified that he was not a land appraiser, that he had never made an

appraisal of mining properties for court purposes or for purposes of

‘' investment and that he had never acted as a broker for the sale or

purchase of mining property (Tr. lOOJ.;-lOO5).

(b) Mr. Jones, based upon extensive research, prepared "11 Valuation
iStudy of the Mineral Resources of the Lands Ceded by the Coeur d‘Alene
Tribe of Indians on Harch 3, 1891." 'This study is in a written report
bearing petitioner's exhibit number l3? and contains much valuable

information pertaining to the geology and mining history of the Tract,

transportation, production, contemporaneous newspaper items concerning
the mining district, and early reports by well-infonned or expert mining
men regarding the mining area. Mr. Jones‘ research included a determination of the number of lode and placer claims filed in the mining

district prior to March 3, 1891. A search of the records of Shoshone

County, the witness testified, showed 5, 222 lode claims and 2,156

placer claims had been recorded by that date. Of the lode claims so

located and filed upon, patents had been applied for on 52 lode claims

prior to March 3, 1891, and patents were later issued on them. Including these a total of 960 lode claims have become patented. Of the placer

location notices filed, a total of l9 had gone to patent prior to March 3,
1891, and including these a total of 122 have become patented (Tr. lOlLhl0h7). Mr. Jones testified that some of these claims were duplicates,
i. e.,' particularly with the unpatented claims the locator would file

his location notice on the same claim year after year (Tr. 1033). The

witness testified that prior to March 26, 188?, there had been 2,388 lode
claims and 1,661 placer claims filed in the county records.

(c) Mr. Jones testified that a search of the records showed a total
of zhoo sales of lode claims and tho placer claims within the mining
district for the four-year period from March 26, 1887 to March 3,. 1891

(Tr. ll28) where the consideration was $10.00 or more. He testified all

4"}!

recorded deeds where the consideration shown on the instrument  

dollars or less were ignored in his evaluation studies. Many, if not
most, of the sales were of fractional’ parts, that is a fourth, a half,

or a sixteenth, which in computing to arrive at an average sales pri.-rt-::2

525

were extended to show a full claim price (Tr. ll29). Mr. Jones testified that it was his opinion that these transactions were "the only
tangible yardstick as to what mining people were paying for ndning
properties." Petitioner‘s appraiser also took into consideration the
value of water rights. His research showed a total of 69h,786 miner's
inches of water rights had been appropriated by filing on the streams
and that although there had been about 21 sales of theseirights, some
fracti'onal,. he had used but six sales to obtain an average price for
the sales of such rights (Tr. 1153). IMr. Jones admitted that the filings
were no doubt for more water than the miners could use and in many cases
were for more water than was in the streams (Tr. ll9h).

"3'
a

(C1) et.'£.'Lione1-‘s appraiser Jones, based on the recorded deeds 0:’

sales, made three evaluation studies. First he assumed that 90% of

the total lode locations were "valid” (that is valuable) and he included in this first "Evaluation Study" the $3,000,000 "sale" of the
Bunker Hill and Sullivan Mine in the sales sample. This "sale" of the
Bunker Hill and Sullivan Mine was actually a transfer for stock ‘by
Simeon 0. Reed (who had purchased the property in April 1887 for a re-ported $650,000.00) and his wife to the Bunker Hill and Sullivan Concentrating Corporation which was incorporated on July 29, 1887. Mr.
Reed‘ s personal papers show no money changed hands in this transaction
(Pet. Ebc. l39, p. l'7S). I-Er. Jones took 90,‘? of the lode clains or b,700
and computing at the sum of 358638, the average sale price per claim he
arrived at a figure of $h0,598,600 evaluation for lode claims alone in

Shoshone County. Applying the sane type of computation to placer

locations and water right filings in Shoshone County and assuming then
to be 9055 valid he arrived at an evaluation of $3,l8S,3.L80 for placer
locations and $1,775,872 for water rights, or a total Shoshone County
evaluation of 31159559 ,952. In addition the witness followed the same
method to evaluate the Pend 0reiL‘Le Iviining District in Bonner County,
Idaho and the Wolf Lodge and Mission Mining Districts in Kootenai County,
Idaho and mining  Spokane County, Washington, all within the Coeur
d'Alene Tract. Hr. J ones‘ total evaluation in Study #1 was $15,776, 222
(Pet. ac. 139, p. 179). In Studies No. 2 and 3 1~n~; Jones eliminated
the Bunker Hill and Sullivan stock sale. In Study No. 2, the witness
reached an evaluation of $39,890,702. In Study No.3 he assumed only
75% of the total lode claims were valid and but§0§«‘S of the placer locations and water rights filings were valid and reached a total evaluation of $31,876,915. I~‘Er.f Jones testified that in his opinion the
mineral resources of the Tract had a minimm value of $30,000,000 on
March 3, 1891, and a minimum value of $25,000,000 on March 26, 1887

(Tr. 1166, 1168). '

37. (a) Defendant's appraiser, C. I-Earc I-Eiller, devotes a‘ portion of
his written report (" ..ppraisal of Coeur dialene Tract in Idaho an
Washington, 1873-1887-I891," Def .  38, pp. I00-13h) to the appr—:.::.feral.
of the minerals of the Tract. The report contains much valuable information with respect to the history of mining in the area, deliel<f..i{§I‘T.*';".._'if?
of the mines and transportation, and the early financial di.f‘ficul"ies
of some of the now successful mining properties.

Mr. Miller reports

that he found the records of sales of minim‘ properties at or ;. 

628

datesof his valuations were of little assistance in detennining the
value of the mineral lands since it was impossible at this late date
to determine the degree of development and the monies expended in the
development of theimining properties prior to the date of sale and‘because he believed the consideration recited in the deeds of sale very
frequently bore little relationship to the actualimoney paid for the
property. Defendant's appraiser stated that although many'authorities
indicate the actual consideration paid for the purchase of the Bunker
Hill and Sullivan mine in 1887 by Simeon Reed was no more than $625,000
or $650,000 the considerations recited in the deeds to Reed total:more

than $1,500,000. Copies of some, if not all, of the deeds to Reed were

111'.’ AA

81

""_J

introduced in evidence by petitioner (Pet. Exhibits L6; 503
and 67) and the consideration recited in said deeds total $l,h53,h96.
This witness also investigated the reported sale of a mining property
known as the Mammoth Lode Claim which was located outside of what is
known as the Coeur d‘AleneIMining District but in Kootenai County, Idaho,
within the Tract. .According to his investigation there were two deeds
of sales of this property in 1886 at a total recited consideration of
ten.million dollars.v Mr» Miller stated he found the only development
work ever done on the property was the driving of four short tunnels
into the hillside and that these sales were "another example of the
recital of an utterly fictitious consideration in the transfer of mining
property.“

(b) From.his research defendant‘s appraiserVMiller concluded that

as of 1887 and 1891 only the Bunker Hill and Sullivan could be considered

6 29

as a proven mining property and all others could be considered only as
prospects or potential mines. This witness was of the opinion that
"Unquestionably, as of March 26, l887, the mineral deposits of the
Coeur d‘Alene Tract would have added very appreciably to the value of

the Tract in the opinion of a well informed buyer or seller. “ Mr. Miller

 stated in his report that the hypothetical purchaser and the hypothetical

seller would have in mind the potentialities of the mining region, the
fact that the Bunker Hill and Sullivan property was a more or less proven
mining property, the need of expending large sums in the development of
other properties and the risk involved. Mr. Miller was further of‘ the
opinion that "Nevertheless the possibility and perhaps the probability
existedthat paying properties would be developed in the area, and that
the Bunker Hill and Sullivan property would prove to be a profitable
mining operation." Mr. Miller concluded that as of March 26, l887, the
known mineral deposits in the Coeur d‘Alene mining district would have
added perhaps as much as $1,500,000 to the value of the Tract and the

same would have enhanced the value of the Tract on March 3, 1891, to the

‘extent of $2,000,000.

38. (a) Mr. William is’. Staley, professor of mining at the University
of Idaho, College of Mines, at Moscow, Idaho, testified as an expert
witness for defendant. Professor Staley holds a Bachelor of Science
degree in mining engineering, an Engineer of Mining degree and a Master
of Science degree. The witness has spent many summers working for the
Idaho Bureau of Mines and Geology and has written a number of publications

regarding various phases of mining in the State of Idaho. His profesrsorieil

631

duties and his work with the Idaho Bureau of Mines and Geology has in-cluded frequent trips to the Coeur d'Alene Mining district. Professor
Staley, based upon his research into the early history of mining in the
tract, testified that the development, that is openings of any extent

into the ground, of mines had not progressed sufficiently so that one
could base an opinion in 1887 with respect to the possible future of

the mines. By 1891, this witness testified, more would have been known

of the future possibilities of the mining area because the mine workings
had become deeper and more extensive and because more of the mines had
become producers. (Tr. 1353-1357). Mr. Staley testified that one standard
which is used today as a means of evaluating a mining property includes
consideration of such factors as positive ore (ore in sight), probable

ore (based on geology, development of the mine and other similar properties), operating costs and determination of the average selling price over

the estirriated years of life-of the property. The witness testified thas as.

of 1887 due to the extent of development it would not have been possible to.

have applied this method of evaluation (Tr. 137).;-1380).

(b) Professor Staley testified that he was of the opinion that the
most practical and reasonable way to evaluate the mining district as of
1887 was to base it on the figures available now that might have been
available in 1887. This witness testified that during the period 1883- 8
1887 the production figures for the entire district S120‘:-I that the Bunker
Hill and Sullivan mine was responsible for 65% of the production in the
district. If the Bunker Hill and Sullivan mine was worth the €$6SO‘,OO0.00

paid for it in 3.887, Professor Staley reasoned, then the entire district

was worth one million dollars. This witness further testified that he
 arbitrarily add to this sum an additional million dollars based

on prospects for the future, thus making the value of the mining
district as of 188? a total sum of $2,000,000.00. Defendant's witness
also explained what he called a check on his estimate based on obtaining
a weighted average of the reported operating profit of the Bunker Hill
and Sullivan mine for 1887 to 1891, which he stated would be $14.88 a
ton. The witness then estimated the district produced 2l0_,000 tons a
year and multiplying this sum by $11.88 he stated “we come out with
$l,O2S,00 which appears to be somewhat of a check or indication similar
to the one based on the selling price of the Bunker Hill Mine." Pro-8
fessor Staley was of the opinion that the district would have been worth
$2,800,000 as of 1891 (Tr. 1381-1386).

39. A hypothetical willing buyer and a hypothetical willing seller
as of March 3, 1891, would have had available, or it could have been
obtained, much information of value pertaining to the mining district as
of that date. Along with the prospectors and promoters in the area at
or about that time were a f ew experienced mining men among whom was
"Professor" J. E. Clayton who had practical mining experience and a
comprehension of theiscience of geology. On February ll, 1888, Mr.
Clayton had published in the “Engineering & Mining J ournal" an article
entitled "The Coeur d‘Alene Silver Mines” which no doubt was the result

of his study of the mining district in l887. The article shows that the

author was well acquainted with the geologr of the area and the properties

being developed.

In writing of the "Possible Output“ of the mining districts,

Mr. Clayton had this to report:

65' 49 4'?

It is difficult to make any close estimate of the possible
daily output of the different mining locations on this great
lode [Hunker Hill lode and ore zo n37 until more extensive and
complete explorations are made.

The Bunker Hill and Sullivan are extracting about 125 tons
of crude ore per day, which yields in the concentrating mills
about 30 tons of clean shipping ore that assays about 32
ounces per ton in silver and 65 per cent in lead -- say a gross
value of silver and lead of $60 per ton. with fair rates of
transportation and reduction the net profit on the dressed ore
ought to be about $30 per ton -- say 5525 per ton net. This output, judging from what I know of the mine, is about one-half
of its capacity; at any rate I think its daily capacity could
be easily doubled within one year from this date, say 60 tons
of clean shipping ore per day. I

If the Stemwinder mine continues as large as it now shows
in the cross-cut tunnel and in the surface workings it will be
able to fax‘-ails}; a‘*ou'u 3{} tons of clear ore per day. The Last
Chance and Emma can probably produce, when opened and equipped,
about 20 tons of dressed ore per day, and the Tyler mine may be
rated at about the same quantity, making _a total output of 130

tons of clean shipping ore per day.

£1‘ ‘Bi’ 41'

To those who are familiar with this great lode the above
estimates will appear small or extremely conservative. while
I am free to confess that its possibilities are much larger
than the estimates, I do not think that the present developments
will warrant a larger one. In order to realize the output that
I have estimated, the Bunker Hill and Sullivan must double the
capacity of their concentration mill; the Steruwinder and Tyler
must have its capacity doubled, and the Ema and Last Chance
must build a mill of one hundred tons capacity, all of which
takes time and a large outlay of money before my estimates can
be realized in actual daily output.

After this discussion of the possibilities of the mines in the Wardner
group, which Mr. Clayton stated in his personal judgment represented no
more than one-fourth of the productive capacity of the district, he re»ported on the possible output of the mines on Canyon Creek which he

estimated could produce 200 tons of shipping ore per day when properly
opened and equipped and that the Tiger and Poor-man mines in that group
could then furnish half that amount. Mr. Clayton reported on the potentials of the mine groups in other parts of the district which gave
promise of being large producers and of dozens of promising discoveries,
some of which might be worthless, which had not been opened or prospected
enough to include in his estimates‘. Mr. Clayton concluded that for his
estimated output of 500 tons per day to be reached it would require two
years of active development, the erection of six or eight more good concentrating mills and very largely increased facilities for shipping ore.
I40. (a) As of March 3, 1891, the mines of the Coeur d'Alene tract

were in the stage of early development and exploration. The potential
of the area as a valuable mining region was readily accepted by the informed persons in the area. The production figures for the time indicate
that a large part of the lead-silver ore produced in the mining district
had come from one property -- the Bunker Hill and Sullivan mine, by then
a more -or less proven mining property. Large sums of money were needed
and had been expended to build concentrators, tramways, and to otherwi.se
 :1     

develop the miznng properties. Great interest in the area was

by the many transactions involving the sales of mining claim:  H -    

by the large sum of money‘ paid for the Bunker-Hill and Sullivan 
property by Simeon Reed in April l887.

(b) The Commission finds, based on all the evidence of record, that
the mineral lands of the Coeur d'Alene Tract, as of Harch 3, 

value in the amount of $2,221,200.00 for the lL=.8,08O acres of 

bl. In addition to those set forth in Finding 8, the Agreement of

March 26, l887, contains the following provisions:

ARTICLE 6.

And it is further agreed that the United States will expend
for the benefit of said Coeur dtalene Indians the sum of one
hundred and fifty thousand dollars, to be expended under the
direction of the-Secretary of the Interior, as follows: For
the first year, thirty thousand dollars, and for each succeed~=
ing year for fifteen years, eight thousand dollars. As soon
as possible after the ratification of this agreement by Congress,
there shall be erected on said reservation a saw and grist mill,
to be operated by steam, and an engineer and:miller employed,
the expenses of building said.mill and paying the engineer and
tmiller to be paid out of the funds herein provided. The remaining portion of said thirty thousand dollars, if any, and the
other annual payments shall be expended in the purchase of such
useful and necessary articles as shall best prdmote the progress,

confort, improvement, education, and civilization of said Coeur
dtklene Indians, parties hereto.

ARTICTV ?.

It is further agreed that if it shall appear to the satisfaction of the Secretary of the Interior that in any year in
‘which payments are to be made as herein provided said Coeur
dtklene Indians are supplied with such useful and necessary
articles and do not need the same, and that they will judiciously use thezmoney, then said.payment shall bezmade to them
in cash.

ARTICLE 11. d
It is further agreed that in addition to the anount heretofore provided for the benefit of said Coeur dfalene Indians
the United States, at its own expense, will furnish and employ

for the benefit of said Indians on said reservation a competent

physician, medicines, a blacksmith, and carpenter.

As shown.by the G. A. 0. report (claimant's Ex. 168) at page 12, there.
was charged the sum of $150,000 to cover the expenditures the defendant

made under said Article 6. However, of such expenditures the following

items were not of the character authorized by said article:

Maintaining law and order $ 22.73 .

Miscellaneous agency expenses 560.00

Clerk 2751.12
Total 3333.85

And the following items charged as Article 6 disbursements should be

deducted and charged as Article IL expenditures:

Medical supplies 331811;. 21.1
Pay and expenses of blacksmith $3 6131.88
Pay of carpenter 52.50
Pay of physician 550.00

Total 3058.62

Therefore, there is deducted from the amount charged as paid on the
consideration under Article 6 the total sum of $>6,392.h7, leaving the
sum of $316,607.53 or the amount the defendant  entitled to credit on
the award for expenditures under Article 6 of the agreement.

By the statement appearing at page 12 of the G. A. 0. report there

was properly disbursed by defendant under said Article ll the following:

Medical supplies $2,?l;2.86
Pay of blacksmith 3h,6hl.63
Pay of carpenters 9,32h.59
Pay of physician 38,509.78

85,218.82

To which is added the similar items erroneously
charged under Article 6, above 3,058.62

Total Article ll deductions $88,277.81:
By reason of the above adjustments the defendant is given credit on
the claim in the sum of $23l,88h.97.

1420

fair market value as of March 3, 1891, of $4,659,663.00 and the petitioner

The Coeur d'Alene tract, consisting of 2,389,924 acres, had 

is entitled to an award in that amount, less the sum of $23l,88b,.97 paid

on the claim by defendant pursuant to the Agreement of March 26, '.I.i3'-i_;’~3,

or the net sum of $h,U27,778.03.

That because of the great disparity between the consideration paid
petitioner for the cession of its land and the value thereof at the tine
oi‘ the cession, as hereinabove set forth, the Commission finds that the

consideration of $23l,88h.97 was unconscionable.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Louis J. 0‘I*Earr

Kssociate Commissioner

.1r.l'n. M.‘ Holt

Kssociate Commissioner ‘

