6 

BEFORE  1'i~:Dn=.1~: C-LAD’ES CC}?-EIS .3103»:

   D=oa3ILLe on
<:;;LIs1=;:;L Texan 0;? Iranna-es,

.... ,3
93
Q.
P?
I
U‘;

Petitioner,
V, Docket No. 9h

THE UNITED srmrs 01? AMERICA,

-....-r-.../-..a-..-A-*‘--»4'*-—/‘--"---»*‘*~.-"

Defendant.

Decided: June 9, 1958

FINDINGS gg FACT

 

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1. Pursuant to authority of the Indian Claims Commission Act of
August 13, 19b6, c. 9&9, 60 Stat. 1019, 25 11.5.0. E 7o(e) et seq., petiner timely filed the claim herein. Petitioner is an Indian Tribe
residing within the territorial limits of the United States and has a
tribal organization recognized by the Secretary of the Interior as having
authority to represent such tribe.

2. (a) The petition in this case alleges a single claim, based on
alternative theories of recovery under Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act. The claim is for compensation for an area of land adjacent
to the Pend d‘Oreille in Washington and Idaho, Pend d'Oreille Lake in
Idaho, and the Clark Fork River in Idaho and Montana. Petitioner asserts
it held this tract by right of use, occupancy and possession, or Indian

title, from time immemorial, until, by gradual encroachment of white

citizens and settlers, and other acts, defendant took the land, and

deprived petitioner of the use and benefit thereof. Petitioner has
received no compensation for this tracts

(b) As an alternative, petitioner claims the tract of land, if
ceded by treaty or agreement, was ceded for an unconscionable consideration. No ratified treaty or approved agreement, ho.-rever, was made with
petitioner, and the tract of land involved was never included in a treaty
or agreement of cession with any other tribe of Indians. Petitioner’s
remaining alternative basis for recovery is that the tract was taken
by conduct of defendant not conforming to fair and honorable dealings.

3. The Kalispel Indians were known to the fur traders who operated
for the Northwest Company in Canada and in what are now the States of

1~ionta.na, Idaho and Washington. David Thompson, one of the traders

(I80?-I812), located the "Kullyspel Lake Indians" on a map in the vicinity

of the present Pend d'Oreille Lake in Idaho.
at about the same period'o:E' time wrote:
or Earbob Indians, are also a tribe of the Flat Heads [it-.e., of the
Salishan :E'amily7, and speak the same language. They dwell on and about
Kullyspell fend d’Orei_'Ll§7 Lake, and frequently accompany the Saleeish
to the plains to procure buffalo." (Def. Ex. 9; Pet. Ex. l2).
)4. The missionaries became acquainted with the Kalispel Indians in
183.11.

Father de Smet, famed missionary to the Indian tribes, wrote in

18116 that "The usual place of residence of the Kalispels--«that in which

the R€d11C‘bi01'l Of St. Ignatius is now established--is an eictensive prai..':=.F;.

called the'Bay of Kalispels, thirty or forty miles above the mouth of
Elan: or Flat-Head River." This mission was located near what is now

Iusick, Washington, on the Pend d'Oreille River and continued to serve

"The Kullyspell fend d‘Oreill_e7

6 3534

Alexander Henry, the younger,

the Kalispel until moved to its present site in western I-Eontans. on

2 Jocko Reservation in l8§h. Father de Smet (about l8L:5) wrote as

v

1"ol.lo‘;~zs :

The upper Kalispels or Pend d‘0rei3.les. The country of
these Indians consists principally in forests and plains.
The upper valley above the great Flathead lake appears to
be very rich in soil and very productive and contains a
great number of beautiful plains, among which the Games
and Horse plains are the most conspicuous. Fr :7: below the
latter to the head 01‘ the Kalispel lake, a distance of about
100 miles , Clark's river is lined with almost impenetrable
forests, inaccessible rocks and mountains, and runs on over
marI_v ledges of rocks , forming falls and rapids, rendering
its navigation very dangerous even to small skiffs and canoes ,
and impossible to larger crafts.

Father de Smet reported they spoke the same language as the Flathead and

that they numbered about 600 souls. These Indians of which he wrote were

the Pend d‘Oreilles, a tribe separate and ditinct from the Lower Kalispel,

or lsalispel Tribe p_oper. dither de S.I::et stated that the Kr‘ ispel "of

lower country“ numbered "as many souls as their brethern from above.“

(Pet. Exs. 15, 22).
5. In 1853 Governor Isaac Stevens was undertaking a survey and exploration for the best route for a railroad from the Mississippi to the
west Coast. . Dr. George Suckley, an ‘army surgeon and a member of the
expedition traveled through Kalispel country. From Father Hoecken at

St. Ignatius Mission the army surgeon reported he had learned that the
Kalispels:

7' ‘I? -‘»‘r lived mostly from the Pend d‘Oreille or Kalispelm
Lake, down the Clark River, to this point (the mission);
they speak nearly the same language as the Flathead or
Selish Indians. Another mission (St. I£ary‘s) was at the
same time opened among the last-mentioned tribe. Between
these two, in the vicinity of the Horse and Canes plains,
on the Clark River, another band, calling themselves

I-5

Kalis.pel.ns, ras since been formed, of wghich Ambrose is the
chi.::f_; this hand consist:‘ of a number of floating  :~:ander-~
ing families, composed of Spohanes, 'r{alispel_*:1s proper, and
Flatheads, 1-:ho, having int-ermarried, have for:ned a habit of
sojourning at this l.ocal.it3' during their annual migrations
to and from tics. buffalo hunting grounds. In all, the two

bancls of the Kalispellns n rfoer about one hundred lodges--say

si_>:t:,«' of the Iialispelms proper, or those who recognize Victor

as their chief-=-and have their headquarters at the mission,

and about forty of the new band already iuded to, '.-:ho look

up to Ambrose and who live above Lake Pend D‘Oreille. £3 -3% 
George Gibbs, who was also a member of the exploration party, reported
Fiarch, l8Sl:) that the "Kalispelms, or Pend d'Oreilles of the Lower Lake ,
inhabit the country north of the Coeur d‘.é.lenes and around the Kalispelm
Lake. Dr. Dart gives their population as five hundred and twenty, e -3% e, *1
Gibbs stated that the Pend d‘Oreil_'Le of the Upper Lake occupied jointly
with the consent of the Sielish (Mathead) the country of the latter and

numbered about LL80. (Pet. Ex. l7; Def. Ex. 11).

6. Governor Stevens on his exploration and survey of a route for a
railroad to the West Coast made many treaties of cession with the Indian
tribes with which he came in contact, including the Flathead, Pend d‘Oreille
and Kootenai who were neighbors of the Kalispel. Irrlian hostilities, however, prevented Stevens from holding a contemplated treaty with the
Kalispel. In December of 1855, Stevens who was Governor and Superintend-=~
ent of Indian Affairs of ‘rfashington Territory, reported to the Commis sj oner
of Indian Affairs that the Lower Pend d’Oreille (Kalispel) could not be
gathered together to treat with them and that he had left with Agent
Lansdale "the program of the treaty to be entered into with them."
Lansoale held a council with the iialispel in March 1856. The agent rean

};orted that Victor “head chief and others, headmen and delegates -of the

Lake or Lower Pend Oreille Tribe of Indians" represented the Indians.

“nsdale‘s instructions were to obtain the cession of a specified area

of land and to secure the removal of the Kalispel to the Flathead Reseru
vation. Chief Victor refused to sell any lands unless the Government
permitted the Indians to keep their lands north of the Clark Fork River

as a reserve. The agent having no authority to agree to Such 3 Pr0P0'

sition no treaty was entered into between the parties. (Pet. Exs. 8, 9,
l0).

7.

Government reports in the years following still located the
Kalispel in the same general vicinity where they were first contacted by
the fur traders and the missionaries. In 1870, they were said to be

located on both sides of the Pend d‘Oreille River from its mouth up to

the Idaho line but principally at the Games Prairie and numbered in popuLn
L35.) 0

lation in

(Pet. Ex. 23). 1875, they were reported still residing

:1 their original homes" on the Pend d'0reiILle River and near Kalispel
Lake. (Pet. Ex. 214). with the passage of time the whites began to advance
into Kalispel county and as a result it became apparent that some agreement would have to be made with the Kalispel whose lands were being taken

over by the whites.

8. On April 15, 188?, the Northwest Indian Commis sion representing

the Government opened a council with the Kalispel Tribe at Sand Point,

Idaho. The Commissioners informed the Indians that they desired the

Indians to release any claim they had to lands and to remove either to

the-Colville, Coeur d'Alene or Jocko reservations. Chief Victor, and

Chief Marcella who had replaced Victor as head chief of the Lower Kalispel,

1’ - ,__ - .:. , .... ' ._,.... . . '*
he are not ta  about our »:-c..1nt.y. not oar land. WI‘
(3

N!

. I will tell you about our land. It
:{‘ollo:.:s the Pend d?Oreille River to Salznon River and then
goes on the top of the mountains between here and Colvill
to the Steam boat landing 3 goes over the top of the ridge
to the léissoula River at the Fezrys down the I-iissoula to
its mouth to Pend d‘Or-eille line. runs through the lake near

Horse Plains. up towards the Kootenai Co‘=..1ntr§r:.‘ then up to

head of Pack River to Salmon River. That is my country.

It is a big country.  -::~ «:2
Victor insisted upon a reservation in }-ialispel country. The Commissioners informed the Indians they had no power to set aside a reservation. Marcella. head chief and son of Victor, refused to sign the
agreement. Chief Michael of the Kalispel agreed that he and his people
would remove and signed the agreement. Although the agreement was never
ratifieds Chief Michael and his people moved to the Jocko Reservation and
remained there. Chiefs Victor and I-iarcella and their people remained in
the vicinity of Kalispel Valley and their descendants are still there tom
day. It was l9lh before a. small reserve (11629 acres) at Usk, Washington,
was set aside for these Indians by Executive order. (Pet. Exs. 31, 32,
3h. us. Def. Ex. 3).

9. As is evi“ent from Finding 8 there appears to have been at least

two divisions with the Kalispel Tribe. An early’ study of the tribe

(3-90h; 3-908, 1909) by James A. Tait indicates that such was the case. Tait.

found with respect to their use and occupancy an-: organization as .‘E‘ollo*.:ss

The Kalispel occupied a rather narrow strip of country
followirg Pend d"’Oreille River. up to Plains and thence north.
taking in Thompson.Lake and Norse Plains. They divided the
Kutenai from the Coeur dialene. This included most of Sanders
County. biontanag the country around Pen-:3. d‘-’Oreille Lake and
Priests Lake in Idaho; and nearly all of Pend d’Ore3'_'lle River
within the State of ‘.~.’ashinr-‘ton. A small corner of their

hunting country'extended into the Salmon River district in
British Columbise

The frialispel, it seems, were at one tizzze in three divisions: (1) The Upper Kalispel, sometimes called }.‘_€tse:ntsi‘n:L

(“people of the confluence," frdn ntsantsin, “entrance, outlet, or confluence,“ a place at the outlet of Pend Oreille

Lake, where a considerable band of them fonnerly”wintered)e

(2) The Lower Kalispel, often called "The Kalispel” or “Real
Kalispel“, and sometimes “canes people" and "Kalispe‘n."

They are said to have occupied the Kalispel country proper,

the district around.Kalispe‘lem or Kalispe‘m, the name of the
large canes prairie west of the Pend Oreille River, near
Calispell Lakes ‘L-Ia3h3'_ngton., (3) The Chewelah, generally called
Slate‘use, and sometimes Tsent's. %'%'%' S0m9 P€0Pl9 C0nSid9Ted
these people a tribe different from the Kalispel, as they spoke
a slightly different dialect and.lived.by themselves. However,
they recognized their very close relationship to the Kalispel.
I did not succeed in getting a full list of Kalispel bands,

but it seems that there were several in each divisione % % %
The Lower Kalispel country was also nearly all in the State of
‘Washington, where they occupied the Lower Pend Oreille River
from about Newport down. This division is said to have had
their headguarters on the east side of the Pend Oreille River,
near Us}: and Cusiek ~:- 6% -2;. There were other winter camps on

the river,Inost of them on.the east side, and all within a
radius of about 9 miles of this place. The present-day'Lower
Kalispel, consisting of Chief Marcellin's'band, still live in
this neighborhood. a e a The Upper Kalispel occupied all the
tribal territory now within Idaho and Montana. Besides the band
that formerly wintered at the outlet of’Pend Oreille Lake, a
band had headquarters e a-a-at.Albang falls, and another % %~%
near Sand Point; and there are said to have been smaller bands
at other*places. In.later'times a band called "Camas Prairie"
Kalispel, numbering about fifteen lodges, had their headquarters
near the confines of the Pend d‘Oreilles. -3 few descendants of
this band are new on the Flathead Reserve. In later years the
Pend Oreille Lake band often shifted their winter camps to
various places within their territory and occasionally many of
them wintered with the Lower Kalispel. e:- as 44- (Pet. Ex. hh).

:lO. .&nthropologists—such as Leslietspier in.his "Tribal Distribution

1 Washington" found the Kalispel were in three divisions, (l) the lower

-lispel who occupied the district west of Pend d‘Oreille River near

lispel Lake, Washington, and held the lower Pend d'Oreille River from

. . . ..onu-go-u

6360

Ne:-rport down the river with principal. settlements about Us}: and Cusik;
(2) the Chewelah‘ who occupied the countmr west of Calispell or Chewelah
Mountaims, in the upper part of the Colville Valley and (3) the Upper
Kalispel, in Idaho and Montana. (Def. Eb:.'l8). Edward Curtis in his
"North American Indian, " Vol. 7, wrote "The Kalispel lived in northeastern
1«'Jashington, in the valley of Clark fork (Pend d‘0reiILLe river) of the
Columbia, from about the place where the Idaho boundary crosses the
stream down to Box canon."

11. A study of the ethnography of the Kalispel Indians was made
in 1936, 1937 and l938 by Dr. Allan H. &nith, a professor of anthropology
at Washington State College. Dr. with testified for petitioner (Tr. 66170) and a copy of his manuscript prepared from his research with the
Kalispsl is in e'.'ide'.-.,., as peLi'oio1'1e'.1:“"S Exhibit 65. Dr. Smith testified
(Tr. 73) that the Kalispel were divided into two units or divisions-- an
Upper Kalispel and a Lower Kalispel and possibly a third division if the
Chewelah Indians were considered part of the Kalispel Tribe. The Chewelah
territory, however, was not included within the bounds of the lands Smith
found to have been used and occupied by the Kalispel (Tr. 77). Smith
testified the two divisions of the Kalispel were separately organized
groups or political entities and each had its own head chief and subchiefs.
The witness testified that one division did not claim a specific territory
as its own as distinguished from the other division but rather that they
had joint use and occupancy of the same territory (Tr. 811). Dr. Smith
prepared a map, petitioner‘s Ebchibit 63, on which he has enclosed in red

the lands he found by his study to have been used and occupied by the

Halispel. On an overlay map, petitioner*s Exhibit. 6h, he has located
within the same territory the winter and su*nmer- villages, and the hunt-=
ing, fishing and gathering areas he found to have been utilized. by the
Kalispel. The area found by Dr. Smith to have been used and occupied by
the Kalispel may be described generaHy as follows:
Commencing on the Flathead River just east of Paradise

Montana; thence north along the crest of the range between

Horse Plains Valley and Flathead Lake region, to a point

just west of Hubbard Reservoir; thence northwest encircling

Thompson Lakes area to the Cabinet Range; thence northwest

along the crest of the Cabinet Rarge and in that general

direction to the southeastern extremity of the Selkirk Noun»

tains 3 thence northwest to the Canadian boundary; thence west

to a point on Clark Fork or Pend d*0reille River where the

Salmon River joins it; thence south along the crest of western

am of the Selkirk Mountains, passing along the west shore of

Sacheen Lake; thence southeast to Mt. Spokane; thence east to

south tip of Pend d'Oreil_le Lake; thence along the crest of
the Bitter Root Mountains southeasterly to a point about west

9 ' .. .......: 4.1., . _ _ . . . -41....-.._J~ -L- . --_- .. . .,-.. ..--.
9. §.:‘'..'.‘.}'.‘£‘‘.’.r;‘'..‘.'..‘-:'‘,-,  ~..-..‘.u. \I.LJiu}L4'uIL» lava. i;.ut.«'a.'ou luv j..).L.a.1-atra‘ UJ. U<'JE’,J..1l1.l..LJ.1E.g

The lands so described are located in northeastern Washington, northwestern
Idaho, and in western Montana. Dr. Smith was of the opinion that in spite of
the divisions of the Kalispel they corstituted a tribe. The witness stated
that several factors in his opinion are taken into account in determining
"what constitutes a tribe in the identification of a group of Indians."
These factors, he said, would be "common territory, an idea of oneness,

a single identity, a common language, common culture, strong friendships,

a very frequent pattern of communication, frequent bonds of intermarriage."
In the Plateau area, to which the Kalispel are considered to belong, the
witness testified the political organization of a tribe may be taken into
consideration as a factor “but because of the rather special sort of political structure wnich the Indians of the Plateau possessed, political unity

6 362

is not regarded as being essential to a singb tribal entity.“ (Tr. 73,
72;, 1L;l:.). Dr. Smith testified that the Kalispel believed "that all the
Iialispel territory belonged to all the Kalispel and that they felt free
to use this territory." (Tr. 137-139). He further testified that the
reason they were designated Upper Kalispel and Lower Kalispel was "because the people who lived in the Villages of these two areas regarded
‘themselves as being politically beneath the chiefs of these two separate
areas“ and that the Lower Kalispel had their winter villages in the socalled lower part of the area which would be on the Pend d'Oreille River
with Cusick, Washington, being in the "heart of their area" while the
Upper Kalispel correspondingly had their winter locations in the upper
part or upriver portion of the area claimed. (Tr. 157). Dr. Smith urged
that “These two political units with regard to these two political st- ..1ctures were regarded as being localized, if you like, to these two parts

of the Kalispel territory. It wasn‘t thought of in this way. This chief ,

and his subchief were not thought of as being the chief and subchief of a
specific group of people. The people moved, and when they moved they fell
under him." (Tr. 169).

12o Stuart FL. Chalfant, ethnologist, expert witness for the defendant,
testified that the Kalispel consisted of two divisions. Each division, he
stated, comprised several local bands under the leadership of their own
headmen or chiefs and that out of these local bands or village groups at
times larger "band clusters“ might be found with a prominent local chief
for a general geographic unit or division. These divisions, according 

the witness, were not necessarily political groups but were rather

“geographic groups of political units, clusters of political units."

(Tr. 2&2). Chalfant stated that based on his research he found that the

Kalispel were divided into two generally politically autonomous divisions
with one, or at least part of one, under the leadership of Chief Victor

in 1855, and part of the other, if not all, under Chief Michael. (Tr. 2&02&1).

The witness testified that in terms of land use the divisions did

(Tr. 2h3~2hh, 251). On a

make use of more or less the same territory.
map, defendant‘s Exhibit 21-B, Chalfant depicts (within black lines) an

rea of land which he describes as the “primary subsistence area" of the

Lower Kalispel. The Indians, however, he testified, were not exclusively

confined within such boundaries in their subsistence rounds nor does the

area so designated show all the areas which they may have used in their

a... h_.j.-i—\-I 0- Vacuum. 0-'v-on-P‘) ac‘-u-tun. TMIEQA 'subsistence rounds: but ya *l_',‘n:;>g~ '!_'.'_P-ye :_2,j,r-93 1-{high he

sistently used to a greater degree than did any other groups of Indians.
Chalfantzmade no effort to outline any territory from which the Upper

Kalispel received their subsistence. (Tr. 236-238).

The witness testified that it was his opinion that the Lower-Kalispel had exclusive control
of the Priest Lake watershed and the Clark Fork watershed almost as far

north as the Canadian boundary'to the north and west, and on the south and

east, be believed they occupied lands a little farther east of the IdahoMontana border boundary as found by Curtis (Tr. 250-251). Any lands to

the east of that point he excluded because of the use of the area by the

Pend d‘Oreille Tribe (Tr. 252-25h).

13. The southeastern portion of the area claimed by the petitioner

L.
Li

.¢:‘U§-: V-\rv
\.o.L 4.1-45

Contains lands in.western Montana bcrd

I-.4.
TIUOL:

Fork River in the vicinity of Plains, Paradise and Thompson, I-Eontanae
The ethnologists for petitioner and defendant were cognizant of the use
oi‘ this area by other than the Kalispel.-. Dr. Smith, 1-zitness for petitioner, testified (Tr. 1&1-lhh.) that the Pend d'0-reille Tribe, which was
closely allied with the Flathead Tribe, ani lived in the vicinity of Flathead Lake, Montana, hunted occasionally in the overlap area but that he
assigned it to the Kalispel “for two reasons: first  a  because they

too hunted in the area and made extensive use in that way of their territory; But more specificall , I have allotted it to the Kalispel because

% within this area were sites of Kalispel winter villages."

-3? '31Chalfant,
witness for defendant, testified (Tr. Zhh, 21.19-25,4) that he hed learned
from the Pend d‘OreiI|_'Le and Flathead Indians that the Pend d‘0reille
claimed they had equal use rights to the Clark Fork region in Montana.

In Docket No. 61, The Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Carling I-Ealouf, anthropologist, testified for the Flathead, and submitted a report on the "Economy and Land Use by the Indians‘
of Western Montana, U. S. A.," which is petitioner’s Exhibit 5 in that
case. On page 11 of his report, Mr. Malouf indicates upon a map what he
considered to be the domain of the Upper Pend d'Oreille Tribe. I-ialou_f‘s
boundaries for the Upper Pend d‘O1-eille encompass the lands on both sides
of the Clark Fork River in Montana and over what is  the state line inwto eastern Idaho. On page S1 of.‘ his report he locates main camps and

migratory camps of the Upper Pend d'Oreille Tribe within the same aforesrewrite,

area from about Plains, Iviontana, all the way across the Idaho-=1‘-iontana

border.

lh. Doctor .:'=.lla:1 H. &r;ith_._ one of petitioner‘s ethnologists, in
..is manuscript compiled in his study of the ethnography of the Kalispcl
Indians (Pet. Ex. 65’, Part One, pages 16--18) wrote regarding the southeastern portion of the claimed area in part as follows:

At only two points, one in the extreme east and the other
around the foot of Lake Pend Oreille, is there any question
from my evidence about the validity of ‘he Irialispel Claim '50
this territory. with regard to the first locality, the Kalis-=
pel maintained that they sometimes Icintered in the Plains area
and, on occasion, even somewliat farther to the east in the
Paradise district. The presumption is strong that they considered both of these areas as theirs. Furthermore they are
reported unequivocally to have hunted southward up the Missonla
River as far as Saint Regis and northward to the Thompson Lakes
district, where, in fact, they even sometimes passed the winter.
The assigning of these areas to them implies the yielding to
them of the intervening region from Plains to Paradise as well.
But it was also stated that the Lower Pend Oreille [Pend 0reille;’7
also occasionally passed the winter in the Paradise region and

sometimes even in the neighborhood of Plains. Hence both the
Kalispel and the Pend (‘rm=ej__'l_:1e zn_-'=§.r have  +"='m-'=~=' ‘..:_:.e':1 this “re”

- In--..—-6' V-4. ~.r-'I-about the junction of the Fiissoula and Flathead Rivers but the
evidence suggests, without being conclusive, that the Kalispel
probably found themselves in this region somewhat more frequently
than did their neighbors to the northeast. On this assumption
this district is here included within the bounds of Kalispel
territory. It seems evident from Stevens data that the Flatheads made no use of the Saint Regis region at least, for they

are specifically reported to have been completely unfamiliar with
this portion of the stream.

Although no definite information on this point was secured,

it is possible that in the 18th century before their trek to the
buffalo country carried the-a annually up the Clark Fonz, the
Kalispel may have ranged over a somewhat more restricted area to
the east. Their territorial limits may have extended only slightly
east of the delta of the Upper Clark Fork, possibly only as far as
Cabinet Gorge. There was in fact no locality in this long stretch
of river from Plains to its mouth at Pend Oreille Lake which was
capable of supporting a group of any size for any length of time;
it was clearly the least economically productive portion of the
territory which they claimed in the l9th century am it was that
part which was least used. at an earlier period then this region
may have been essentially unoccupied both by Kalispel and other

peoples. Only the fact that the K-alispel are linguistically one

with the Pend d‘Oreilles and Flathead to the east argues against

McGregor Lake in what is now the State of'Montana.

Petitioner‘s exclusion of these two small portions of the
claimed is based upon a report and affidavit accompanying

prepared by petitioner’s ethnologists in this case,

a virtual separation of the two areas at this early period.
It is certain however that by the beginning of the last
century this eastern strip along the Upper Clark Fork was
commonly used by the Kalispel and the evidence adduced above
indicates that the Kalispel tribal boundary then fell as it
has here been describede

l5. On July 2, 1957, petitioner, through its attorney Of records

filed a disclaimer to two small areas within the area originally claimed
as described in Finding ll. The modified description of the area clahned

excludes one small area around.present-day Saint Regis and the other near

The claimed tract as

modified is described as follows:

Commencing at a point on the Flathead River east of'present-day
Paradise, Montana, and just east of the confluence of the Flathead and Clark Fork Rivers; thence northerly along the divide

separating the watersheds of the Thompson and Little Bitterroot

Rivers to the point thereon nearest McGregor Lake; thence north‘westerly south oIWhcGregor Lake across the streae eonreeti2S
icsregor and.Thompson.Lakes to the divide to the north of Thompson Lakes; thence northwesterly along said divide; thence southerly across Fisher River to the west of Thompson Lakes to the
divide separating the watersheds of Clark Fork (and Pend d‘Oreille)
and.Kootenai Rivers; thence following said divide to the Canadian
boundary; thence west along said boundary, across Priest River to
the divide to the west thereof; thence westerly along said divide '
dividing the headwaters of Priest River and the Canadian tributaries of Pend.d}0reille River to the Canadian boundary; thence
‘west along said boundary to the divide west of Pend d‘0reille
River; thence south on said divide, separating the watersheds of
the Pend d‘0reille and Columbia Rivers to Mt. Spokane; thence

east to thezmost southerly tip of Lake Pend d'Oreille; thence
easterly to the crest of the Bitterroot Range; thence southeasterly
on said crest, and along the crest of the northern watershed of the
St. Regis and Clark Fork Rivers to the point of beginning.

area originally
the disclaimer

'1'
Verne

Allan H. Smith, and Carling I. Malouf (see Finding 13) one appeared as

(Ix
Ox

ethnologist for the petitioners in the Con:-‘federated Salish and Eiootenai

Docket No. 61, before the Indian Clains Cotanission. The purpose

Q“
3%?

“fl

of the report and auidavit was to reconcile the overlap in areas cla.iaed
by the petitioners in Docket nos. 61 and 91: (see Finding 13):

16. The Commission finds that from time immemorial and until gradually dispossessed thereof, the Kalispel Tribe (composed of Upper Kalispel
Indians and Lower Kalispel Indians), used and occupied a tract of country
1-zithin the United States in what are now the States of Washington, Idaho
and Montana, described as follows:

Commencing at the town of No:-con on the Clark Fork River in
the State of Montana; thence in a direct northerly direction
to the divide separating the watersheds of Clark Fork (and
Pond d‘0rei.lle) and Kootenai Rivers; thence following said
divide to the Canadian boundary; thence west along said boundary,
across Priest River to the divide to the west thereof; thence
westerly along said divide div2‘t.d:ing the head:-raters of 1”’:-icst
River and the Canadian tributaries of Pend d‘ Oreille River to
the Canadian boundary; thence west along said boundary to the
divide west of Pend d‘Oreille River; thence south on said divide,
separating the watersheds of the Pond d‘0reille and Columbia
Rivers to Mt. Spokane; thence east to the most southerly tip
of Lake Pend d’Oreille; thence easterly to the crest of Bitterroot Range; thence southeasterly on said crest to a point on
said crest directly south of Noxon; thence in a direct northerly
direction to the place of beginning‘.

the boundaries of the tract described above are as set forth on the map
introduced by petitioner as Exhibit No. 63, except those lands in the
‘southeastern portion not included in the above description are found not
:0 have been exclusively used and occupied by petitioner.

l7. The Commission finds that while the Kalispel Tribe during the
ins pertinent to the issues herein may have consisted of‘ two divisions
The Upper Kalispel Tribe and The Lower Kalispel Tribe), there is subtantial evidence that for all intents and purposes there was but one

land-holding entity composed of all Kalispel Indians and known officially as The Lower Pend d'Oreille or Kalispel Tribe to the avents and
representatives of the United States.

18. From time immemorial and until lost, as hereinafter stated, the
petitioner, the Kalispel Tribe, exclusively used and occupied the lands
described in Finding 16 hereof and.had original Indian title theretoc

19. That long prior to August 13, l9h6, the United States, without petitioner's consent, began acquiring or disposing of said lands
for its own use and benefit, or for the use and benefit of its citizens,
until the petitioner was deprived of the entire tract prior to August 13,

l9h6, and the petitioner received no compensation for any part of the

Sameo

20. The evidene does not show when the petitioner was deprived

of its lands except as set forth in the last preceding finding.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

 

Louis J. O*I*Iarr

 

Associate Commissioner

wm. 5. Holt

 

Associate Commissioner

