BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMXISSION

CLYDE F. 'I'dO3~£PSON, et al.,
Plaintiffs,

V. Docket No. 31

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Defendant.

ERNEST RISLING, et al.,
Plaintiffs,

V- Docket No. 37

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
)
and )
)
)
)
i
)
i

Defendant.

Decided: January 19, 1956
Appearances:
Ernest L. Wilkinson and
Francis M» Goodwin

Attorneys for Plaintiffs
in Docket No. 31

Reginald E. Foster,
Attorney for Plaintiffs

in Docket No. 37
Ralph A. Barney, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perry W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant

OPINION __rC_)_i_~"_ THE CC.-Zs§i~1ISS
PER CURIAM:
The plaintiffs, the Indians of California, in Dockets Nos. 31 and

37, on September 7, 1955, filed ieentical motions to amend their amended

petitions for the purpose, as they say, to make it plain that they are
claiming right to the use and occupancy of the some 8,800,000 acres of
land in California covered by Spanish and Mexican grants recognized by
the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo and validated by the United States.

Since the allegations in the petitions in Dockets 31 and 37 are
essentially the same, in fact, as to the matters hereafter discussed, are
almost identical, we shall consider the allegations of the petition in
Docket No. 31, since the Conclusions we reach apply with equal force to
the petition in Docket No. 37, the real Plaintiffs being the same in each
docket.

The sole question raised by the proposed aendment is whether under
the allegations of the petition in Docket 31, fairly construed, claim has
been made for all lands in California, which include the grants. We
think a fair construction of the pleading, read as a whole, indicates a
Purpose to claim aboriginal occupancy of all the lands within the State
of California. including the grants. In paragraph VI of the petition,
reference is made to the &act of the Indians "owning and enjoying the
sole and undisputed use, occupancy and possession, in the accustomed
Indian manner, of all the lands in the State of California." Similar
language appears in paragraphs VII and VIII, And the prayer seeks an
"account of the grants and acreages approved under the Act of March 3,
1851“ and for compensation for the lands lost.

The Government's objection to the proposed amendment is that the

following allegations of the petition:

1411

“At the time of the proclamation of the Treaty of Guadalupe
Hidalgo, on July M, 1828, the Indians of California still owned
and had immemorial possession and were entitled to the sole use,
occupation and possession, in the accustomed Indian manner, of
all the land within the present boundaries of the State of
California, except such lands as had been granted to others by
the Kingdom of Spain or the Republic of Mexico, the title to
which was subsequently recognized by the United States, the
exact acreage of which is unknown to petitioners but is known
:to defendant;"

expressly exclude from the claim the 8,800,000 acres of the granted land
and adding to the above—quoted allegations the following (the proposed
amendment):

“as to which lands in grants from Spain and Mexico nonetheless

the Indians of California, pursuant to the laws of Spain and

Mexico, retained and owned an interest of use and occupancy;
# ti!

would create a new, different or enlarged cause of action.

The above-quoted part of the petition does state that at the time
of the Guadalupe Hnialgo treaty, the plaintiffs still owned and were
entitled to the sole use and possession of all the lands within the

boundaries of California, except the granted lands, and if this language

stood alone we would be inclined to agree with the Government's contention,

but when read in connection with other allegations of the petition, some

of which have been referred to, there mould appear to be a conflict which

must be resolved. It can be said of the quoted allegations from parae
graPh IX that they mean that the grants deprived plaintiffs of the use

and possession of such lands as were covered by the grants, but that is

far from a disclaimer of rights therein, especially in view of other

1; 114C

allegations of the petition indicating a claim for all the California lands.

In view of our rule that all pleadings shall be so construed as to
do substantial justice (Sec. 7 (3) (c)), we believe the amendment should
be allowed and an order will be made accondingly. And since the amendment relates back to the commencement of the action, it is not affected
by the five-year limitation.

We wish to make it plain that we are here only passing upon a
procedural question and intimate no opinion on the merits of the plaintiffs‘
claim of interest in the lands included in the validated grants as that
involves an issue of law and fact which must be determined when we decide
the question of liability.

What has been said above applies to Docket 37, and an order allowing
the amendment in that docket will be entered.

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

Innis J. 0‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

pm. M. Holt
Associate Commissioner

*9.‘

