7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 98

BEFORE THE IHDTAY CLAIRE COEYISSION

TJE IOJA TRIBIS, ET aL.,
Petitioners,
Docket No. 153

V.

THE UEITED SKATES,

\._,./\._/\-..._../\__,/‘n.-/\._z"h._,r'\.../\._;’

Defendant.

Decided: Februarv 9, 1959

Appearances

Elroy O. Jones, Stanford Clinton,

Brian Sullivan, Attorney for Petitioners,
Attorneys for Petitioners, . Sac and Fox Tribe of

Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Missouri

Nebraska

Nicholas C. English, Lawrence C. Kills,

George A. Preiser, Attorney for ?etitioners,
Attorneys for Petitioners, Sac and Fox Tribe of Iowa
Iowa Tribe of Oklahoma

George B. Pletsch, Curtis C. Shears,'with whom
Attorney for Petitioners, was Er. Assistant Attorney
Sac and Fox Tribe of General Perry H} Horton,
Oklahoma attorneys for Defendant.

OPINION 0? TE: COEHISSION

 

‘Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the

ht by the pet;,L*:'  » ~

-r

the Iowa Ration of Indians and.its member trioes, tne Iowa Tribe of he

V.‘
KY1

7 Ind. Cl. CoI.‘::‘;. 93 lC6

in Oklahoma, and, the Sac and Fox of the Sac and Fox Tribe

of Indians of Oklahoma, the Sac and Fox Tribe of Indians of Hissouri, and the

1 A ‘'0 C9

Sac and Fox Tribe of the Hississippi in Iowa, and all the indiv‘aue menbcrs

named herein, in which said petitioners sue for additional compensation for

those lands in central Iowa officially designated as Royce Cession 2&2. as we

K

have found in the prior cases,_ and as we nos find in the instant case, the
petitioners are identifiable groups of American Indians residing within the
territorial limits of the United States and have the capacity to bring this
suit under the provisions of the Indian Claims Commission Act. In like manner
we find that these petitioners are the proper representatives and successors
in interest to those groups of Ioxa and Sac and Fox Indians who participated
in the Prairie du Chien Treaty of lE2S (7 Stat. 272), referred to hereafter
the sake of brevity as the l82S Treaty, and who, in the years that followed, ceded in three separate treaties rith he United States al_ their

interests in Royce Cession 262.

"5

Specifically these treaties o; cession were: the Treaty of October l837
with the Iiissouri. Sac and Fox (7 Stat. Sue), the Treat‘:-f of October 19, 1838
nith the Iowa Uation (7 Stat. 568), and finally the Treaty of October ll, l8b2
with the confederated tribes of Sac and Fox Indians (7 Stat. 596). Each of
uhcse treaties substantially cal_ed for a general cession to the United States
all of the petitioners‘ interest to those lands lyinr between the Eissouri

and Mississippi Rivers and south 0; the Sio1'~Sac and Fox line as described in

Article 2 of the aforem~ntioned I82” T

- 7'.‘ .L\._|..E

H
w

 .j'-11-.‘-j—:

Comnission‘s Findings l and 2

e-t}. ;ltl-n this vast area, and forming

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 98

the central portion thereof is Cession 262 whose boundaries are not set out in
any one treaty but are the product of several separate inst ments. The Sue
and Fox Treaty of October 2l, l837 (7 Stat. 5h) set up the eastern boundary
line, and the southern line, which is the Iona-Missouri State line, was fixed
by the two treaties of August h, l82h, concluded vith the Iowa and Sac and Fox
Indians (7 Stat. 229, 231). Finally, the Treaty of July l§, l83C with the
Iowas, Sac and Fox, and other tribes (7 Stat. 328) fined the western and northern boundary lines of Cession 262.

The title question to Cessihn 262 is the agreed issue to be determined
at this stage of the proceedings. ‘Se note that the petitioners rest their
title claims either upon the theory of having a prior recognized or reservation title to Cession 262, or an Indian title perfected through aboriginal
use and occupancy.

t is the Connission’s considered opinion as shown hereafter that he
question of a recognized or reservation title, which is fundamentally a question of law, decides the title issue in.this case; and in this tonnection we
need only cite and apply the rule found in the prior decisions of this Come
mission involving these same claimants upon the subject of recognized title
concerning lands embraced within the terms of the 1825 treaty. Therefore, it
would seen.that the Commission, at least in this case, is relieved of the duty
of setting out detailed findings of fact in support of ultimate findings as in
the case of determining aboririnal or Indian title.

In Docket lS8, this Commission had occasion to pass upon the effect ef
the provisions of Article 3 of the l32S Treaty on the duesticn of recognized

title. The same issue is raised in the instant case. On page hh3 of the

7 Ind, Cl. Conn. 98 - 108

opinion therein, the following is stated:

In view of (our) holding made later herein that (the) Treaty
of August 19, lb2S, called the Prairie du Chien Treaty, is thought
by us to be recognition of title in the participants thereto to the
lands described therein we think it unnecessary to discuss in much
detail the evidence in the record as to use and occupancy of the

land claimed by the petitioners-—this because when Indian title has
been recognized it is unnecessary to prove aboriginal title.

Cession 262 is part and parcel of that same vast area described in Article 3 of the 1825 Treaty, and if stare decisis means anything, we have no
alternative but to adhere to our former ruling on this point and resolve the
title question herein in favor of the petitioners and against the Government.g/
We therefore hold as a matter of law that both the Iona Nation of Indians
and the Sec and Fox hation, by virtue of the language of Article 3 of the 1825
Prairie du Chien Treaty have a recognized or reservation title and compensile interest in Royce Cession 262.

The other question to be resolved, and the bone of contention between
the respective petitioners is the extent and manner by which each nation holds
its title to the subject lands. In other words, th problem of apportionment
has been presented to the Commission for determination. In like manner the
Commission believes that this issue can be resolved on certain agreed facts
between the petitioners and upon controlling questions of law.

‘we shall discuss the suggestions advanced.by the Iowa petitioners as the
PT0?er solution in the manner of effecting an equitable division of Cession
252- Of course it follows that once the extent of the Iowa petitioner‘s claim
to Cossion 262 has been resolved the Sac and Fox claim is_in like manner settlcd.

 —__

I- 

Commission's Finding 9

7 Ind. Cl. Comm. 98 109

In its proposed Finding 52, the Iowa petitioners suggest two alternative
methods of dividing the area.2/ They argue first that the Commission should
find that the Prairie du Chien Treaty of 1825 recognized that the Iowa Nation
of Indians and the Sac and Fox Nation had "joint Indian title” to all of Cession 262, so that in effect each nation enjoys an undivided moiety in the whole
area. To accept the proposition as advanced by the Iowa petitioners, it is

necessary to give that legal effect to that portion of the language in arti5

cle 3 of the 1825 Treaty, which reads as follows:

'§/ Proposed Findings of Fact by Iowa Petitioners, page llh.
Proposed Finding 52
"By virtue of the Treaty of August l9, 1825 (7 Stat. 272):

A. The Iowa Nation and the Sac and For Nation are found
to have joint Indian title, recognized by the defendant
to the lands in Royce Cession 262 described in Proposed

IN

Iowa Finding o; or in the alternative,

B. The Iowa Nation had Indian title recognized by the defendant:

l. To the lands within Cession 262 lying southerly
of a line commencing in the western boundary of
Cession 262 and running along the southerly watershed of the Raccoon Fork until it joins the Des
iMoines River near the present City of Des Moines,
Iowa,-and thence down the Des Eoines River to the
present Town of Eddyville, Iowa, and thence westerly of a line running generally south from 2653»
ville, Iowa to the state line between hissouri 2
Iowa at the 'atershed-of the Crand and Chariton
Rivers, and

2. Jointly with the Sac and For Nation to an undi*‘Leo

one~half interest in all that portion of Cess5*x 2%?
lying due east of dmeljre from.Eddyville, Iona,

‘!

the Eissouri-Iowa state line hereinaoove referred to,”'

‘I;  Clo  .:--.o

C'*’‘\

llO

F» l P‘
”lhe Ionays accede to tne arrangement betveen the oa s and
Foxes and the Sioux; but it is agreed between the loways and the
confederated tribes of the Sacs and Foxes, that the Iosays have
a just claim.to a noriticn of the count.;'tetween the bouncer’
described in the next preceding article and the Eissouri and
Eississippi.”

If this is the language relied upon by the Iowa petitioners as creating

a “joint ownership” of the area described therein in the strict legal sense as

the term night he used in real propertr law, we fail to see how a plain read*1
v

Jhen the

inv f the words therein lenos itself to such an interpretation.

‘:9

0
Commission passed up the same question in Docket l58 relative to the Iowa and

Sac and For having a recognized title b0 tiat area set out in article 3 of the

5

1825 Treaty, it generally viewed such onnershia in terns of separate and exclusive areas, and chose to mane snch separation when evidence showed that

apportionment in this manner coulo he accomulished fairly and equitably.b/

Jne emphasis has been made upon the fact that at various times, subsequent

-Q

to the conclusion of the l82S Treaty, certain Government officials, in connenting upon the results of the lS2§ Treaty with reference to the Ionaand Sac

and Fox cla*ns, employed such phrases as ”undi?idec interest", "owned in connon,”

“hold in common", "being joint or ccnnon," and other of sinilar import. The

‘

F‘ ,’-''s-.- ' _g_ * o 1 , 9 __o_ _;_ . . ‘ 9 0 9
oonnission soucied all tnese sonar“ reports anc So3g€K€nES in their entirety

and concluded ui¢hout.too much difficulty that the writers never intended to

9give or to convey a,legal interpretation to any of the treaty language. he do

  It

I r‘ 1 I ‘A WU“. u v 1 o '- .____ V‘,-t . .1 o ‘_ _ -—- _ 6, 15/ En Dociet lb3, tee Commission oio a are Jointl; to the iota and age ano
cox claimants a portion of Cession 175 in order to insure an eoual interCst. This was occasioned by th lack of evidence noon nh'ch the Commisfi 1

i
‘~13 ‘1 I} """'-1' ‘ r 4-.l o'4"U'I€":". L1-\ 4-. J...“ ., ,.., ‘ _: 5""! "1 ,,,._'
"J o n CO1-*~——C- CC_u.l ...:-7.31:: Supol -.:.:.23 one ai”E<:-.3 0... EC L.:'-'.C‘.3_ O'.‘.Tl».:.rSIl_z.U . _‘.fl8 '-..;OI'I'_mlS<"- ‘__ s _,., ‘ _‘ . W‘. n 3 . .. , , _ _ "' _ _
sion mane a iactial cetoriina.ion.hasec noon tne evioence of Jolat usage

 

C‘

“ 0- this area a? of the date of the 1825 Frairie on Chien Treaqy.

7 Ind. Cl. Conn. 98 111

not consider these non-contemporaneous and nonelegal statements as controlling
or persuasive in changing the Connission‘s opinion that Article 3 of the 1825
Treaty was intended to recognize the title to the area described th rein to
be in the Iowa and Sac and Fox Indians, with each holding separate and exclusive areas therein.§/

The Commission notes with particular interest hat such construction is
perfectly consistent with the earlier position of the Iowa petitioners as
adequately stated in their proposed findings of fact filed in Docket l38.
That case also involved lands falling within the scope and meaning of Article 3 of the 1825 Treaty, and at that time the Iowa petitioners urged.upon
the Commission the following legal proposition:

"As pointed out by Froposed Finding of Fact 33, the Iowa Na1.:
tion and the 3ac and Fox.nere two distinct tribes. While the relationu
ship between them was generally amicable, there was no common or joint

ownership of land. Actually neither of these tribes at the time of the
Prairie an Chien Treaties of 1825 and 1830 would have considered their

land as jointly owned by the other.

 

 

"ioreoverz Article 3 of the 1825 Prairie du Chien Treaty is not

phrased in terms of joint ownership; rather this article is explicit
recognition by the United States and the Sec and Fox that the low
Nation had %%% a just claim to a portion of the country **% south of

the Sioux line between the hissouri and hississippi rivers.“ (Emphasis

—supplied§

 

   

   

The Commission therefore rejects the Iowa petitioners‘ snggestion.n? iei“*

ownership” with the Sec and Fox hation of all of Cession 262 and turns i
tention to the Iowa petitioners‘ second alternative proposal, thm. gt; giw:
cessors had Indian title to that portion of Cession 262 as set out %%I$&$

Y

Proposed Finding 29. This area was outlined on a map prepared by Dr. a.thonr‘

 

§/ Commission‘s Findings 8, l0

7 Ind. Cl. Co.. . 98   3:12

Hallace, who was offered as an expert witness on behalf of both the Iowa Nation of Indians and Sac and Fox Eation, and who has testified for these same
Indians in other cases before the Commission. Dr. Hallace’s map was admitted
into evidence without objection as Iowa Eghibit 306. This section of Cession 262 is described in Iowa Proposed Finding 29 as:
" t % % lying south of the southern watershed of the Raccoon

Fork of the Des Moines River as far downstream as the present village

of Eddyville, and west of the line running from Eddyville to the IowaMissouri state line at the watershed between the Grand and Chariton

Rivers."

In its Proposed Finding 2b, the Sac and Fox Nation agrees substantially
with the extent of the Iowa claims of Indian title to a portion of Cession 262

as set out ahove.é/ Since we are concerned with arriving at an agreed division of property riahts between the petitioners, the actual validity of the

¢——U no

04-‘

we claims of aboriginal title is immaterial. The consent 0; the Sac and
Fox Nation thereto is all that is needed in this instance to clear the air.
The Commission therefore accepts and adopts that area described in the Iowa
Proposed Finding 29 and the Sac and Fox Proposed Finding 2b as correctly‘
stating the limits of the Iowa petitioners‘ claim.of recognized title exclusively to a portion of Cession 262 as of the date of the Prairie du Chien
Treaty of l82S. °
One last question remains. The Iowa petitioners are also asking the

Comrission to find, under the 1825 Ireaty, recognized title jointly with the
S39 and Fox Nation to that relatively small area of land lying roughly west
of the aforementioned line from Eddyville, Iowa, to the Iowa-Missouri state
 ____ ' . __

6/ Commission's Finding ll

7 Ind. C1. Conn. 98 773

line below the Des hoines R ver in the southeast corner of Cession 262. In sole
support of said request the Iowa petitioners state in their Proposed Finding
30 that:

“Prior to l825 the Iowa Nation used jointly with the Sac and

Fox that portion of Cession 262 lying due east of the line from Eddyville to the Iowa—Hissouri state line referred to in Finding 29.”

Of course we have already rejected the concept of recognized joint ownership to the whole of Cession 262. Even assuming the oontrary and the correctn
ness of the above quoted finding, the Commission is unable to find.that language
in the 1825 Treaty which would supply the retroactive application desired by
. 7/
the Iowa petitioners.What the Commission is attempting to do in this case on the record before us, is to sever and apportion the respective ownership claims of the lord
and the Sac and Fox Indians into separated.bounded areas on the theory that if
the true boundary lines had been actually drawn in 1825 said lines might substantially conforn with our present determinations. Furthermore we find no
reason for the Iowa petitioners to complain of an injustice, if we follow this
method of proceeding. In its proposed findings filed in Docket 138, the Iowa
Nation stated quite frankly:

"To decide this case, the Commission must do what the United

States should have done in 1825 and 183C, and, on the basis of th

record.in this proceeding, reconstruct the boundaries as they

existed at those dates * * *”

and then with more emphasis it was stated further:

"The failure of the United States to designate boundaries
as required by the 1825 treaty has thrust upon the Commission

   

1/ Connission‘s Findings l2, l3

7 Ind. C1. com. 98 111;

that responsibility of reconstructing the boundaries of Iowa
land in 151 as they existed in 1825 and 183C. §/

‘We think the above statements are substantially sound and eminently just
and fair when applied to the claims in this case. The Commission, therefore,
sees no need to adopt a different course of action, and shall hold the ownership claim of the Iowa petitioners to those lands in Cession 262 in which a
claim of ownership could have been asscrted.by their predecessors in interest
as of the date of the 1825 Treaty. This area has already been determined as
being that portion described in Iowa petitioners‘ Proposed Findings 29 and

52 (B) (1) and agreed to by the 33C and Fox petitioners in their Proposed Find_9_/
g 2h.
Having determined the extent of the Iowa petitioners‘ claim to Cession
262 it is only a matter of simple arithnetic, as between these petitioners,

to award to the Sac and Fox Nation the balance of Cession 262. This end result comports favorably with the respective claims of these petitioners

 

§/ Proposed Findings of Fact by Iowa Petitioners in Docket 138, pages 167,
‘ 173. '

2/ Supra - Footnotes 3, S, 6

7 Incl. C1. Comrri. 98  115

relative to oheir exclusive and predominant use of Cession 262 as of the oate

of the 1825 Treat”. 29/

/s/ EDGAR E. Er-IITT

 

Chief Commissioner

We concur:

/s/ LOUIS J. 0'1-1.22..
Associate Commissioner

 

/s/ 1-.I~:. 1-=:. :-{om
Associate Commissioner

 

 

10/ Commission's Finding m

