BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIRS COMMISSION

LINCOLN BURDEN,'wILLIE RANEI, AND )
BUDDIG LITTLE, EOR THEMSELVES AND )
AS EERRERS AND:RERRESERTATIvES OF )
THE LOIAL SEMINOLE GROUP OF )
AMERICAN INDIANS, )
)
Petitioners, )
)   A
vs. ) Docket No. 121
. >
THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA, )
)
Defendant. )
Decided: February 27, 1958

Appearances:

Guy Martin, with whom was
George E. Rorvell, Attorneys
for Petitioners.’

Keith Browne and Ralph A.
Barney, with whom was Mr.
Assistant Attorney General
Perry W. Morton, Attorneys
for Defendant.

OPINION Q§_E§§ COMMISSION

Holt, Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission.

The claim in this case is asserted by three individuals as members
and representatives of the Loyal Seminole Group of American Indians to

recover an additional amount for alleged losses sustained by their

ancestors during the Civil War. The claim is now before the Commission

on the defendant's motion for summary judgment based on the following

grounds:

6 127

ha "3'. ,,.,.,.,.,,-_,g.....-u..n...a4\--who-In u

1. The petition fails to state a claim against the
United States and in favor of the petitioners, or either,
or any of them.

2. The issues involved have been heretofore determined.
and the matter is res judioata.by'reason of the award of the:

United States Senate under the agreement with petitioners cu?
July 1, 1898.

3. The Indian Claims Commission lacks jurisdiction of the
subject matter.

The pertinent allegations of the petition.are:

6. By ‘Article 3 of the Treaty of March 21, 1866, 11, Stat.
755, the Seminole Indians who had remained loyal to the United
States during the Civil War were to be reimbursed for their
losses due to such loyalty in a total amount not exceeding
$50,000.00, with interest thereon.at the rate of five per

centum.per annum from the date of the execution of the said.
treaty.

?. 3. Tyler Powell and J. W. Caldwell, commissioners

appointed to determine the amount of such losses, reported.
on November 26, 186?, that they had determined the total
amount of losses sustained by the loyal Seminoles to be

$213,888.95.

8. Thereafter, fifty thousand dollars was paid to the
said Loyal Seminoles.

9. By the Agreement between.the Commission to the Five
Civilized Tribes, commonly known as the Dawes Commission,
on behalf of the United States, and the Seminole Ration of
Indians, ratified by the United States Senate on July 1,
1898, 30 Stat. 567, it was provided that the Loyal Seminole
claim should be submitted to the United States Senate, which.
‘was to determine the same finally, and provide for the payment of any amount sustained.within two years.

10. The Appropriations Act of May 31, 1900, 31 Stat. 2h0,
provided for the payment of $186,000.00 in full settlement
of the said claim.

11. Section 9 of the Act of'Apri1 26, 1906, 3h Stat. lh0,
ratified the disbursement of $186,000.00 to the Loyal Seminoles in accordance with the provisions of the Act of May 31,
1900, aforesaid.

6 128

12. The provisions of the Acts of Congress of May 31,
1900, and of April 26, 1906, aforesaid, providing that the
said payments should be in full settlement of the claim of
petitioners, are not binding on petitiomrs for the reasons
that petitioners were given no opportunity to, and in fact
could not, effectively object to the said provisions, and
further the petitioners did not in fact consent to the extinguishment of their claim.

On the basis of these allegations, the petitioners pray the
Commission:
(1) To give judgment for petitioners in the amount of
$213,888.95, with interest thereon from March 2l, 1866, at
the rate of five percentum per annum, deducting therefrom

the payments of $50,000.00 and $186,000.00 made by respondent.

(2) For such other and further relief as to the Commission may seem just and proper in the premises.

In their petition the loyal Seminoles seek payrrent of $213,888.95,
plus interest, less payments made by the United States totalling
$236,000.00, to compensate them for losses suffered duri.ng the Civil
War. The petition states that such claim is a claim in law and equity
as well as a claim based on fair and honorable dealings that is not
recognized by any existing rule of law or equity. However, in its

argument in reply to the defendant‘s motion for summary judgment, the

petitioners have stated that the claim is asserted under the fair and

6 129

honorable dealings provision of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission .

 Act of August 13, 19116 (60 Stat. l0h9) and, during oral argument on the

motion, the petitioners‘ attorney stated that this action is not predicated on any rule of law or equity. Further, in the argument presented

by the petitioners in opposition to the defendant‘s motion, no reference

is made to payment of interest, but rather the petitioners state that

they are asserting this claim on the ground that any amounts which were

heretofore paid by the United States are insufficient to satisfy the
principle of fair and honorable dealings. While it is not clear to
the Commission upon what theory the petitioners are basing their claim,

no purpose will be served  speculation concerning the petitioners‘

theory or upon the sufficiency of the allegations contained in the petition since the Commission's decision on the primary defense of 3:'_c_§_
judicata is determinative of the entire matter.

The defendant relies on the award of the Senate of the United
States under the Agreement of July 1, 1898, in invoking the defense
of _I_‘_§§_ ‘udicata. It contends that that action by the Senate determined

all issues arising from the Civil War claim of the loyal Seminoles and

that its tiecisiczz as an afcitrator had the same operation and effect , as

against the parties, as a judgment of a court of last resort. Accordingly,

the Government argues, the petitioners are prevented by the doctrine of
_r__e_§ judicata from once again litigating the same claim.

The petitioners argue that the present cause of action arises
from clause (5) of Section 2 of the Indian Claims Commission Act, which
provides that the Commission shall hear and determine “claims based on
fair and honorable dealings that are not recognized by any existing
rule of law or equity." The petitioners allege that this section of
the Act created a new cause of action and that any amounts previously
pad to the petitioners were insufficient to satisfy the principle of
fair and honorable dealings as recognized by Section 2 of the Act.

Under the Treaty of March 21, 1866, a sum not to exceed $50,000

was to be paid to the loyal Seminoles to reimburse them for their Civil

War losses. In order that the sum.might be apportioned.among the individual members of the loyal Seminoles, a commission was set up to determine the amount of each individual claim. The aggregate amount of

the individual claims so determined by that commission was $213,888.95.
The $50,000 was then paid by the United States to the'loyal.Seminoles,
thereby conforming to the provisions of the Treaty and satisfying in
full the obligations of the United States arising under the Treaty.
There was no agreement to pay all the losses which the loyal Seminoles
had suffered during the Civil War and the taking an account of the
actual losses of individuals raised no implied promise to pay the whole

amount but was only for the purpose of ascertaining the proportionate

9..

Ir’ Illa’1O C‘ rhea‘ 

--.n_...'a. -n.-‘_¢g»

amount due each one. of. Thomas Connor. at 21., v. U.

Thereafter, the Seminole Nation and the United States entered into
an Agreement, incorporated into the Act of July l, 1898, under the
terms of which both parties agreed that "the loyal Seminole claim shall
be subitted.to the United States Senate, which shall make final deter'mination of same, and, if sustained, shall provide for payment thereof
‘within two years from.date hereof." The Senate then referred.the
loyal Seminole claims to its committee on Indian Affairs for investigation and recommendations. That committee submitted its report to
the Senate in.which it stated that it disagreed with the conclusion of
the commission under the Treaty of March 21, 1866, that the aggregate
of all claims was $213,888.95. The Senate committee recommended re'\

duction of that amount by hS$. From the remainder they recommende

subtraction of the $50,000 previously paid and the addition of 5%

..—6 132*

interest from August l6, l866. That resulted in a recommendation that
the sum of $l77,08S.OO-should be paid to the loyal Seminoles in full
settlement of their Civil War claims. The Senate adopted the recommendation.

Notwithstanding the determination by the Senate, the House of Representatives initially refused to appropriate that amount. However, the
Senate and the House of Representatives finally agreed on the sum of
$186,000, which amount was included in the Appropriations Act of May 31,
1900, and its disbursement to the loyal Seminoles was ratified by the
Act of April 26, 1906 (3h Stat. lho).

It is clear that the parties to the Agreement of July 1, 1898, are
the same as the parties now before this Commission. Likewise the subject matter in this action is identical with the subject matter referred
to in the Agreement, i.e., the loyal Seminole claims for damages suffered
during the Civil War.

The Senate, in its actions taken under the provisions of the Agree-.-»
ment of July l, l898, was not acting in its legislative capacity but
rather as an arbitrator, and its determination that the sum of $177,085
should be awarded to the loyal Seminoles to compensate them for their
Civil War losses constituted an award by an arbitrator. Loyal Creek

Indians, ot al., v. The United States, ll8 C. Cls. 373.

It is well established in the law that the award of an arbitrator,
acting within the scope of its authority, determines the rights of
the parties as effectually as a judgment by a court. An arbitrator's
decision on matters of fact and law is conclusive, and all matters

in the award are thenceforth res ;':udicata, on the theory that the matter

has been adjudged by a tribunal which the parties have agreed to make
final -- a tribunal of last resort for that controversy. United States

v. Gleason, 175 U.5. 588; Bun’-chell v. Marsh, 17 How. 3111;; 3 Am. Jur. 951.

Clearly, then, whether it be a judgment by a court of 123-?’ or an
award by a duly authorized arbitrator, the judgment or award is final
and conclusive as to every matter which was or could have been offered
and received to support the claim. The Senate award was final and conclusive as to the Civil War claims of the loyal Seminoles. The Agreement submitting the Civil War claims to the Senate for arbitration was

broad. It did not impose any conditions, li.mitations, or restrictions

upon the Senate or require it to abide by any rules of law or equity in

‘r: . + A ¥ 1;  05 I ; .2 vs: USA ¢u...L..I.' 3:1 U.L\JJ-JO

In fact the Senate award was not based on airy

legal claim since none existed. It was an award based, as it was stated

in a similar award to the loyal Creeks, on the "strong equities“ involved. There is nothing for this Commission to consider which the

Senate could not have considered in reaching its determination.

The question of pleading a claim for the payment of interest under

the "fair and honorable dealings" clause has been discussed at length

in previous decisions of this Conmdssion and the Court of Claims. In

Western Cherokee Indians et al., v.

2 United States, 116 C. Cls. 665, the

Court of Claims said, at page 678:

-2-   Clause (5) was intended, as its lanwage clearly shows,
when considered in the lirrht of its history and other provisions of section 2, to cover only moral claims based on
justice and fair dealings or broad principles of equity and
justice, with respect to which no court had theretofore made
a determination on the merits, or could have made such a
determination under the terms of prior ;’_=urisdictional
acts, -::- -32 -:2 '

6 133

The United States Senate had no restrictions placed on it in considering
the Civil War claims of the loyal Seminoles and any claim now presented
for payment of interest is an attempt to relitigate an element of the
previously adjudicated claim. In Loval Creek: et al., V. United States,
ll8 C. C13. 373, the Court rejected the plaintiff ‘s claim for interest
under the "fair and honorable dealings" clause for the further ground
that the Government is immune from the burden of interest unless it is
specifically agreed upon by contract or imposed by legislation.

It is our conclusion that, since the Senate award adjudicated the
claim, the defense of r_e_§ judicata must prevail. The payment by theUnited States in 1906 of an amount in excess of the award, satisfied

J-1-- .tun: claim and any action on it is ‘barred. Accord':=‘_.ngl:,', no actionable

claim was in existence prior to the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act of August 13, 19116, and, under the provisions of Section 2
of the Act, this Commission does not have jurisdiction of the subject

matter.

The defendant's motion for summary judgment will be sustained and

an order entered dismissing the petition.

Wm. M. Holt

Associat e C ommis si one?    it 

I concur:

T

Louis o. O‘?-Earr
Associate Commissioner

 

