l Ind. C1. Comm. 469 459
BEFORE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COMMISSION

TEE QUAEAW TRIBE OF INDIANS
AND EHUL GOODEAGLE, LOUIS.A.
IMBEEU,AND SAM DOUTHIT, as
the representatives as far as

permitted by law of all members
of said tribe and all persons

)

)

)

)

)

)

who shall be found entitled to )
participate in any judgment )
which may be rendered herein, )
same being members of a class )
too numerous to be joined herein, )
)

)

)

3

)

)

3

)

Plaintiffs,

vs. Docket No. lu

THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA,

Defendant.

HEAR 1 5 1951
rnmmos _0__I§’_. mom _

The Commission makes the following findings of fact:

1:‘ The Quapaw Tribe of Indians was first discovered by the
white man in the year l5Ml when DeSoto‘s expedition reached the Mississippi River. At that time the Qhapaw inhabited a territory along the
west bank.of the Mississippi river, extending from the vicinity of the
St. Francis River to the Arkansas River. At this time a number of
Quapaw Indians resided on the east side of the Mississippi river,
and about the year 1700, moved across that river and joined the other
members of the tribe, so after the year 1700 the entire Qpapaw Tribe

was settled in the area west of the Mississippi River.

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 469 2

The tribe's principal village was at the confluence of the St.
Francis and Mississippi rivers, until they began moving southward,
and about the year 1805 located along the south bank of the Arkansas
River in several villages extending from the junction of the Arkansas
and the Mississippi rivers, a distance of about lOO miles, to the
vicinity of what is now known as Little Rock, Arkansas, and remained
in that locality-wbut between Arkansas Post and Little Roch-—to the
time of making the treaty of August 2%, 1818.

In 15h1 the tribe was estimated to have a population of from
five to six thousand persons. in lT50, Eather Vivier referred to the
tribe as having about U00 warriors. In l820, they had been reduced
to between three and four hundred souls; in 1825 there were 158 men,
123 women, and 17h children. (Plain. Er. Q9, p. 98); and in 1829,

the estimated number was 500. Major 89 H, Long of the Army Toporaphical Engineers estimated the number of warriors to be no more
than 60 or 70. At the time of the conclusion of the 1818 treaty, the
entire membership of the tribe——men, women, and children-uwas less
than 500°
2. In the year l8l8, the defendant decided to acquire, through

negotiation, the lands claimed by the Quapaw west of the Mississippi
River in order to provide lands for such other Indians living east

of the river, who might choose to emigrate to the west, Accordingly,
the Secretary of war had two persons commissioned to

Qnapaw for all their claimed lands with the exception o

thereof as might be reserved for

470

1 Ind. c1. comm. 469

of the Secretary. of War, the Treaty Commissioners concluded a treaty
with the Qnapaw Indians on.August 2&9 1818, 7 Stat. 176, by which the
Quapaw ceded and relinquished. to the United States all their lands

east of the Mississippi River and those west of that river, except a
reservation. That the lands so cededa relinquished and reserved are

described in Article 2 of said treaty, which reads as follows;

the

the

.. 3%,.

The undersig1ed'chie:E's and warriors, for themselves
and their said tribe or nation,, do hereby, for,, and in
consideration of, the promises and stipulations hereinaafter named, cede and relinquish to the United States,
forever, all the lands within the following boundaries‘,
viz: Beginning at the mouth of the Arkansaw river;
thence extending up the Arkansaz-J9 to the Canadian forkg
and up the Canadian fork to its source; thence south,,
to Big Red river, and down the middle of that river, to
the Big Raft; thence? a direct line, so as to strike the
Mississippi rivers thirty leagues in a straight line,
below the mouth of the Arlcansawg together with all their
claims to land east of the Mississippi, and north of the
Arkansas river, included within the coloured lines 19 29
and 3, on the above map, with the exception and reser-vation following, that is to say: the tract of country
bounded as follows: Beginning at a point on the Arkansaw

river, opposite the present post of Arkansaw, and running

thence, a due southwest course,, to the Washita river;
thence, up that river, to the Saline fork; and up the
Saline fork to a pointg from whence a due north course
would strike the Arkansaw river at the Little Rock; and

thence, down the right bank of the .drh'a.nsaw, to the place
of beginning: which said tract of landg last above designated and reserved, shall be surveyed and marked off, -at

the expense of the United Statess as soon as the, same can

be done with convenience, and shall not be sold or disposed
of, by the said Quapaw tribe or nation, to any individual
whatever, nor to any state or nation, without the approbation

of the United States first had and obtained.

plaintiffs in their petition make no claim for land described in
treaty, tzhich lie west of the 100th degree of west longitudeg. so

area ceded which lies east of said lOOth meridian (exclusive of

471

1 Ind. Cl. Comm. 469 472

...u..

the reserve land) comprised h3,520,888.2h acres, and the land lying
within the boundaries of the reserved area comprised l,l63,6OM.75
acres.

30 At the time of the l8l8 treaty, the qnapaw were occupying
and in possession of an undefined territory within the boundaries of
the lands reserved for their use by Article 2 of said treaty, and
they did not at said time actually occupy and exclusively possess any
part of the said M3,520,888.2M acres of the land lying east of said
l00th meridian, ceded by said treaty of l8l8,

M. The defendant, at the time of the negotiations with the
Indians for the cession of the land lying between the Arkansas,
Canadian and Red rivers, and at the time of concluding the treaty of
August 2%, l8l8, intended to and did recognize the fact that the
Qnapaw were in the actual occupancy and exclusive possession of the
area reserved for them in that treaty. However, the boundaries of
the reservation were inaccurately described in the treaty and were
later determined to be as follows: 8

Beginninglat a point on the arkansaw river opposite
the Arkansaw post, and running thence a due southwest
course to the Saline river, thence up that river to a
point from whence a due north course would strike the
Arkansaw river at the Little Rock, thence down the right
bank of the Arkansaw river to the place of beginning,

5, About a year after the proclamation of the treaty of l8l8,

the Chief Executive of the Territory of Arkansas and the Territorial
Legislature began pressing the United States to acouire the Quapaw

U ..

reserved land

U}

.f' '4
-1 an .. (1 :' -5- ---5-.-—--v-.-—— :7 " .1, and on Jane no, lcew, eh Secre.diy of tar transmitted

1 Ind. C1. Comm. 469 473

— 5 —

to one Robert Crittenden a commission from the President, appointing
him to negotiate a treaty with the Quapaw for the extinguishment of
their rights to the reserved lands.

6. On November 15, 182%, 7 Stat. 232, a treaty was concluded
between the defendant and the Quapaw by which the latter ceded to the
‘United States all their lands reserved by.Article 1 of the treaty of
1818; that a correct description of the lands intended to be so ceded
is that set forth in Finding No. H hereof.

By Article 6 of the Treaty of 182M, 1280 acres of land were reserved for one James Scull in.payment of a debt due him from the Quapaw,
and by Article 7 thereof the United States was required to grant to
eleven Indians a total of 1080 acres of the ceded land, so the United
States received free of Indian title l,l6l,28M.75 acres of the reserved
area.

7. .As consideration tor the cession of land by the 1823 treaty,
the Indians were paid the sum of $28,037, which included $M,0OO in goods
paid at the time of the cession, certain of the annuities provided for
in the treaty, and $500 each paid four head chiefs of the Quapaw, as
required by the treaty, for losses sustained by them in removing from
their farms and improvements,

8. .At the time of the cession of the reserved area by the treaty
of November 15, 182k, the land therein was worth $987,092.00. That the
consideration the Qnapaw received for said land set forth in finding No.

7 hereof was so grossly inadequate as to constitute an unconscionable

consideration.

