BEFOHE E3 INDIAN CLAIMS COEMISSION

THE DELAWARE sum or nmmrs, )
)

Petitioner, )

)

v. )

)

rm mxzm smzss or AYERIGA, )
  >
Defendant. )

ABSENTEE DELAEARE {BRIE or )
oKL.AHoL1A., DEIAWAEE mm: on, )
EX REL. Yr’. E. EENZDINE mm )
Lrram HOLDER, )
)

Petitioners, )

)

V. )

_ )

ms UNITED sures or Aisaxci, )
J

Defendant. )

Decided: August 23, 1955
Appearances:

Wesley E. Disner and
Charles B. Rogers,

Attorneys for Petitioner,

Docket _2'{-A

Stanford Clinton,

Attorney for Petitioners,

Docket 2341

Docket No. 27-A

Docket No . 21:1

Frederick E. Ugast, with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney

General Perry W. Morton,

ttorneys for Defendant

OPIEEIION _O;’_ TEE’ COMMISSION

3 634

Witt, Chief Commissioner, delivered the opinion of the Commission“

This case is now before us a second time.
we dismissed the petitions in both dochets, holding that the petitioners
had not shown that they had Indian title to the “outlet”, the alleged
ownership of which and the unconscionable consideration received from

defendant therefor, were the bases of their claims. .As stated by us

our previous conclusion.made it unnecessary to consider the amount of

acreage involved .

Upon appeal to the Court of Claims that court, on February 8, 1955,
reversed the decision of this Commission “as to the nature of the
interest of the Delawares in the outlet," and remanded the cases to
the Commission "for further proceedings not inconsistent with” that
opinion. Since the interest in the outlet was held by the Court of
Claims to be full Indian title, the questions now for determination
by this Commission are the size and value of said outlet; the size
‘being the question now before us.

That question was not decided by the Court of Claims, Said Court,
however, did.make the following statement;
The historical fact was that the United States had,
by the Treaty of 1851+, acquired the Delaware‘s interest

in 1,000,000 acres of land for $10,000, or one cent an

8.CI'8 .
I

A.footnote was added with.reference to the amount of acreage, reading as

follows:
This figure is taken from the 190k petition referred to
above. We, of course, express no opinion as to the actual
acreage of the outlet.

The question is submitted on the record as made before the appeal;

however, oral argument on the question has since been had (on April 27,

When originally considered

1955) at which time counsel for Docket Zhl and for the defendant appeared.
.As there has been some variation between the claims of the respective

petitioners in Dockets 27~A and 231 as to the extent of the acreage in

said outlet, a'brief resume of same is made.

The petition in 27nd alleges that “Said land consisted of a strip
ten miles wide and 292 miles long comprising an area.in excess of 1,873,830

acres.“ However, at pages l3l and 132 of the transcript, the following

appears:

Mr. Disney:.....That was substantially 150 miles long
and ten miles wide, extending from the west boundary

of the main reservation.

Chief Commissioner Witt: You allege it in the petition

to be 292 miles long.
Mr. Disney: That is an error.
Qhief_Commissioner Witt: Is that so?

Mr, Disney: Yes.

Chief Commissioner Witt: That ought to be how much?

Mr. Disney: Approximately 150. You may change that

in the petition.

Docket 27~A‘s requested finding No. 2 states that "The_outlet began
at a point about H5 miles west of;Leayenwprth, Kansas, and 10 miles north
of the east end of the Kansas Indian Reservation, and was a strip 10
miles wide extending west to the buffalo country as surveyed by Isaac
McCoy, under official sanction, in 1831.” Requested finding No. 5

reads as follows:

The acreage of the Outlet was approximately
1,000,000 acres. Its north, east and southern boundar

ries were clearly defined. ts western boundary was determined by the survey of Isaac McCoy, made in lS3l under

5.

written authority of orders of the President and the Secretary of the Interior (see Government Exhibits 141+ and 1&7).
McCoy surveyed west into the buffalo country approximately
150 miles from the point of beginning at the northeast corner
of the Outlet, and his survey was considered and treated as
official and authentic as the west boundary, where he
“stopped at 150 miles from the point of beginning and 210
miles from the then west boundary of Missouri. ‘foe Treaty

of 1851!» treated McCoy‘s survey as fixing the west boundary
__of the Outlet.

4 similar statement. is made in its brief (pp. H-5). I Its reply brief

‘contains no section on thesize of the outlet but at page 33 refers to

"the sale of 1,000,000 acres for 15! per acre.".. Mr. Disney did not
appear at the oral argument on this issue, but counsel for 2141 stated
that before the Court of Claims on appeal, Mr. Disney had gone along with
2H1 on the larger claimed acreage.

t The petition in 2141 originally alleged that "Said outlet consisted
of approximately 1,318,000 acres oi land." Upon motion, this petition
was amended by order of the Commission dated the 7th day of July, 1953,
substituting the figure 2,176,000 for the figure 1,318,000. Its

proposed findings of fact Nos. ’-l2-343 are entitled {Findings as to the

Location of the Western Boundary of_ the Outlet," concluding in Finding 1+8:

The Delaware outlet extended Westward to the western

boundary of the area ceded by the aboriginal occupants, the

Fines and Pavrnees, for a distance of approximately 31!-0 miles.
This position has been maintained by 21!-l in its brief, pages 67-69, in
its reply brief, pages 129-l31L, and in its oral arguments. The above
figure has been arrived at by a mathematical computation from the Commission‘s decision_in Mccauley v. United States, 1 Ind. Cl“. Comm. 608.

‘The Commission decided there that the Kay: Reservation comprised

6,559,012-O acres (p. 613). which are the equivalent of l0,2LI8.5 sq, mi.

3 638%

As the Reservation.measured thirty miles from north to south, its length

from east to west was, therefore, 3ui.6 miles." (an; Brief, p. 65). A
length of 3h1.6 miles would.mahe the size of the outlet 2,1s6,2ho acres.
-:Throughout the litigation, the defendant has been consistent in

its stand, as summarized in part of its proposed finding No. #7:

1. That Isaac McCoy, in 1830, was charged with the
duty of surveying the Delaware Outlet, in aecordance‘with,,_
the terms of the Treaty of September 2h, 1829, and that in
completing the said survey, he terminated his line at a
point 210 miles west of the Missouri State boundary as it
then existed, or 150 miles from its starting point. HcCoy“s
' survey_was treated and considered as official and authentic‘
and as establishing the western boundary of the Delaware
Outlet; likewise, the Treaty of 185M treated McCoy's survey
as fixing the western limit of the outlet.
2. That the “Delanare Outlet" consisted of a strip
of land at the most 150 miles long and 10 miles wide,
extending no or 50 miles into the heart of the buffalo
country, and beyond mcCoy's line of “habitable country,“
and comprised approximately 960,000 acres.‘

3. There is no substantial evidence that the outlet
assigned the Delaware Ration under the Supplemental
Ereaty of September 2h, 1829, was intended to extend
westward to the western boundary of the area ceded by
the aboriginal occupants, or that the western limit of
the outlet was to be identical with the western boundary
of the new Reservation established in 1825.

Proposed findings Nos. 25-37 are_supporting findings, while objections
to Zhl findings_(Def. Brief, pp. 27-32) and.the section on “the Western
Limit of the Delaware Outlet“ (Brief, pp. 98-110) are also material.
In the record before this Commission, the defendant and 27aA.sere in
virtual agreement as to the size of the outlet.

The instrument by'uhich the United States granted the “outlet” to

the Delaware Nation is the Treaty of September 2M, 1829. The full

paragraph is quoted in finding l6 herein. The particular words of

3 639,

description are: "the country in the fork of the Kansas and Missouri
Rivers extending up the Kansas River to the Kansas line and up the
Missouri River to Camp Leavenworth and thence by a.line drawn westwardly
leaving a.opace ten miles wide north of the Kansas boundary line for an
outlet.“

It can'be said at the outset that these words describing the "outlet"
in the granting clause are not in themselves sufficiently clear to determine the exact size and acreage of the “outlet.” Petitioner in 27eA
does say in its reply brief (pp. 129-130) that "as these were the clear
and.unequivocal words of the grant, no amount of wordage or confusion
can possibly'upset them. ‘The space granted was the entire tenemile
space north of the Kaw-Reservation, not a fraction thereof.” But at
the oral argument on this issue, counsel for 27gA was ashed whether he '
had any'legal cases to supportthis contention and he replied that he had
looked for cases but had been unable to find any. i

Counsel on oral argument also said that he was relying solely on the
‘wording in the treaty. He reasoned that a space north of a given line
must necessarily run the full length of that line, even though the length
of the line is uhhheth. It is admitted that "the length of the Kat
Reservation was not known at the tine of the Delaware grant.“ (27-A
Reply Brief, p. 130).

That counsel relies solely on the treaty wording is further borne
out by the fact that neither its brief nor reply brief sets out any
affirmative evidence to prove that this‘was the understanding of the
Indians who made the treaty of l829 and who ceded the “outlet” back to

the government in 1853.‘

We_are convinced in this situation that it is necessary to look at
the entire record in an effort to determine the intent and understanding
of the parties to the treaty of 1829. The Court of Claims (all references
are to its opinion on appeal in this case, unless noted otherwise) comments that where necessary, “respect should be accorded to the statement
of the Supreme Court in Jones V. Meehan, 175 U} S. 1, 11, that a treaty
with an Indian tribe should be construed

‘not apcording to the technical meaning of its words to

learned lawyers, but in the sense in which (it) would
naturally be understood by the Indians.‘"

We shall try to determine the understanding of the parties to the treaty’
of 1829 as to the shape and size of t e "outlet" granted.

It is, of course, agreed by all parties to this action that the
width of the outlet was ten miles and that it began at the northeast
corner of the Kansas or Kaw reservation. The conflict is over how far
the tenrmile strip extended west.

There is nothing in the relations of the United States and the
Delaware Nation previous to 1829 which throws light on this issue.
While the 1818 treaty, referred to in finding 1 herein, contained an
agreement “to provide for the Delawares a country to reside in, upon.
the west side of the Mississippi,” there was no promise of an area of
any particular size nor any reference to an"outlet."

When the treaty was executed on September 21?-, 1829, the first
important point of understanding in regard to the outlet was that the
Indians were to receive by the treaty an "outlet" running rest to the

buffalo plains for the purpose of reaching those hunting grounds.

Counsel for 27-Aadmits this when he stated (Tr. p. ljl):

The object, of course, of the grant of the outlet
was to let Indians have space through which they could
go to the buffalo hunting ground. We needn‘t quibble
about that. That was the objective of it.

In requested finding 32 (Dkt. 2&1, Brief, p. 39) the "outlet“ is described.

as extending westward from that portion designed for residence purposes

‘and says the "outlet" was “designed for hunting pu.rposes.'“.

Rev. Isaac McCoy, after accompanying an expedition that examined
lands west of“ the Mississippi river available for assignment to emigrating
Indians, in a letter to the Secretary of War dated January 29, 1829
(Def. Ex. 12) described an outlet as a "slip of land extending from
that more particularly stipulated in the treaty as being designed for
settlement, west into the uninhabitable regions of the desert  the
mountains: "‘ "' "' The object of these outlets is that each (tribe) may
have an_access to hunting lands in the west.", He refers to outlets of
the Choctaw, the Greeks, the Osage and the Kansas.

Finding 22 herein notes that no settlements or villagesjwjere
established on the "outlet“ by the Delavzares and that the lack of game
on their”“residence lands made necessary the long narrow strip leading
to the buffalo plains. The Court of Claims states that it is a
“statement of the obvious fact that the gane was far to the west of
the Delaweres’ residence.”

The very fact that it is designated in the 1829 treaty as an
"outlet." indicates its purpose. The shape of the “outlet" also makes

clear its purpose. The other “outlets" mentioned by }.{cCoy were the

western parts of tribal lands,  naturally gave those tribes

access to “thehunting lands in the west" because there were no other
recognized Indian reservations to the west of then, But in the case
of the Delawares, the Kay: reservation, which had been created by treaty
in 1825 (7 Stat. 2414), -was west of the lands which the Delavrares were
to_-receive for their residence. It was therefore necessary to create
this long narrow "outlet," It appears to have been the only "outlet“
which was considerably less in width than the residence lands from
which it extended.

Another important point of understanding between the parties who

made the 1829 treaty, which»-.'ou.ld affect not only the outlet but the

_WhO].e treaty, was that the treaty was not final when sigied on

September 21.1. As set out in finding 16 herein‘, it was "concluded in
Part only,“ providing "that a deputation of a Chief, or ‘Harri or, from
each town with their Interpreter s@l proceed with the Agent to explore the country more fully, and if they approve of said country, to
sign their names under ours, which shall be considered as finally
concluded on our part; and after the same shall be ratified by the
President and Senate of the United States, shall be binding on the
contracting parties."

Unfortunately the record does not contain a journal of the treaty
proceedings. George Vashon, the Indian Agent who signed the treaty
for the United States, reported to the Secretary of ‘Far from his
agency 5 miles south of the month of the Kansas River on October 27,
1829 that “the supplemntary article to the Delaware treaty herewith

enclosed exhibits the best terms to which they could be brought, and

63

3 6«

as the removal of all the other tribes so much depends on theirs, you

may rest assured that it is advisable to accede to their terms.“ (Pet.
Ex. 10?). T

The approval of six chiefs and warriors was given by their signing
on October l9, 1829. The record does not disclose what occurred in this
regard between September 21+ and October 19, but the provision for this
additional approval in itself indicates the desire of all parties that
the Delawares be satisfied with the land they were to receive.

The Resolution of the Senate (Finding 17 herein) of May 29, 1830
was a conditional ratification of said treaty, requiring that the

boundaries of the “granted country” and of the "outlet“ be accurately

I and permanently established before the treaty became "binding and conclusive.", The interests of the Delaware Nation ‘were again fully protected by providing that the survey should be made “in the presence of
an agent to be desiaated by the Delaware Nation," that "the President
shall be satisfied that the said proceedings have been concurred in
and approved__by the agent of the said Delavrare Nation" before his
approval, and that a copy of such. approval was "to be delivered to the
agent of the Delaware Nation, for the use of said Nation."

The record does not contain any Senate or Committee proceedings
leading up to the passage of this Resolution. The Senate action indicates that it was considered important and necessary that the boundaries
be first made certain and that such boundaries have the express approval of the Delaware Elation so there would be no future question

ab out then .

3 6&4

As set out in finding l8 herein, Isaac McCoy was employed to make
the survey, with instructions to be governed in every particular by the
treaty and the sennte Resolution. With no other detailed instructions,
the matter was left entirely in the hands of McCoy, subject only to the
approval of the agent for the Delaeares and of the President of the
United States. .A high regard for the knowledge, experience,shill and
reliability of McCoy in this field is indicated.

McCoy made a Journal (Def. Ex. 52) with daily entries from August 16
to November 22, 1830, showing that he started his surveying expedition
on August l6 (p. Ehl) and completed his survey on November 5 when he
“completed the line of the outlet to 150 miles, and stopped" (p. 371).
John Quick, second chief.of the Delaware Nation, who was designated by
the Delanares as their agent to accompany McCoy on the survey, joined
him on.kugust 23 (p. 333). Quick stayed with him until September 28,
the_Journal (p. 359) noting that on that day'McCoy “took a certificate
from qpick that he was satisfied with the land, the lines." This certificate (Def. an. hen), which isset out in full in finding 19, describes
where he accompanied McCoy, which included "the commencement of the
outlet,“ and explains why it was necessary ior him to leave before the
marking of the lines was complete, upon instructions from his nation
‘to remain no longer than to see the limits of the land assigned us
ior settlement.“ This is further verified by hcCoy‘s 1831 report of
the survey to the Secretary of War (Pet. BX. 109, pp. 19-20).

On October 13, McCoy‘s Journal (Def. Ex. 52, P. 363) states that
they "reached the mound we erected, some weeks ago, at the commencement

of the Delaware outlet.“ This was a point tenrmiles north of the

northeast corner of the Kansas reservation. From there McCoy surveyed
a. line directly west l5O miles, setting a monument every one—hal_'E' mile,
as shown by his "Field notes of the Survey of the Delaware Outlet"
(Def. Ex. 146-3 is the first and last pages thereof). The 150 mile
point is described as 210 miles west of the State of Missouri. Having
completed the survey, _L£cCoy tells of his journey back, mainly along the
rivers (Journal, Def. Ex. 52, pp. 371-377).

On November 1, 1830 John Campbell, ‘sub-agent at the Shawnee agency,
certified (Def. Ex. 1+6-D set; out in finding 5 herein) that he had
personally ascertained that Quick was "perfectly satisfied with the

surveying and marking of theirland, and their outlet" and that their

‘first chief William Anderson was "entirely satisfied with the report

of their agent John qdic’.-dc, relative to the surveying and marking of
their lands and the outlet.“

As required by the Senate Resolution, McCoy made a map of the
survey and forwarded itpto the Secretary of War with his undated letter
(Def. Ex. 1&6) which designated it as "Document-A which is a plat of the
survey, and of the whole of the Delaware lands.“ The record is not
clear in identifying this ":b0c‘tm1‘eD.t A.“ me defehdeht offered its
Exhibit 3-L6—d (nu p. 228) as the plat that =ii-as designated as McCoy's
Document A.“ Counsel explained (Tr. 13. 229) that "there is nothing
on the plat itself to indicate that it was prepared by McCoy” so he
introduced as Bchibit )+6—C a certificate of the Assistant Secretary of
the Kansas State Historical Society that the map (14~6A) in the possession
of that society is shown by the index of the volume to have been made

‘by Liccoy. This map shows the north line of the- "Delaware Outlet” marked

every five miles from 15 to 150 “End of Survey." The line however
continues west beyond the 150 to the eae of the page._ ‘me south line
is a dashed line with no markings. i i D

Docket 27-A (Reply Brief, p. 102) has "no objection" to defendant's
requested finding 29 (Def. Brief, p. 50) which by footnote 108 identifies
McCoy's plat of the survey as Dft. Ex. 146(3). Another footnote (112)
explains that the government has been “unable to locate the original
plat of the survey of the lands designed for the residence of the
Delawares." Dft. Ex. 116(a)l, which was introduced by motion and admitted
by order on September 16, 19-53, is described in the same footnote as
“a plat of the survey of both the outlet and the residence lands made
by Isaac McCoy, dated l83'{.or 1839 according to. records of ‘the Cartographic Records Section of National Archives.“ That plat shows the
north boundary of the outlet as a solid line without ma.r‘.<:ings, except
at its west end where "150 miles the distance run in l830. .By Isaac
McCoy“ { appears . _

McCoy also furnished the principal Delaware chief with "a plat of
their country“ (Pet. E32. 109, p‘, 3.6). It is likely that this plat was
a copy of the plat sent to the Secretary of tfar, but in any event, 
can assume that it showed the end of the “outlet” survey as .150 miles
west of where it commenced. It is also probable that there was no
western boundary drawn across the ten-mile wide "outlet," as is the
case in the two McCoy maps in evidence (Def. Ex. 11-6-3 and 3-16(a)l).

We point out here an error of the Court of Claims in its

reference to I-s1cCoy's survey. In calling attention to the fact that

3 647

when he made the survey called for in the resolution, he "placed_no
monuments whatever along the line between the residence lands and the
outlet," the Court adds, "although he placed such monuments every half
mile along the borders of the whole area.“' McCoy did not put monuments
along the borders of the "whole area,“ which by the quoted resolution
expressly included both the “granted country“ and "said outlet.“ In the
case of the "outlet," he placed half-mile monuments only along the
northern boundary thereof. In fact he surveyed only the north and east
lines. In his report (Pet. Ex. 109, p. 36) he says, “No portion of the
northern line which separates their lands (Kanza) from the Delaware
outlet hasgbeen surveyed.“ This line was surveyed by John McCoy, son
of Isaac, in 1836 to a.point 206 males west of the northeast corner of
the Kansas Reservation, as shown on the plat thereof (Def; Ex. 50(g)). '

The sduth boundary of the Kansas Reservation had been surveyed a
distance of goo miles in 1826-27 by Major Langham. (Def. Ex. 52, p. 352).
This 200 mile point is shown on McCoy‘s plat (Def. Ex; h6(a)l)i McCoy
had been furnished with a.copy of the Langham.survey before entering
upon his survey_in 1830 (Def. EX. UM(a)). The Kansas Reservation was
‘created by Treaty of June 3, 1825 (7 Stat, Zhh) with the Kansas Nation
of Indians, diich by Article 2 thereof is described as thirty miles in
width extending west Vthrough the lands ceded in the first Article."
The Commission has determined the size of this reservation in the
Kaw case, Docket No. 33.

From these basic facts concerning the l829 treaty and the McCoy

survey set out above, Docket 2&1 and the defendant have drawn quite

3 648

different conclusions as to their meaning on this issue of the size

of the "outlet." The defendant says:

From all the surrounding circumstances--the fact
that the assignment of the “outlet” was for the purpose
of giving the Delawares access to the hunting grounds in
the West and thus there would have been no need for its

extension beyond the buffalo plains, the fact that McCoy
knew the country was “habitable” only 200 miles west of

Missouri, the fact that the Treaty itself was McCoy‘s
sole guide and that he would of necessity have been
obliged to interpret the language of the treaty in the

light of his own knowledge regarding the object of
granting outlets to the various tribes, and finally

the fact that he terminated his survey at a point no
or 50 miles within.the region abounding-with buffalo

and just beyond his line of “habitable country“——it is

reasonably certain, lacking any statements by McCoy to
the contrar , that he believed he had established the

western limit of the "outlet" at the point where he
terminated the survey.

Docket Zhl, on the other hand, questions McCoy's authority to
establish a.western limit of the “outlet.” in surveyor has, of course,
no authority to vary the terms of a grant, and nothing contained in the
Supplementary Article would have given.HcCoy authority to out off the
outlet before reaching the western end of_the Kawlheservation." (ah;
Reply Drief, pp. 130-131). But the authority of McCoy is clear. Ehe
Senate Resolution-and his instructions made it his duty to “run.the lines
and fix and establish the boundaries of the said granted country and
the said outlet‘ before the treaty became binding and conclusive. Ehe
Delaware Indians acquiesced in.these proceedings by sending their agent,
John Quick, by his approval of the survey'and by the expression of
satisfaction of their principal chief. A "plat of their country” was

also furnished the principal chief and there is no evidence of any

objections on the part of Delaware Indians to the authority and acts

of McCoy at any point.

3 649

In one particular McCoy actually varied "the terms of the grant,"

1: that is what it can be called. In an 18140 writing by McCoy (Footnote 33. Def. Ex. 52, p. 359), he emlains:

The treaty which had fixed the boundary of the
Delaware country made no provision for reserving to
the use of the Uhited States the site of Fort Leavenworth,
and to make the survey according to my instructions would
have rendered the site ineligible. I therefore assumed
the responsibility of making an arrangement with Quick,
who acted in behalf of his people, by which a suitable
tract was reserved for the use of the garrison. This
measure was afterwards approved by the Secretary of War.

Ehe area is shown on McCoy's plat (Def. Er. 146(a)l) at the northeast
corner of the “Delaware Lands.” Defendant notes in Footnote 138 (Def.
Brief, 13. 63) that the Court of Claims in 72 C. Cls. 525 (1931) sustained

McCoy's survey of the Ft. Leavenworth boundary.

So we say again, the authority and duty of McCoy to fix and establishid

the boundaries is clear. However, it is another question 7.-hether ticcoy
actually believed. he had established the western limit of the "outlet."
While admitting that “McCoy did terminate his survey of the northern
line of the Delaware outlet l5Q miles west of the starting Point,"
Docket 2741 insists that “there is no evidence that McCoy did thin}:

that he had reached the end "or the outlet at 150 miles“ (Dkt. 2M1 Reply

Brief, pp. 130-131). In support it is argued thatliccoy stopped where

he did principally because of the lack of food for their horses (Requested

finding 145, Dirt. 21¥l, Brief, p. 146), In footnote 28 thereunder, a
number of references in his Journal to this lack of food and travel
difficulties are listed, which we shall not set out in detail. Defendant
admits that "there may have been other factors which might have otherwise forced McCoy to turn back at approximately the same point at which

he stopped (such as the exhaustion of his horses, suffocating dust
storms or Pawnee war parties)" (Def. Brief, pp. 106-107). But
defendant reasons that “if circumstances beyond his control had forced
him to abandon the survey of the “outlet,” and to leave the lines run
by him and the boundaries of the outlet as provided in the treaty incomplete, he would have mentioned such a fact in his report or journal

in which he had already detailed so minutely the progress of the survey.”

Docket 2H1 counters with the suggestion.that McCoy would not have made
the statements he did (see quote, 2M1 Reply Brief, p. 132) if he cone
sidered his job complete. is an example, why did he say, “We are sure
that we ought not proceed further, and hope to get our horses back.“

There is also some discussion of the significance of the fact that
McCoy left the outlet open and drew no western boundary on his plats
(Def. Ex. #6.; and 1:6(a.)1). This could most logically be explained if
it was their understanding that the outlet was merely ajpassageway'and
a definite western boundary was unnecessary. But the Court of Claims
has rejected such a.possibility; Nevertheless, the fact that its
purpose was to give access to the hunting grounds to the west might
explain why McCoy did not survey or draw a western boundary. The
‘outlet’ opened out on the buffalo plains.

While the parties are asking why didn't McCoy say this and why
did he say that, one could also ask, if McCoy thought by the treaty it
was his duty to fix the boundary of the outlet as far west as the

Kansas Reservation extended (the theory of 2&1), why didn‘t he say

so and explain that it was impossible for him to fix.that'boundary,

as required by the Senate Resolution, because of lack of feed for the
horses or because it was unknown how far west the Kansas Reservation
extended. Docket 21!-l argues that "there was no need to make special
mention of the fact that the line was incomplete as it was not at all
unusual to leave such lines incomplete” and that "every single survey
conducted at that time in that area of lines running nest was left
incomplete, including the northern and southern Kaw lines and the
northern and southern Osage lines” (Dkt. 2141 Reply Brief, p. 131; also
13. 85). But the Delaware situation appears to be unique in that it

appears to be the only instance in which a survey establishing the

boundaries was required, together with the approval of a tribal representative and of the President, before the ‘treaty became effective.
‘He draw this conclusion from a cursory examination of the treaties
listed by Docket 21a in finding 32 (Brief, 13. ho). Since it was 3:£cCoy‘s
duty to establish all boundaz-ies_of the outlet, any failure to do so
would be a vital matter and “special mention“ of that fact would be
expected. But instead Hccoy refers to his plat as "of the whole of the
Delaware lands“ when he submitted his "documents" to the Secretary of
War (Def. Ex. 146).

We_ submit that there is some basis for confusion from shat McCoy
said and didn‘t say and what he drew and didn't draw at the time of
the survey. But in later statements and figures of acreage, he certainly
indicates that a definite size and length had been established, although
the figures vary. In the 1837 Annual Register of Indian .A:E'i‘airs (27-R,

Ex. 21) McCoy describes “the land of the Delav.-ares“ as follows:

dThe land of the Delawares lies north of the Shawanees,

and in the forks of the Kansan and Missouri rivers, extending

up the former to the Kansan lands; thence north 2h miles to

the H; E. corner of the Kansas Survey. It extends up the

Missouri river to Cantonment Leavenworth, a distance of

about 23 miles on a direct course; thence with a line westward to a point 10 miles north of the N. E. corner of the

Kansan lands, and then in a slip only 10 miles wide, it

extends west along the northern boundary of the Kansans,

to the distance of 206 miles from the state of Missouri.
Defendant figures this would give the outlet a length of 15% miles
(Def. Brief, P. 107). Docket 2H1 says this is based on the pre-1836’
Hissouri State line and that in 1837 the length would figure 168 miles
(21+1 Reply Brief, p. 132). By our figures, if the pre—l836 state line
was meant Jghich by McCoy's Field-notes of the Survey (Def.IEz. 363)
has 210 miles from his 150-mile stoppingjpoin§7, the outlet length
would be 1&6 miles. But the important thing is that he gives the 10
mile wide slip a definite western limit.

_ Also in McCoy‘s “Plat of the Delaware Lands“ (Def. Ex, h6(a)l),
which it is noted above is said to be dated l837 or 1839, there appears
under “Delaware lands“ the words lncres l.T59.36l.TT.” If we take the
figure of 92h,l6O acres for the “quantity of land designed for the
residence of the Delawares“ from the Survey Report of McCoy-(Pet.‘Ex.
109, p. 21), it would leave approximately 835,210 acres as the size of
the outlet.

One more purported estimate of McCoy is in the record. Commissioner
Manypenny, in a.May 20, 1853 letter to the Secretary of the Interior
transmitting the treaty of May 6, 185M by which the Ioelese.-:.-e Nation

ceded to the United States the outlet here involved, refers to McCoy‘s

estimate of 92M.l6O acres of “residence” land and “the Out Let therefrom

U1

3 653 3,

about 1.318.000 acres.” He adds, “According to my estimate the ‘residence’
of the Delavrares contains about 920.000 acres, and the ‘Out Let‘ about

one million of acres.“ The defendant has been unable to locate any
document in which McCoy made the estimate of 1,318,000 acres in the

outlet attributed to him by Manypenny (Def. Brief, 33. 67), (footnote

111-1+), nor have the petitioners produced such a document. However,

on McCoy‘s plat (Def. Ex. 1L6(a)l) there appears a very faint figure

near the word "Outlet" which could be 1.318.000. his 3 might be a 5

and the last three figures are unreadable. It will be noted that other
faint figures appear at several places on the "residence" portion, which

if added to the figure on the outlet, would appear to total over

,2.1¥00,0O0. Ehis is so different from the plainly written figure of

l.759.36l.77 acres of “Delaware Lands“ appearing on the plat as to
make said imperfect figures.

John McCoy, who accompanies his father on the Delaware survey,
in a paper read to the State Historical Society of Kansas, January 15,
1889 (Def. Ex. 51, p. 301;) stated:

The Delaware Outlet was a strip of land given by

the Government to the Delavzares, 10 miles wide and extending fron the northwest corner of the Delaware lands

proper, westward to the buffalo plains.
He describes briefly the survey and notes that their party surveyed the
northern boundary of the outlet "due westward 150 miles to near the
forks of the Solomon." Although he says that the outlet “was to pass
wB‘sf-wad along the northern boundary of the Kansas Reservation, “ he

gives no indication that they thought the line must go to the western

end of the Kansas Reservation or that their survey was incomplete.

In Docket 2&1 it is ergiee that John McCoy, in his 1836 survey of
the -north boundary of the Kansas Reservation, erected a post where he
ended his survey 206 miles west, which post was meshed "K. L. 206
M. K. Ld." on the south side and “Del. L.” on the north side (Pet. Ex.
136), showing that John McCoy believed in 1836 that the outlet reached
at least to the 206 mile point (éllrl Finding 1-L6, Brief, p. 14-7), but
this argument loses persuasiveness because of his later statement that
the outlet extended only 150 miles westward. Defendant suggests that
‘tit would be more reasonable to infer that McCoy intended to indicate
merely that the lands to the north comprised hunting grounds of the
Delawares to which their outlet led” (Def. Brief, p. 22).

6 The record further shoes that this 150 mile western limit was
the generally accepted contemporaneous understanding of other people.
(Def. Requested Fdg. 35, Brief, pp. 65, 108-110; our Fdg. 9).

The May 20, 1851; letter of Commissioner Man;5_rpenny- (Pet. Ex. 129),
transmitting the 18534 treaty to the Secretary of Interior, has previously been referred to in connection with the reported acreage
estimate of Isaac McCoy. I.ianypenny's estimate of "about one million
of acres“ in the outlet is particularly significant because it is made
in connection with the treaty by which the outlet was ceded to the
United States and because "a map exhibiting the country ceded" (Pet. Ex.
130). was also transmitted with this letter. is stated by the defendant
(Def. Brief, p. 32), in commenting on the assertion of 21.11 that this
“official map" left “the western end of the outlet open" (2L!l Reply

Brief, p. 1%8, footnote 31), “such an uneqxiivocal statement of the

3 555

acreage of the outlet in a letter reporting on the Treaty and transmitting the map operates as a ‘key’ to the map, and in effect establishes a western boundary of the outlet when the two are read
together.” Certainly it is the best evidence in the present record of
the understanding of government officials, the President and the Congress
during the negotiation, signing and ratification of the 185k treaty.
.And in the absence of evidence to the contrary and any direct statements
by or on behalf of the Delaware Indians involved in the 185% treaty, the
opinion as to the size of the outlet of the very'Commissioner who negotiated the 185k treaty would most likely be the understanding of the
Indians with when he was dealing. There is no journal of the proceedings in the negotiation of the 185k treaty. ‘If in those negotiations

anything was said by Manypenny or the Indians about the size of the out~%;

let, it is a logical assumption that the length was placed at 150 miles
and the size at about 1,000,000 acres, consistent with Hanypenny's
estimate. If the Indians had claimed some substantially larger acreage,
Manypenny could well have mentioned that fact in connection with.his
estimate.

Petitioner’s Exhibit 132, nhich petitioner in 2M1 calls an "official
tabulation“ included in the report of the Conmissioner of Indian.Affairs
for 1856 (2hl Brief, p. uh, footnote 21), lists under the heading "No.
of acres to which Indian title has been extinguished or re~acq‘d“
1,538,000 acres from the Delauares by treaty of May 6, l85h. Under
“Remarks,” this is shown to consist of 538,000 acres of residence lands

(€75,000 acres having been reserved) and 1,000,000 acres of outlet. It

should be noted that Docket 2hl again gives this exhibit credence in
proving that the interest of the Delanares in the outlet and the residence lands was the same (Tr. pp. 203-203).

Ehe only evidence in nhich'a Delaware Indian is on record as to
the size of the outlet is the 190k petition of the Delaware in the

Court of Claims (Def. Ex. 62) referred to in findings 27 and 28 herein.

'It was there alleged that “the outlet referred to in said Treaty of

September 2H, 1829, was found to contain about 1,000,000 acres." This
Petition is verified by one Richard C. Adams who was a Delaware Indian
and an attorney in fact of the petitioners. The verification would indicate that a. Delaware Indian residing
among the Delawares, who was an official representative and an attorney
in fact for the tribe, believed in 190% that the outlet contained
1,000,000 acres. In the absence of evidence to the contrary, this.
would indicate an understanding of the Delawares as to the acreage of
this outlet as handed down in their traditions. The understanding of
other tribes as to the size of this outlet is indicated by the claim
of the Pawnee Tribe (Docket No. 10-before this Commission) wherein a.
claim is made for the value of the outlet as Pawnee lands claiming same
to be approximately 668,800 acres, extending 10 miles wide and l0h§
miles long, alleged to have been taken by the United States from the
Pamnees without their consent and without payment, and assigned to the
Delaware tribe of Indians by the Treaty of September M, l829. Judicial

notice may be taken of the recent brief and proposed findings of fact

(filed June 7, 1955) of the petitioners in the Pawnee case in which they’

3 E

ask that the D-ela@e outlet be founded to comprise a strip 10 miles
Wide and 150 miles long.

Evaluating the foregoing, we think the weight of the evidence
supports the defendant in its contention that I saac McCoy thought that

he had surveyed the outlet far enough to meet the requirements and

purpose of the treaty, because he was 140 or 50 miles within the buffalo

country (petitioners in Docket 21:1 admit that the 150 mile point ms
50 miles or more within the buffalo country--see Reply Brief, 13. 133)
and that the approval of his surveys by the Delawares and by the

President of the United States established his 150 mile terminal as

the western limit of the outlet; and that our findings 29 and 30 are

warrant ed.

t

Edgar E. Witt
Chief Commissioner

0 oncurring:

Louis J. 0‘LIaI'I'
Associate Commissioner

 

Wm. M. Holt
Associate Cozsnissioner

 

36

£3

