BEF“nE THE INDIAN CLAIMS COEEISSION'

THE POKCA TRIBE OF IKDIANS )
or OKLAHOMA, et al., )
)
Petitioners, )
_ )
V- ; Ibcket R0. 323

THE UNITED STATES or AMERICA, ).
)
Defendant. )

Decided: June 19, 1958

Appearances:

Edward P. Morse, with whom
were Edwin A. Rothschild and
Louis L. Rochmes,

a..:.:...--.---. o_— _. , J. - ~ .2 .. .. 
ns..uu.i.‘ux::,y ..l..\)J.' 1. U\.r..LL»¢UI1!.'3.L :3

Bernard M. Newburg,'with whom
was Mr. Assistant Attorney
General Perry‘W. Morton,
Attorneys for Defendant

0 P I N I 0 N

jj-1-jj-jj

PER CURIAM

on August 10, 1951, the Ponca Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma and three
alleged members of the Ponca Tribe filed a petition setting forth two
claims designated as Count I and Count II, but we are here concerned only
with the Count II.

One of the defenses set up in defendant‘s answer to Count II is

that‘ The Petition fails to state a claim upon which relief can be

granted.

.:e':“¢3s:t.«

OR May 2, 195?, defendant filed its motion for a preliminary hearan‘.

ing on the defendant‘s ‘efense. and on Eay 13, 1957, the petitiowers

answered the motion and consented to a determination of the legal suffiTT

1-1-.

ciency of the claim pleaded in said Count

On May 15, l957, the defendant's motion was argued before the Commission and the parties were permitted to file briefs, the defendant
filing its brief on June 15, 1957, and the petitioners did not file
their brief until April ll, l958.

‘we shall treat the defendant's motion of May 2, 195?, as one to dismiss because of the failure of the petition to state facts constituting
a cause of action against the defendant under the Indian Claims Commission Act.

According to the allegations of the petition (Count II) the defendant, pursuant to the Act of March 3, 1883, 22 Stat. 603, 623, purchased with tribal funds of the Ponca previously appropriated, 101,804
acres of land from the Cherokee and on June lh, 1883, the Cherokee conveyed such lands to defendant in trust for? the use and benefit er the
Ponca Tribe.

Later the defendant allotted all the Ponca lands, except 943 acres
which remained tribal lands, to the individual members of the Ponca tribe
under the General Allotment Act of February 8, 1883, 24 Stat. 388, under
which trust patents were issued to the individual members of the tribe
and by which the allotted lands were held in trust for the allottees for
a period of 25 years, or longer, as was the case of the Ponca. Although
it is not specifically alleged, under the General Allotment not at the

of the trust period, whether 25 years or longer, an unrestricted patent in fee was issued each allcttee and until the expiration of the

trust period the allottee could not legally dispose of his land._

It is alleged in the petition that defendant permitted almost twothirds of the reservation to fall into the hands of persons "other than
the petitioner and its members." we must read such allegations in connection with the provisions of the Allotment Act and conclude that the
allotted lands were acquired by white persons from allottees who had received unrestricted patents and were thereby freed from government control of the lands.

According to the allegations of Count II, only the Ponca Indians of
Oklahoma were interested in the reservation lands above referred to, and
that it was such tribal lands that were allotted to memcers of the tribe,
except the 943 acres, which remained tribal.

The power of the defendant to allot the lands to the members of the
tribe is not and cannot be questioned. ‘When the allotments were made,
the title, under the General Allotment Act, vested in the allottees.

For the period of 25 years, or such longer as the President may direct,
the patent issued is restricted, but at the end of such period the allottees were given a patent in fee, discharged of control of the allotment
by the defendant. So when the restricted patents were issued, the tribal
title to the lands passed from the tribe to and became vested in the allottees. If the allottees made an improvident sale of their land it was

of no concern of the tribal entity, nor did it, as such, suffer any loss

by reason thereof, hence, it can base no claim on such loss. ‘Whatever

the loss, it was that of the allottee. ‘We, of course, have no jurisdiction to entertain claims of individual Indians, nor, as we held in the

61.11

6 L12

Underwood case, 1 Ind. Cl. Conn. l?8, does a common suit for individual

claims give us jurisdiction to adjudicaie a claim based upon the individual losses of members of a tribe of Indians.
It is alleged in the petition that the tribe desired to hold the

reservation lands in common and opposed the allotment program. It was

not necessary to obtain the consent of the Indians to the allotment program for the General Allotment Act vested the power in the President to

determine whether the reservation lands should be allotted in severalty
and his action in directing allotment of the lands did not require tribal consent. we conclude, therefore, that no cause of action has been

alleged in Count II of the petition, and an order sustaining the defendant’s motion will be made.
The petitioners‘ response to defendant's motion contains these

statements:

* * * At the present time the evidence to support the allegations of Count II has not been assembled. Our investigation

indicates that the assembling of such evidence will be an
extremely difficult task. It may be that the Tribe will decide

that the expense to it of presenting the evidence would be disproportionate to the recovery. In that event the Tribe may
decide not to proceed with proof under this count. ‘Whatever
decision is made, we will advise counsel for defendant and the

Commission so that defendant will not be required to engage in
unnecessary preparation. The decision will be forthcoming well

in advance of trial.
Our records show that the petition containing Count II was filed nearly

seven years ago - August I0, 1951. The petitioners now admit they did

not have facts to support the allegations of Count II when they filed
their petition and it now appears they may never be able to assemble such

evidence. It would.seem to follow they may not be able to assemble facts

to sustairazni amendment of the claim, should one be allowed. However

I'‘';. "

I‘-L

that may be, we are here dealing with existing allegations O; the peti-'
tion and are not now concerned with the facts, except those alleged.

fe have held that such facts do not state a claim against the Government, so assembling evidence to support the present allegations of Count
II would be wasted effor . ‘Whether facts may be found that would justify
an amended claim can only be determined if and when petitioners make seasonable and appropriate request to amend. Obvionsly.'we cannot and do

‘not postpone action on defendant's motion pending the remote chance that

petitioners may be able to allege and sustain a claim of the character

now alleged in Count II.

sz Edgar E. Witt

Chief Commissioner

s Louis J. O‘Marr
Associate Commissioner

5 “~’m- 15-  

Associate Commissioner

